+++
title = "07 7. Gandhian non-violence"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**7. Gandhian non-violence**

 

         One point where the BJP seems to be decidedly un-Gandhian is
defence policy.  Whereas Gandhi had advocated a strictly non-violent
strategy including an unarmed defence against the impending Japanese
invasion, the BJP advocates a strong defence capability including
weapons of mass destruction.  Yet, even here the BJP is more Gandhian
than one would expect.

 

         The famous quotation of Mahatma Gandhi on Hindu cowards and
Muslim bullies deserves to be read in full: "There is no doubt in my
mind that in the majority of quarrels the Hindus come out second best. 
But my own experience confirms the opinion that the Mussalman as a rule
is a bully, and the Hindu as a rule is a coward.  I have noticed this in
railway trains, on public roads, and in the quarrels which I had the
privilege of settling.  Need the Hindu blame the Mussalman for his
cowardice?  Where there are cowards, there will always be bullies.  They
say that in Saharanpur the Mussalmans looted houses, broke open safes
and, in one case, a Hindu woman's modesty was outraged.  Whose fault was
this?  Mussalmans can offer no defence for the execrable conduct, it is
true.  But I, as a Hindu, am more ashamed of Hindu cowardice than I am
angry at the Mussalman bullying.  Why did not the owners of the houses
looted die in the attempt to defend their possessions?  Where were the
relatives of the outraged sister at the time of the outrage?  Have they
no account to render of themselves?  My non-violence does not admit of
running away from danger and leaving dear ones unprotected.  Between
violence and cowardly flight, I can only prefer violence to
cowardice."[\[1\]](#_edn1)

 

         Gandhi declares that the owners of the looted houses ought to
have chosen to "die in the attempt to defend their possessions".  But
why should the lawful owner die, in punishment of what crime?  If anyone
has to die at all, would it not be more fair, more just, to let the
aggressor die rather than his victim?  Justice does not figure in
Gandhi's calculus of non-violence at all.  People should innocently die
as some kind of moral gesture rather than inflict a just punishment on
the aggressor: a morbid kind of personal asceticism eclipses any
socially responsible concern for public justice.  Or does Gandhi mean
that people should expose themselves to the *risk* of dying by fighting
the aggressor rather than flee?  While Gandhi did make many morbid and
ridiculous statements about the virtue of getting killed (e.g. about the
cows willingly offering themselves to the tiger until the tiger gets
tired of beef and turns vegetarian), here he says: "I prefer violence to
cowardice."  Gandhi is ashamed that Hindus failed to put up an effective
self-defence, and wants them to do better next time.

 

         Here, for once, Gandhi seems to link up with a whole tradition
of mature thinkers who have taken a proportionalist view of the
acceptability of violence: in cases where force can reasonably be
expected to make the difference (not when the situation is hopeless, as
pointed out by Thomas Aquinas in his theory of "just war"), it is lawful
to use force to ward off aggression.  In its own view of itself, the RSS
has precisely taken up the challenge formulated here by Gandhi: "Need
the Hindu blame the Mussalman for his own cowardice?"  Gandhi calls on
Hindus not to be cowards in the face of Muslim bullies.  In response,
the RSS claims it builds martial qualities and equips its workers with
the strength to face bullies.  There is nothing un-Gandhian about RSS
martial arts practice.  Even the Shiv Sena, the Mumbai Mafia which
organized the defence of the Hindus when the Muslims were starting a
pogrom in January 1993 could claim to have done Gandhi's bidding (and
then overdone it a bit; but Gandhi too used to overdo things).

 

         But then there is the other, unrealistic face of Gandhi, the
morbid face of "when slapped, turn the other cheek".  Even in this
extremist view of non-violence, the RSS is often a follower of Gandhi. 
During the Khalistani separatist struggle in Panjab (1981-93), hundreds
of RSS and BJP men were killed by the Khalistanis, yet this did not
provoke a single act of retaliation.  When in ca. 1990, and again in
1996, Communist militants started killing RSS men in Kerala, the RSS was
very slow to react in kind.  The Islamic bomb attacks on Sangh centres
in Chennai and elsewhere, the murders of BJP politicians in UP, Mumbai
and elsewhere, they all have not provoked any counter-attacks. 
Anti-Hindu governments in Bihar and West Bengal have achieved some
success in preventing the growth of sizable RSS chapters by means of
ruthless intimidation and violence, all without having to fear any RSS
retaliation. 

 

         The RSS often celebrates its "martyrs", which it calls
*"shahid"*, unmindful of the fact that this is a strictly Islamic
term.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  The word *shahid* is related to *shahada*
("witnessing", viz. to the two truth claims of the Islamic creed: there
is no God but Allah, and Mohammed is His prophet), and means "a witness
\[to the Islamic faith\]", i.e. one who has fallen during Islam's war
against the unbelievers.  To use this term for an unbeliever killed by
the believers is an insult to both sides.  Honouring those who died for
the cause is fine, but the thing to note is that the RSS never honours
those who killed for the cause.  Muslims at least honour the
kafir-killer (*ghazi*) along with the martyr (*shahid*), but the Sangh
follows Gandhi in choosing to extol dying rather than killing for the
cause. 

 

         Is this, then, a plea for more violence?  Should the RSS start
to live up to its mediatic image of "the world's largest private
militia"?  Should it drop its stick-fighting gymnastics and move on to
more realistic training with AK-47s?  That is the plea which I sometimes
hear from younger Hindutva activists.  Frustrated by the leadership's
appeasement policies, they want action, they want to "teach them a
lesson" (i.e. to the Muslims).  It has been done before: during
Partition, Sangh workers were quite active in taking revenge on Muslims
inside India (as eyewitnesses have told me), doing some bullying of
their own, though I am not aware of similar martial RSS feats in the
territory allotted to Pakistan.[\[3\]](#_edn3)  At any rate, the use of
force seems to be the only alternative they can imagine for the confused
and weak-kneed policies of the present leadership.

 

         Now that Hindus have practically disappeared from Pakistan and
Bangladesh, in the future most Hindu-Muslim killing will take place in
India, where Hindus are in a good position to kill a great many
Muslims.  Of course, the time is near when the quality of Muslim
armament will catch up with its already large quantity (to divulge a
police public-secret tabooed in secularist publications on riots), and
Muslim "revenge" operations of the Mumbai explosions (12 March 1993)
type can become a routine affair.  Still, in the next few decades the
non-Muslim army and police will remain a decisive factor blocking the
way to a definitive defeat of Hindus by Muslims in India, though they
may remain unable (mostly because their hands are tied by politicians)
to stamp out anti-Hindu and anti-Indian terrorism and armed separatism. 
Given this configuration of forces, I certainly take the possibility
into account that Hindu militant groups may develop, which will try to
settle newly arising communal confrontations by means of "direct
action", probably starting with the Kashmir-type situation which is
developing in the northeast.  I think it is in Hindu society's interest
to avert such a development by means of ideological warfare. 

 

         If Hindus want to win the life-and-death struggle with Islam,
they will have to do it in a Hindu, not in an Islamic way.  Some
Hindutva activists quote with approving bluster Veer Savarkar's dictum
that for every Hindu woman dishonoured by Muslims, a Muslim woman (if
not a dozen Muslim women) should be given the same treatment; and that
such retaliation would quickly teach the Muslims to behave.  I am told
that to this view of Savarkar's, Swami Karpatri, that genuine Hindu
fundamentalist if ever there was one, has replied that defending
Hinduism against Islam makes little sense if it means interiorizing
Islamic attitudes: "When a dog has bitten you, does it mean that you
have to bite back?"  Perhaps giving tit for that creates a good feeling
at the time of the act, but a movement which wants to be the vanguard of
Hindu civilization has to aim higher than that.

 

         The Hindu value of *ahimsa*, so prominently praised as the
"highest *dharma*" in the Mahabharata, is not the same thing as passive
masochism, whatever Gandhi may have read into it.  Even so, *ahimsa*
does imply a restraint on the use of violence.  Force is sometimes
necessary, as Krishna explains to Arjuna, but it should not be resorted
to lightly.  Indeed, Krishna and the Pandavas exhaust all possibilities
of compromise before they resolve to do battle.  The use of force may
not be altogether avoidable in the face of multiple aggression against
India and Hinduism, but to rely on force as a matter of long-term
strategy to save India from its enemies would be contrary to Hindu
ethics.  It would also be very unwise.

 

         Partly due to Gandhi's lingering influence, Hindus tend to
overreact to the shiver in their own eye, all while justifying or at
least ignoring the beam in their enemy's eye.  The mass killing of
Hindus in East Bengal in 1971 and the constant petty terrorizing of
Hindus in Pakistan and Bangladesh to chase them out have not moved
Hindus in India to retaliate in any way; they never even talk about it. 
By contrast, a single murder by a Hindu, that of Gandhi himself, was
enough to throw the Hindutva movement off course for decades.  There is
no dearth of Hindu soft-brains who feel guilty for the Ayodhya
demolition, and who preach that Hindus should make amends for it.  A
large-scale killing or forcible expulsion of Muslims will expose Hindu
society to the ferocious indignation of the Muslim as well as the
non-Muslim world, and experience shows that the Hindus have no stomach
for that.  So, apart from being bad publicity, any major act of violence
may also help to paralyze a Hindu revival. 

 

            Leaving apart the influence of Gandhism, there are also
honourable and purely Hindu reasons for feeling uncomfortable with
violent victories, viz. when violence was a wasteful and unnecessary
method resorted to out of being too lazy to try more subtle ways.  As we
shall demonstrate in the last chapters, there is an excellent
alternative.  Gandhi's *ahimsa* failed because he did not wage the
ideological struggle (except to some extent against the British, with
whom he also succeeded to an extent).  He could have thrown the Muslim
League on the defensive if he had exposed the Islamic ideology behind
the League's separatism.  He refused to do that, and if the Sangh
continues to follow in his footsteps on this issue, it will meet the
same defeat.  Whether by Gandhian appeasement or occasional bursts of
jihad-type violence, the Sangh is bound to lose the struggle against
Islam.  Its only chance lies in the ideological struggle, the royal
highway to Ram Rajya.    

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(           \[1\])  "Hindu-Muslim Tension: Its Cause and
Cure", *Young India*, 29/5/1924; reproduced in M.K. Gandhi: *The
Hindu-Muslim Unity*, p.35-36.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(           \[2\])  Unlike the day-to-day politicians in
the BJP, the more clerical Sangh spokesmen in the VHP do use proper
Hindi, like *hutatma* or *atmabalidan* instead of *shahid*.  Though
terminology is not important in itself, it is a good indicator of the
speaker's level of understanding.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(           \[3\])  I assume that if the RSS had
accomplished anything during the Hindu flight from Pakistan, it would
have devoted a publication to celebrating its heroes and martyrs there.

 

**    [NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section8.html)**

**    [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section6.html)**

</div>

</div>
