+++
title = "09 9. The Sangh as dinosaur "

+++
<div class="Section1">

**9. The Sangh as dinosaur**

 

         The anti-intellectualism of the Sangh Parivar is a sufficiently
serious problem to warrant a closer discussion.  The situation on the
ground is that RSS men seldom sit down to do any thinking, but are
always on the move.  As a US-based Hindutva activist told me: "When I
make a phone call to an RSS office-bearer in India, he will most often
not be in the Delhi office, not in Nagpur or another town, but somewhere
on the way."  And the wife of a BJP stalwart told me: "Being on the way
from one place to another is a status symbol among RSS men."  With all
this physical locomotion, little time and occasion is left for
concentrated mental work.

 

         The Sangh has a basic commitment to India and to Hindu culture,
but beyond that, its ideological position is hazy and undeveloped, and
therefore malleable in the hands of ideologically more articulate
forces.  It has been more influenced by dominant political currents and
intellectual fashions, often emanating from its declared enemies, than
one would expect from an "extremist" movement.  Like in the Congress and
Janata parties, quarrels within the BJP are never about ideology.  As
ex-insider Balraj Madhok writes in a comment on the Gujarat quarrels:
"Personal differences rather than ideological factors lie at the root of
the rifts within the Sangh Parivar."[\[1\]](#_edn1)

 

         To an extent, the BJP has its lack of ideological
sophistication in common with all non-Communist parties, most of all
with Congress.  A few recycled old slogans, a picture of its long-dead
leaders, some material presents for the voter (ad hoc food subsidies,
writing off farmers' loans), and there you have a complete Congress
election campaign.  Mutatis mutandis, the same is true for most
parties.  The simple slogans on the outside are not the summary of a
profound and complicated programme too esoteric to trouble the voters
with (as in the case of the Communists).  The surface is all there is to
it, at least as far as ideology is concerned. 

 

         This ideological hollowness is merely the application to
politics of a more general superficiality afflicting India's public
discourse.  An example is the politics of Sikh identity: given the
Vaishnava contents of Sikh scripture and the unmistakable Hindu
self-identification by Sikh leaders from Guru Nanak through Guru Tegh
Bahadur and Maharaja Ranjit Singh down to Master Tara Singh (a
co-founder of the VHP), the "separate identity" in which radical
neo-Sikhs have invested so much, including political separatism and a
long decade of bloodshed, amounts to nothing more than beards, turbans
and steel bangles,-- pure externality, an insult to the human
intellect.[\[2\]](#_edn2)

 

         Sri Aurobindo, the Freedom Fighter and philosopher, already
said it: "I believe that the main cause of India's weakness is not
subjection, nor poverty, nor a lack of spirituality or Dharma, but a
diminution of thought-power, the spread of ignorance in the motherland
of Knowledge.  Everywhere I see an inability or unwilingness to think --
incapacity of thought or 'thought phobia'."[\[3\]](#_edn3)  The great
ailment of India today is the decline in thinking power.  The crudeness
of contemporary political thought in India, once the cradle of great
pioneers in abstract and social sciences, is a sad sight, especially
considering that in other fields, such as business and the exact
sciences, Indians are already recovering their ancient greatness and
showing their acumen again.  

 

         To this general atmosphere of intellectual sloppiness, the RSS
has contributed its own wilful anti-intellectual prejudice.  The
perception from which Dr. Keshav Baliram Hedgewar (RSS supremo 1925-40)
started his RSS project was that Hindu society essentially had
everything, even the best of everything, certainly also in intellectual
culture, and that the only thing it lacked was *organization*.  It is
debatable whether lack of organization was a factor in the historical
defeat of Hindu princes by Muslim invaders and British colonizers, but
for the interbellum period, this analysis possibly had its merits.  And
so, the RSS put all its eggs in the single basket labelled Hindu
*sangathan*/"organization" (hence its weekly's name *Organiser*). 

 

         Hedgewar's successor Madhav Sadashiv Golwalkar (1940-73)
despised intellectual pursuits, and when he saw RSS people reading books
or newspapers, he would ask them if they had "nothing useful to do for
the Sangh?"  When I mention this to RSS activists, they protest that
there are many doctors, engineers and scientists in the RSS, and some of
them recount as their personal experience that Golwalkar had encouraged
them in their studies.  Alright then, let me rephrase my position as
follows.

 

         Golwalkar, who had been trained as a biologist, shared with
many people from the exact sciences a dismissive incomprehension for the
humanities, the disciplines in which critical thinking is practised. 
Secondly, he shared with many spiritual-minded people a skepticism of
the power of the intellect as compared to that of supposedly deeper
layers of consciousness.  Thirdly, he shared with many activists a
distrust of sterile cerebration with its tendency to paralyze people's
power to act.  And fourthly, he shared with many Hindus a disgust with
the traitorous role of the Communists, intellectuals all of them, in the
British suppression of the 1942 Quit India movement and the Partition of
India.  Hence the rhetorical question of many RSS people: "What good was
ever done by intellectuals?"

 

         RSS people often tell the story of the Pandit who crosses the
river and asks the boatman if he ever studied philosophy: "No?  Then
half your life is wasted!"  But when the boat starts to sink, it is the
boatman's turn: "Panditji, have you studied swimming?  No?  Then all
your life is wasted!"  And then they have a good laugh, satisfied at
having proven how useless intellectual effort is.  But fact is: in the
modern world, the equivalent of "swimming" in the story, the skill
necessary to disentangle yourself from the impasse and reach the goal,
is not the physical locomotion at which RSS officials are so good. 
Among the skills needed for successful social and political action
today, we should include the art of collecting and analyzing
information, and the art of formulating and advertising viewpoints.  Not
the intellectuals, but the RSS itself acts like the pandit in the story
who had spurned mastering the art of swimming.

 

         In fairness, it must be conceded that for all its
anti-intellectual bias, through its dedicated investment in grass-roots
work involving enormous personal effort of several millions of people,
the Sangh Parivar has unmistakably succeeded in establishing an
impressive presence among the common people.  Also, it must be said that
some RSS leaders, particularly its new *sar-sangh-chalak*, Prof.
Rajendra Singh (1994--, successor of Balasaheb Deoras 1973-94), have
understood the folly of this anti-intellectual prejudice, and now exhort
their workers to do some reading.  The newer publications are also less
shabby-looking and better written than the handful of pamphlets which
constitutes the whole of RSS literature produced in the first seventy
years.  In particular, the *Organiser* has definitely gained in
informative reliability and intellectual depth under Seshadri Chari's
editorship.  In the margin of Sangh, some local groups have started to
process information and disseminate ideas, such as the *Vigil* group in
Chennai and the *Hindu Vivek Kendra* in Mumbai.  But the consequences of
this long-standing policy of mindless activism are bound to run their
course for some more years.

 

         The Sangh's wilful mindlessness reminds me of a Chinese story
about a man who equipped himself for a journey to the south.  He bought
the best chariot and horses, hired the best charioteer, and went to the
imperial highway which crossed the empire in north-south direction. 
There, he gave directions to his charioteer, and off they went.  At a
stop along the way, someone asked him where he was going.  "To the
south", he said.  "But this way you will never get there", said the
stranger.  The man replied: "Come on, how can you say I will not get
there?  This is the best road in the empire, why should it not take me
there?"  But the stranger said: "You will not get there, because you are
taking the direction to the north."  The man insisted: "But these are
the finest horses, and this is a brandnew chariot, most certainly they
will get me there."  The stranger said: "But they will not get you to
the south if you take this direction."  The traveller got tired of all
this nitpicking: "My charioteer is the best in the empire, so how can
you say that he will not get me to my destination?  Look, this is a
sterile discussion, I must be on my way."  And off he drove, on the best
road, with the best equipment, at full speed, yet he never reached his
destination.

 

         Indeed, when you ask RSS office-bearers to evaluate their own
performance, they will boast that they have such a neat scheme of
character-building, such a fine organization, so many well-trained and
dedicated cadres, such a wide range of activities and front groups. 
Alright, but where is this impressive organizational machinery going? 
Do they know enough about Hinduism to understand why it should be
defended in the first place?  The standard shakha teachings about
"patriotism" may fail to teach them much about the specific qualities og
Hinduism.  Do they know enough about Hinduism's enemies to defeat or
even simply to recognize them?  Without a proper analysis, this vast
network of shakhas and front organizations is but an army of
sleepwalkers.

 

         I propose to conclude with another metaphor, which came up
during a discussion I had with Dina Nath Mishra, a journalist close to
the RSS: "The RSS is a big dinosaur with a small brain."  I don't think
I misrepresent Mishra's opinion when I say he agreed with this remark. 
His practical conclusion was: the thing to do is not to build up an
alternative organization, but to "infuse some brain into the dinosaur".

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  B. Madhok: "A Question of Power",
*Indian Express*, 29 October 1995.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(             \[2\])  The desire to fill up the doctrinal
emptiness of non-Hindu neo-Sikhism has led to the superficial adoption
of British secular or Christian viewpoints (from anti-Brahminism to the
Protestant doctrinal slogan of "the fatherhood of God, the brotherhood
of men", quoted by Khushwant Singh as the essence of Sikhism) and the
redefining of Sikh concepts after an Islamic model, e.g. the ten Gurus
as prophets, the Granth as "revealed scripture", the *hukumnama* as
*fatwa*, the *dharm yuddh* as *jihad*.  

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(             \[3\])  Spoken in April 1920; quoted in
Abhas Chatterjee: *Concept of Hindu Nation*, p.67.

 

    **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section10.html)**

**    [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section8.html)**

</div>

</div>
