+++
title = "13 13. Hindutva and other peoples' nationalism"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**13. Hindutva and other peoples' nationalism**

 

         The BJP's subordination of any and every ideological or
religious conflict to questions of "national unity and integrity", this
most mindless form of territorial nationalism, is also a worrying
retreat from the historical Hindu conception of Indian nationhood and
its implications for the evaluation of foreign problems of national
unity.  Along with Mahatma Gandhi and other Freedom Fighters, the BJS
used to be convinced that India was a self-conscious civilizational unit
since several thousands of years, strengthened in its realization of
unity by the Sanskrit language, the Brahmin caste, the pilgrimage cycles
which brought pilgrims from every part of India all around the country
("country" rather than the "Subcontinent" or "South Asia", terms which
intrinsically question this unity), and other socio-cultural factors of
national integration.  The notions that India was an artificial creation
of the British and a "nation in the making", were floated by the British
themselves and by Jawaharlal Nehru, respectively, and both are obvious
cases of unfounded self-flattery.  Gandhi's and the BJS's viewpoint that
India is an ancient nation conscious of its own unity is historically
more accurate.

 

         In foreign policy, one can expect two opposite attitudes to
follow from these two conceptions of India, the Gandhian one which
derives India's political unity from a pre-existent cultural unity, and
the Nehruvian one which denies this cultural unity and sees political
unity as a baseless coincidence, an artificial creation of external
historical forces.  In its own self-interest, an artificially created
state devoid of underlying legitimacy tends to support any and every
other state, regardless of whether that state is the political
embodiment of a popular will or a cultural coherence.  The reason is
that any successful separatism at the expense of a fellow artificial
state is a threat to the state's own legitimacy.  That is, for instance,
why the founding member states of the Organization of African Unity
decided from the outset that the ethnically absurd colonial borders were
not to be altered.  It is also why countries like Great Britain and
France, whose own legitimacy within their present borders is questioned
by their Irish, Corsican and other minorities, were reluctant to give
diplomatic recognition to Lithuania when it broke away from the Soviet
Union.

 

         By contrast, those who believe that states are merely political
instruments in the service of existing ethnic or cultural units, accept
that state structures and borders are not sacrosanct in themselves, and
that they may consequently be altered.  That is why Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn proposed to allow the non-Slavic republics to leave the
Soviet Union, and why as a sterling Russian patriot he pleaded in favour
of Chechen independence from the Russian Federation: it is no use trying
to keep Turks and Slavs, or Chechens and Russians, under one roof
against their will.  If Russia is meant to be the political expression
of the collective will of the Russian people, it is only harmful to
include other nations by force, as the Chechens and Turkic peoples once
were. 

 

         To be sure, even partisans of this concept of "meaningful" (as
opposed to arbitrary) states will concede that there may be limitations
to this project of adjusting state structures and state borders to
existing ethnic and cultural realities, especially where coherent
communities have been ripped apart and relocated, as has happened in
Russia.  Also, cultural and ethnic identities are not static givens
(e.g. the "Muslim" character of India's principal minority), so we
should not oversimplify the question to an idyllic picture of a
permanent division of the world in states allotted to God-given national
entities.  But at least the general principle can be accepted: states
should as much as possible be the embodiment of coherent cultural
units.  That, at any rate, is the Hindu-nationalist understanding of the
Indian state: as the political embodiment of Hindu civilization. 

 

         Now, what is the position of the BJS/BJP regarding the right of
a state to self-preservation as against the aspirations of
ethnic-cultural communities or nations?  The BJS originally had no
problem supporting separatism in certain specific cases, esp. the
liberation of East Turkestan (Sinkiang/Xinjiang), Inner Mongolia and
Tibet from Chinese rule.  At the time, the BJS still adhered to the
Gandhian position: India should be one independent state because it is
one culturally, and so should Tibet for the same reason.  Meanwhile,
however, this plank in its platform has been quietly withdrawn. 

 

         As A.B. Vajpayee told the Chinese when he was Janata Party
Foreign Minister, and as Brijesh Mishra, head of the BJP's Foreign
Policy Cell, reconfirmed to me (February 1996): India, including the
BJP, considers Tibet and other ethnic territories in the People's
Republic as inalienable parts of China.[\[1\]](#_edn1)  The BJP has
decisively shifted towards the Nehruvian position: every state, by
virtue of its very existence, must be defended against separatist
tendencies, no matter how well-founded the latter may be in cultural,
ethnic or historical respects.  That is, for example, why the BJP is not
supporting Kurdish sovereignty against Iraqi and Turkish
imperialism.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  Along with falling from cultural Hindu
nationalism to empty secular-territorial nationalism, the BJP has also
fallen from solidarity with other oppressed and colonized nations to a
short-sighted Indocentrism.

 

         When you ask why the BJP has abandoned its support for the
Tibetan freedom movement, the standard reply is that this would justify
other separatisms, including those in Kashmir and Panjab.  Exactly the
same position is taken by non-BJP politicians and diplomats.  But from a
Hindu and from an Indian nationalist viewpoint, this position does
injustice to India's claim on Kashmir and Panjab, which should not be
put on a par with all other anti-separatism positions in the world. 
Firstly, while Tibet was never a part of China, and while Chechnya was
only recently (19th century) forcibly annexed to Russia, Kashmir and
Panjab have been part of the heartland of Hindu culture since at least
5,000 years.  Secondly, in contrast with the annexations of Chechnya and
Tibet, the accession of Panjab (including the nominally independent
princedoms in it) and the whole of the former princedom of Jammu &
Kashmir to the Republic of India were entirely legal, following
procedures duly agreed upon by the parties concerned. 

 

         Therefore, Indian nationalists are harming their own case by
equating Kashmiri separatism with independentism in Tibet, which did not
accede to China of its own free will and following due procedure, and
which was not historically a part of China.  To equate Kashmir with
Tibet or Chechnya is to deny the profound historical and cultural
Indianness of Kashmir, and to undermine India's case against Kashmiri
separatism.  Here again, we see the harmful effect of the BJP's
intellectual sloppiness. 

 

         To be fair, we should mention that the party considers its own
compromising position on Tibet as very clever and statesmanlike: now
that it is preparing itself for Government, it is now already removing
any obstacles in the way of its acceptance by China and the USA (who
would both be irritated with the "destabilizing" impact of a Government
in Delhi which is serious about challenging Beijing's annexation of
Tibet).  In reality, a clever statesman would reason the other way
around: possibly there is no realistic scope for support to Tibetan
independence, but then that can be conceded at the negotiation table, in
exchange for real Chinese concessions, *quid pro quo*.[\[3\]](#_edn3) 
If you swallow your own hard positions beforehand, you will have nothing
left to bargain with when you want to extract concessions on the other
party's hard positions, i.e., China's territorial claims on Ladakh,
Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh, and its support to Burmese claims on the
Andaman and Nicobar islands.  International diplomacy should teach the
BJP what it refuses to learn from its Indian experiences, viz. that
being eager to please your enemies doesn't pay.

 

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  If earlier BJP manifestoes still
mentioned Sino-Indian cooperation "with due safeguards for Tibet",
meaningless enough, the 1996 manifesto does not even mention Tibet.  Nor
does it unambiguously reclaim the China-occupied Indian territories; it
vaguely settles for "resolv\[ing\] the border question in  a fair and
equitable manner".(p.32)

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(             \[2\])  In October 1996, a handful of BJP
men bravely demonstrated before the American Embassy against the
American retaliation to the Iraqi troops' entry in the Kurdish zone from
which it was barred by the UNO.  There was every reason to demonstrate:
while punishing Iraq, the Americans allow Turkish aggression against
Iraqi Kurdistan, the so-called "protected" zone, and fail to support
Kurdish independence in deference to Turkey's objections.  But that was
not the target of the BJP protest, which merely opposed any and every
threat against the "unity and integrity" of Iraq, a totally artificial
state with artificial and unjustifiable borders (as Saddam Hussain
himself argued during the Gulf War, pointing to the artificial
British-imposed border between the Mesopotamian population centre and
the Kuwaiti oil fields). 

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(             \[3\])  This is not to suggest that
demanding freedom for Tibet should only be done to have bargaining chip,
merely to illustrate the principle that concessions, even if unavoidable
under the circumstances, should still be made known as such, i.e. in
exchange for concessions from the other party, and not made beforehand
in exchange for nothing.  But Beijing politics may develop in such a way
that Tibetan sovereignty becomes a realistic proposition again.

 

    **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section14.html)**

**    [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section12.html)**

 

 

</div>

</div>
