+++
title = "14 14. The Sangh's Muslims"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**14. The Sangh's Muslims**

 

         In criticizing the Sangh's simplistic anti-Americanism, I am
not holding a brief for American foreign policy.  The *Organiser* is
entirely right in arguing that American officials are being extremely
silly when they base their policies on the assumption that Pakistan is a
bulwark *against* (rather than *of*) Islamic fundamentalism.  But this
mistake is hardly typically American: in *Organiser* itself, columnists
play the same game of labelling Muslim entities, without asking their
consent, as bulwarks against Islamic fanaticism. 

 

         Ever since he counseled Muslims to abandon their claim to the
Ayodhya site, one Maulana Wahiduddin Khan is regularly presented in
*Organiser* as an enlightened alternative to Islamic
fanaticism.[\[1\]](#_edn1)  He is also credited with admitting that most
riots are started by Muslims.  Yet, Wahiduddin Khan is an ideologue and
leader of the *Tabligh* movement, the object of which is to "purify"
Muslim culture of Hindu influence.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  It is motivated by
the same hostility to Hinduism as the Muslim League's Pakistan movement
was.  His endorsement of the Hindu claim on Ayodhya springs from the
realization that the Muslim campaign for the islamization of the
disputed site in Ayodhya (in use as a Hindu temple since 1949) has
proven harmful to Muslim interests.  Similarly, his chastising the
Muslims for starting riots can perfectly be explained by the bad image
which this gives them among Hindus, who are not fooled by the secularist
lies about "pogroms", and are kept on the alert against Muslims.  But
the RSS, in its eagerness to find some kind of approval in the enemy
camp, wilfully ignores the fundamental hostility of a Wahiduddin Khan
(and of many others whom they welcome on Hindutva platforms), just like
the US Government ignores the intense anti-Americanism and Islamic
militantism in Pakistan.

 

         Similarly, the enthusiasm in Sangh circles for Ansar Hussain
Khan, a second Muslim who actually talks with Sangh people and thereby
breaks through the *cordon sanitaire* which the secularists have laid
around the Hindutva movement (assuring him of intense gratitude in Sangh
circles), shows a painful lack of *viveka*/discrimination.  I have
nothing against the man personally, and from his acclaimed book *The
Rediscovery of India* I get the impression that he is sincerely seeking
an exit from the Islamic worldview; only, he has not yet freed himself
from certain basic attachments to things Islamic.[\[3\]](#_edn3)  I know
from experience that outgrowing a closed creed like Christianity or
Islam is usually done in stages (e.g. there are millions of people in
Europe who have rejected their Church but not yet Christ), so I will not
hold it against him that he hasn't reached the stage of full
emancipation yet.  I also appreciate the courage it must take for a
Muslim secularist to write in positive terms about the Sangh.  But if we
limit our evaluation to the actual *ideas* formulated by Ansar Hussein
Khan, we find certain things which are just unacceptable.

 

         First of all, he builds up the well-known argument that the
crimes which Islam has committed in India are violations of the true
spirit and the true law of Islam.  This is the great illusion which most
modern Hindus cherish: the true Islam as conceived by the founder is
impeccable, the only problem is that some followers misunderstood him,
or that purely nominal Muslims with little interest in the true Quranic
message falsely used the label "Islam" as justification for their
un-Islamic selfish acts.  Even among known Hindu critics of Islam, if
you scratch the surface, something of that illusion has withstood their
best scholarly insights.[\[4\]](#_edn4)  I suggest Hindutva ideologues
start to live up to the image which the secularists have propagated
about them, viz. that they are anti-Islamic.  Unfortunately, though a
good many of them are anti-Muslim at heart, most of them are not
anti-Islamic at all.

 

         The second and most dangerous message in A.H. Khan's book is
his plea for undoing the Partition, reminding us of similar pleas by
K.R. Malkani and other Sangh stalwarts.  True, India should not have
been partitioned, the Hindu masses were right to vote for a party which
promised to prevent Partition (unfortunately, that party, the Congress,
was deliberately fooling the voters), the Hindu organizations were right
to campaign against it.  But history moves in strange ways, and
yesterday's disaster may be today's blessing.  For Hinduism as such,
Partition has by now proved to be a blessing in disguise, a last chance
to survive.  When you consider that before Independence, the Hindu
Congress stalwarts were taken for a ride by the determined Muslim
leadership though the Muslims represented less than one-fourth of the
population and there were practically no Islamic states to support them,
how would the Hindus fare in a united India in which the Muslims now
constitute one-third of the population and receive support from rich and
well-armed Islamic states? 

 

         The last offers made to Jinnah to make him abandon his
Partition plans included 50% reservations for Muslims at all levels and
an effective predominance of the Muslims in the government.  What Jinnah
gave up by refusing the offer was a Muslim-dominated Akhand Bharat, an
unassailable country with the highest population in the world, with
"Vedanta brain and Muslim body" (freely after Vivekananda): Hindu brains
to serve the progressively islamicizing regime by building satellites
and nuclear bombs, and Muslim muscle to push back the Hindu element
until it would vanish the way it is actually vanishing from Pakistan and
Bangladesh.  Possibly this would have led to a civil war, but it is by
no means certain that Hindus would have won.  Hindus were just not ready
for Akhand Bharat, because they were not ready with Islam. 

 

         The present Indian state is already difficult for Hindus to
manage; apart from the Demolition (responsibility not acknowledged) and
a few Supreme Court verdicts (no merit of politicians), the Hindutva
forces have suffered defeat upon defeat in their struggle with the
secularists and Islam, essentially because they have never resolved to
wage war against the Islamic-cum-secularist forces which are already
waging an all-out war against Hinduism.  They failed to enact an
effective ban on cow-slaughter, to enact effective curbs on missionary
subversion, to integrate Kashmir, to stop the 1991 Places of Worship
Act, to withhold statutory status from the Minorities Commission, to
stop (let alone reverse) Bangladeshi infiltration.

 

         In this light, all the Hindutva daydreaming of a
pan-Subcontinental federation (whence the cordial welcome to A.H. Khan)
is profoundly mistaken.  It amounts to saying: "Now that we have proven
ourselves unable to handle small problems, give us big problems to let
us handle those."  It is no coincidence that all Muslim intellectuals
now openly deplore Partition: they now realize that Indian Islam lost on
Partition, and that it is quite capable of taking control of the whole
Subcontinent.  They have given up believing their own lies about the RSS
being a formidable fighting force threatening the Muslims, they know
very well that Hindu society under its present "leadership" is no match
for determined Islamic gangsterism.  They even think that the RSS can
serve their ends: bringing down the one defence which stands between
Islam and the annihilation of Hinduism, viz. the Indian state.  For all
its Muslim appeasement and anti-Hindu discriminations (cfr. infra), the
Indian state is not aggressively anti-Hindu: the Hindu-born ruling class
may sell itself for petro-dollars, but it does not organize the kind of
oppression which exists in Pakistan.  It does not support Hinduism, but
at least it passively allows Hindu culture to flourish on its own
strength.  Most importantly, the Indian police and armed forces (unlike
those in the Akhand Bharat which Jinnah spurned) are predominantly
Hindu, and they are not passive bystanders when Muslims terrorize
Hindus, as they are in Pakistan and Bangladesh.

 

         Partition has been a mistake, from the Islamic viewpoint.  The
Muslim community has been split into three roughly equal parts; Pakistan
and Bangladesh are uninspiring backwaters; the Muslims in the more
promising state of India cannot entirely free themselves of the
Partition stigma, and will be unable to take power there for at least
another half century.  It is now clear that from the viewpoint of
Islamic interests, the pro-Partition Aligarh school was wrong and the
anti-Partition Deoband school was right: Islam in India should not have
settled for a part of the country, but should have aimed for control of
the whole country.  The plan is that Pakistan and Bangladesh remain
Islamic states, but India should become a joint account.  In Bangladesh
the idea is very popular because it would formalize the *de facto*
permeability of the Indian border for Bangladeshi migrants. 

 

         Short, Akhand Bharat is now high on the Islamic agenda, and
calculating Muslims are welcoming and encouraging RSS romantic
daydreaming about reunification.  But so far, I have not seen any Sangh
spokesman pause and wonder why Islamic strategists have suddenly joined
them in wanting to undo the Partition.  They see no reason for
suspicion.

 

         A similar case of unjustified lack of suspicion seems to be
moving up on the BJP's and India's political agenda: proposals to change
the electoral system, including the replacement of the
first-past-the-post system with a proportional system.  This system,
which functions well in the Netherlands and Israel (and in diluted form
in most European countries), would be an unwise choice for India,
because it would allow Islamicist parties to enter the parliaments, not
just from Muslim-majority districts but from wherever the Muslim vote is
worth a seat.  This would then force secular parties to compete with the
Muslim League for the Muslim vote, which they will do by promising
ever-greater concessions to Islam.  The effect will be similar to the
creation of separate electorates in the pre-independence period.  At the
time of writing, I am not aware of a definitive consensus about this in
the BJP, but not of a realization of the danger either.[\[5\]](#_edn5) 
The BJP used to support the proportional system which favours smaller
parties when it was a small party itself, but now that it is a large
party, it may avert the danger out of sheer self-interest.  

 

         As for undoing the Partition, it is true that India should
ultimately be reunited, but which India?  What do the Sangh people
expect to achieve by undoing Partition without undoing the doctrinal
conditioning which led to Partition in the first place?  Do they prefer
an Islamic Akhand Bharat to a partitioned India which allows Hinduism to
survive in its major part?  Have they given any thought to the probable
outcome of their policies?  In their case, that is always the question.

 

         Unfortunately, Sangh Parivar ideologues labour under the
illusion that they can leave Islam intact while removing the
"anti-national" element from it.  Most of them, even including the
fairly radical former BJS president Balraj Madhok, have suggested that
the Islam problem can be solved by "indianization": Islam has to
"indianize" itself.  Or as the *Organiser* once put it: "Let Muslims
look upon Ram as their hero and the communal problems will be all
over."[\[6\]](#_edn6)  Islam, however, is a seamless garment, and it
cannot be freed from its anti-Hindu doctrine while retaining its Allah
and Mohammed.  Muslims cannot look upon Rama as "their" hero without
ceasing to be Muslims.

 

         The term "indianization" implies that the problem with Islam is
its un-Indianness.  And this, in turn, would imply a nationalistically
distorted view of religion: that a nation should only follow native
traditions and shun foreign contributions in religion.  By such
standards, the adoption of Hinduism or Buddhism by the peoples of East
and Southeast Asia would not be a matter of pride (as it seems to be for
the Sangh) but a violation of the proper world order.  The Khmers should
have rejected Shiva and built their Angkor temple to some native deity;
the Balinese should not enact the Ramayana but create an epic around a
native hero instead.  The "holyland" of many East-Asian Buddhists is not
their own country, but India: the Mahabodhi temple was renovated in the
19th century by the king of Burma, and is now surrounded by guest-houses
catering to many thousands of pilgrims from each Buddhist country every
year.  Should we deduce that these Thai or Japanese pilgrims are being
"anti-national" by having such "extra-territorial" religious loyalty? 
And that the Mongolian and Chinese Communists were right to crack down
on Buddhism?  That would be the implication if we start reducing
religions to their geographical provenance instead of studying their
contents.  In this case, patriotism is not the refuge of scoundrels, but
of duffers.

 

         This futile attempt to identify the Islam problem in terms of
"Indian" vs. "foreign" implies a second similarity with certain
undesirable xenophobic trends in the West.  Semi-literate xenophobic
ideologues in Europe identify Islam as "a foreign religion, fit for
Asiatics but not for Europe".  In their opinion, there is nothing wrong
with Islam, as long as it remains in its country of origin.  This is not
too different from the applause given in Hindutva publications to Anwar
Shaykh's thesis that "Islam is the Arab national movement".  In his book
*Islam, the Arab National Movement*, the Pakistan-born apostate author
from Cardiff (with a death-warrant fatwa on his head since 1994)
accurately documents how islamization has meant external arabization
(names, clothes, script) for most converted populations, but wrongly
infers that Islam is a form of Arab nationalism or Arab imperialism.

 

         For the Sangh, this thesis was doubly welcome: it recast the
Islam problem in the familiar, safely secular-sounding terms of
nationalism, and it legitimized Islam ("See we're not against Islam?")
all while limiting its legitimate geographical domain so as to exclude
India from it.  The implication is that Hinduism is Indian nationalism,
and Islam is Arab nationalism.  This is grossly unjust to the Arabs and
the native Arab culture which Islam destroyed.  There is nothing Arab
about Islam, a doctrine confabulated by Mohammed from half-digested bits
and pieces of Jewish and Christian lore, combined with his own
extraordinary self-image and the hallucinations registered on his
sensory nerves (the Quranic voice he "heard").  Except for a small
minority of people attracted to Mohammed out of gullibility or lust for
booty and power, the Arabs were only forced under the yoke of Islam
after valiantly resisting it.  For the sake of comparison, Communism was
not the "Chinese national movement" just because Chairman Mao's
Communists militarily wrested the country from the legitimate
Nationalist Government of Chiang Kai-shek.  The genuine Arab national
movement was the so-called *Ridda* ("return" to god-pluralism) uprising
against the Islamic state after Mohammed's death, in which the Arabs
tried to restore their pluralistic culture.[\[7\]](#_edn7)

 

         The review of Anwar Shaykh's work in *Organiser* was titled
"Muslim proud of his Aryan heritage".  This was, first of all, an
untruthful statement.  It is true that Anwar Shaykh has rediscovered the
"Aryan" (i.e. Vedic) heritage which his great-grandfather had abandoned
by converting to Islam.[\[8\]](#_edn8)  But the consequence of this
rediscovery was precisely the opposite of what the *Organiser* title
suggests: he quit Islam, becoming a "non-Muslim proud of his Aryan
heritage".  Secondly, this title sent the wrong message to Indian
Muslims.  The message which *Organiser* sought to convey was that Indian
Muslims should follow Anwar Shaykh's example: remain Muslim all while
rediscovering their Aryan heritage (or with an older term, "indianizing"
themselves).  This was a replay of the Gandhian myth of the "nationalist
Muslim" for whom Islam and Indianness are not
incompatible.[\[9\]](#_edn9)  But the case of Anwar Shaykh proved just
the opposite: by rediscovering his Hindu heritage, a Muslim loses his
Muslim identity.  Islamic fanatics are wholly aware of this phenomenon,
which is why they try to nip it in the bud, e.g. by forbidding Hindu
religious music on Pakistani radio.  The message of the *Organiser*
should have been: "Indian Muslims, follow Anwar Shaykh's example,
rediscover your Vedic heritage, and abandon Islam."

 

         A similar case is that of BJP office-bearer Sikander Bakht. 
Mr. Bakht is a thorough gentleman, but his main value for the BJP is
that he is a born Muslim.  He is often shown off as the party's token
Muslim, but just as often, angry Muslims write letters to the editor to
explain that Mr. Bakht is not a Muslim at all.  They say that he
actually converted to Hinduism on the occasion of his marriage to a
Hindu lady, and that his children were raised as Hindus.  Now, when I am
to choose between the BJP version and the Muslim version, I tend to
attribute more credibility to the latter.  If it is true that Mr. Bakht
is a convert, I certainly applaud the BJP policy of giving due
prominence to him.  Only, they should have the sincerity and the wisdom
to add the correct message, which is not: "We have Muslims as well",
but: "We welcome Indian Muslims seeking the way out of Islam back into
their ancestral culture." 

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(           \[1\])  Cfr. Maulana Wahiduddin Khan: *Indian
Muslims. The Need for a Positive Outlook* (Al-Risala Books, Delhi 1994),
p.109-130.  Within the limitations of the Muslim outlook, this is
nonetheless a lucid and well-intended book.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(           \[2\])  Cfr. Maulana Wahiduddin Khan: *Tabligh
Movement*, Islamic Centre, Delhi 1986.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(           \[3\])  Ansar Hussein Khan: *The Rediscovery
of India. A New Subcontinent*, Orient Longman, Delhi 1995.  The book is
well-written; particularly pleasant to read is the candid deconstruction
of the entire Congress version of the Freedom Struggle and the Partition
machinations, which cuts secular icon Jawaharlal Nehru to size.  The
book also contains in appendix the correspondence between Khan and the
BJP leadership.

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref4)^(           \[4\])  E.g., in 1993 a leading historian
signed a petition against Syed Shahabuddin's attempt to get Ram Swarup's
book *Hindu View of Christianity and Islam* banned, but not after
suggesting a change in the text: instead of the phrase which refuses to
Shahabuddin the role of "conscience-keeper of the nation", he wanted to
put "conscience-keeper of Islam".  The implication was that Islam is
alright, but that Shahabuddin distorts Islam.

</div>

<div id="edn5" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref5)^(           \[5\])  In its 1996 Election Manifesto (p.11),
the BJP promises to "examine the feasibility of introducing the list
system", which would imply multi-seat constituencies giving a more
proportional representation to smaller parties.  Incidentally, political
experience in Belgium and other countries using a list system shows that
it strengthen the control of the parties over the candidates, which may
(as Euroskeptic defenders of the British first-past-the-post system
rightly argue) be questionable from the viewpoint of democracy. 

</div>

<div id="edn6" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref6)^(           \[6\])   *Organiser*, 20/6/1971, quoted in
Tapan Basu et al.: *Khaki Shorts, Saffron Flags*, p.12.

</div>

<div id="edn7" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref7)^(           \[7\])  Even A.A. Engineer (*The Origin and
Development of Islam*, Orient Longman, Delhi 1987, 2nd ed., p.131)
admits that "the war of *ridda* (apostasy) was a general insurrection
throughout Arabia".

</div>

<div id="edn8" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref8)^(           \[8\])  The story is told in Anwar Shaykh:
*Eternity* (Principality Publishers, Cardiff 1990) and in various issues
of his quarterly *Liberty*.

</div>

<div id="edn9" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref9)^(           \[9\])  Of course, it can and does happen that
an Indian Muslim has genuine patriotic feelings, but this is necessarily
in spite and at the detriment of his commitment to Islam.  Many Indian
Muslims are not "Pakistani patriots", firstly because Pakistan is
mistreating their own Mohajir cousins, and secondly because Pakistan is
a failure in every secular respect except terrorism.  Their dream of an
Indian-Muslim state is no match for the reality that unlike Pakistan,
India is a country to be proud of.  In that sense, I am willing to
accept the self-description of people like M.J. Akbar as "nationalist
Muslims".  But they remain stuck with a problem of divided loyalties,
and part of the reason why they have accepted their Indianness is that
the present Republic is in many ways an incarnation of their second
(Islamic) loyalty as well: a pro-Muslim regime dedicated to weakening
Hinduism.

 

**    [NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section15.html)**

**    [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section13.html)**

</div>

</div>
