+++
title = "17 17. Christ in India"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**17. Christ in India**

 

         The Sangh is even less combative vis-à-vis Christianity than
vis-à-vis Islam.  The Christian Churches must be counted among
Hindutva's most determined enemies.  Much of the negative image which
the BJP has acquired internationally is due to the lasting powerful
impact of the Churches on the information stream concerning the Third
World.  In quarrels between the Hindutva forces and the Muslims or the
secularists, the Christian institutions are invariably on the anti-Hindu
side.  There are also Christian armed separatist movements in Nagaland
and Mizoram, which are openly supported by the World Council of Churches
and by a number of Catholic institutions.

 

         Some Hindu writers have therefore developed detailed criticisms
of Christian political behaviour in India, detailing records of
conversion, and discussing the missions' international
sponsoring.[\[1\]](#_edn1)  This line of argument is also developed in
books formally published by the Sangh Parivar itself through its
"think-tank", the Deendayal Research Institute, most notably Devendra
Swarup, ed.: *Politics of Conversion* (1986).  A more fundamental
critique of Christianity itself, regardless of its alleged
"anti-national designs" and use as an "instrument of the Western
powers", but more in touch with Western developments in Church history
and Bible research, is only available in publications by independent
writers, mostly through **Voice of India**.[\[2\]](#_edn2)

 

         The Sangh Parivar cannot be accused of a confrontationist
stance vis-à-vis the Christians and the missionaries.  The single most
frightening moment for the Christian mission strategists was in the
mid-1950s, when the BJS was hardly in the picture as a political force. 
The Congress government of Madhya Pradesh ordered an investigation of
fraudulent conversions through social pressure and material inducement
by Christian missionaries in the tribal belt.  The BJS supported the
implementation of the recommendations (for a much stricter control of
missionary activities and finances) concluding the highly critical
report of this committee.  The BJS 1957 election manifesto stated: "The
recommendations of the Niyogi Committee and Rege Committee will be
implemented to free the Bharatiya Christians from the anti-national
influence of foreign missionaries."[\[3\]](#_edn3)  Remark the language
used: it sounds as if the BJS wants to protect the *Christians* against
the missionaries.  Then already, it apparently felt the need to cloak
its concern for Hindu (including tribal) interests in an ostensible
concern for the minorities.  At any rate, Nehru prevented the report
from having any political consequences.

 

         The BJS took up the same thread of checking the missionary
activities when it reckoned it was in a stronger position to impose its
will, viz. when it was part of the Janata Party government.  In 1978,
O.P. Tyagi proposed his Freedom of Religion Bill in the Lok Sabha, with
the object of prohibiting conversions by force or allurement.  The
Christian missions launched a worldwide propaganda campaign against it,
and the Leftist sections of the Janata Party also opposed it, so that
nothing came of it.  But the BJS had at least tried; the BJP can not
even be credited with trying.

 

         In 1994, the Churches created a similar stir, on the occasion
of a very small incident in the Chennai area.  After reading Ishwar
Sharan's book *The Myth of Saint Thomas and the Mylapore Shiva Temple*,
which argued that a number of churches including the one commemorating
Saint Thomas's alleged martyrdom had been built on destroyed Shiva
temples, a back-bench member of the RSS-affiliated Tamil organization
*Hindu Munnani* went to a church in Pondicherry, equipped with the
paraphernalia for *puja*, and inquired where the *Shiva lingam* was, so
that he could worship it.  He had learnt that the Cathedral had been
built on the site of the Vedapuri-Ishwaran Temple after the temple had
been destroyed in 1748 by the Jesuits aided by the them French governor
of Pondicherry. Immediately, the Catholic Church was alarmed and warned
that the Hindu fundamentalists were trying to create a second Ayodhya
affair.  The Hindu Munnani responded to the challenge in a very modest
way, holding a small demonstration near the church (as close as the
police allowed them to go) to draw attention to the Catholic Church's
record in the attempted destruction of Hinduism in South India. 

 

         The Hindu Munnani did not let the controversy escalate any
further, not least because the BJP had immediately disowned the
fledgling movement. The story of how the Vedapuri-Ishwaran temple was
destroyed had been documented in great detail in Sita Ram Goel’s
*History of Hindu Christian Encounters* published in 1989. He requested
an RSS journalist whose syndicated column was published in many
newspapers across the country, to make the story more widely known by
devoting one of the articles to it. He agreed but did not keep his
promise. Goel tried to get the story summarized in the *Organizer* also,
and immediately sent a copy of his book to the editor who expressed
willingness over the telephone. But weeks passed without the weekly even
mentioning the episode. Later on, it was learnt that the Sangh leaders
had decided to suppress the story, and so it was blocked out of the
media controlled by the Sangh Parivar. When I mentioned this incident to
some leading BJP members, none of them expressed any interest in, let
alone sympathy for the Hindu Munnani's position.  K.R. Malkani, whom the
media always describe as "BJP ideologue", laughed it off and said that
"we have no quarrel with the Christians". 

 

         Why did the BJP refuse to focus attention on the record of
Christian aggression?  Though focusing on conflictual chapters in
history has been decried and condemned in the strongest terms when
Hindus did just that during the Ayodhya campaign, it is a perfectly
respectable activity in other parts of the world.  Every now and then,
we hear of some new monument or movie commemorating the Holocaust and
confirming the Germans in their role of culprits.  Monuments are being
built to commemorate the victims of Communism, and hence to draw
attention to the guilt of their Communist oppressors and executioners. 
Except for Hindu society victimized in centuries of Muslim rule, every
community which considers itself the victim of large-scale aggression at
some point in history freely exercises the right to fix the memory of
this crime in the collective consciousness.

 

         Most to the point, the not-so-gentle conquest and
christianization of the Americas has been commemorated on a very large
scale in 1992, on the 500th anniversary of Columbus's landing.  It so
happens that another 500th anniversary in approaching: that of Vasco da
Gama's landing in India in 1498.  Juridically and theologically, this
event was the exact counterpart of Columbus's landing in America.  In
the 1494 Treaty of Tordesillas, the Pope had allotted two halves of the
world to Spain and Portugal, on condition that these Christian states
organize the christianization of their respective colonies.  Most of
America and East Asia fell to Spain, while Portugal got the area from
Brazil to China, including Africa and India.  The Portuguese were less
successful in India than the Spanish were in America, not because their
intentions and methods were different, but simply because the power
equation was different: the Indians were better equipped (cannon,
horses, resistance to diseases) than the Native Americans, while the
Portuguese were fewer in number than the Spanish.  On a smaller scale,
the Portuguese in India behaved just like the Spanish in America:
forcible conversions, massacres of the native priesthood, destruction of
places of worship.

 

         Therefore, the question arises: is there any chance of a 1998
commemoration comparable to the 1992 commemorations?  In 1992, even the
Pope felt he couldn't ignore the painful anniversary, and in the name of
the Catholic Church, he publicly apologized to the Native Americans. 
This was the result of a broad movement in public opinion, including the
cultural sector and politicians from every American country.  Is there
any chance that the Pope will feel sufficiently pressured to do the same
thing towards the Hindus?  As things stand at the time of writing, it
looks like there will be no trace of a similar Christian soul-searching,
simply because there will be no Hindu pressure in that direction.  In
December 1995, Hindu Munnani activists in Chennai told me that they
vaguely consider "doing something", but no writer or film director is
creating an opinion climate, and even the political party allegedly
waging a campaign against the Christians is not taking up the issue at
all.  Mr. Malkani emphatically denied that the BJP would ever consider
participating in or give a lead to such a movement. 

 

         To sum up, while a part of the BJP constituency certainly
harbours anti-Christian feelings, the BJP is careful to avoid any
confrontation with the powerful Christian Churches.  One reason is that
most Hindus are simply not sufficiently informed about Christianity to
take it on in any meaningful way (often sentimentally cherishing crazy
myths about Jesus having lived in India, the Gospel teaching yoga,
etc.).  Another is that the calculating BJP politicians see courtesy to
Christianity as one of the prerequisites for achieving the mirage-like
goal of being accepted as secular.

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  Typical examples are Brahma Datt
Bharati: *Christian Conversions* (1980), Thanulinga Nadar: *Unrest at
Kanyakumari* (1983), and Major T.R. Vedantham: *Christianity, a
Political Problem* (1984).

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(             \[2\])  Examples are Ram Swarup: *Hindu View
of Christianity and Islam* (1992) and *Hindu-Buddhist Rejoinder to Pope
John-Paul II* (1995), Sita Ram Goel: *History of Hindu-Christian
Encounters* (1989, 1996) and *Jesus Christ, Artifice for Aggression*
(1995), Ishwar Sharan: *The Myth of Saint Thomas and the Mylapore Shiva
Temple* (1991, 1994), and Arun Shourie: *Missionaries in India* (1994).

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(             \[3\])  *Party Documents*, vol.1, p.82.

 

   **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section18.html)**

**   [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section16.html)**

</div>

</div>
