+++
title = "18 18. Hindus wielding the sword of Islam"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**18. Hindus wielding the sword of Islam**

 

         When Akbar had Rajput armies fight his Rajput enemies, he
rejoiced at the sight of "Hindus wielding the sword of Islam".  When his
archers could not distinguish between the Rajput mercenaries and the
Rajput freedom-fighters, he told them that it didn't matter, since
anyone killed would be a Kafir anyway.  India's greatest Moghul is often
mindlessly lauded by Hindus as a "secular" ruler, but while he should be
credited with a certain wisdom, he was and remained an enemy of the
Infidels.  Unlike the Delhi sultans, who constantly provoked Hindu
uprisings with their cruel politics of jihad (apart from weakening
themselves with their internecine fighting), Akbar managed to
*consolidate a Muslim empire* by incorporating a sufficient number of
Hindus in his apparatus. 

 

         Thus, his abolition of the jizya (which could seldom be
collected in rural areas where most Hindus lived) need not be read as a
gesture of communal amity, but rather as a clever way of opening new tax
channels to the rural masses through mostly Hindu tax collectors.  He
extracted a much larger revenue from Hindu tax-payers in the form of
land tax or other secular formulas, than his predecessors had managed to
do through the jizya.  And it is through Akbar's tax collecting system
that Aurangzeb would later collect his re-instituted jizya.

 

         On the Hindu side too, things are not always what they seem,
and some reputations for Hindu bravery deserve some reconsideration,
precisely because on closer scrutiny, they were "Hindus wielding the
sword of Islam".  Thus, Guru Govind Singh declared in his *Zafar-nama*
("victory letter", though there is nothing victorious about its
superficially defiant but basically toadyist contents) that like
Aurangzeb, he too was an idol-breaker.  In spite of the RSS veneration
for Govind Singh and his "sword-arm of Hinduism", the germ of Sikh
separatism and the islamization of Sikhism was already in evidence in
his words and deeds.  The Marathas started as Hindu freedom fighters,
but ended as bullies to the Rajputs, Jats and Sikhs, and as vassals of
the Moghuls.  The Brahmo Samaj and Arya Samaj wanted to defend Hinduism
against Christian and Islamic aggression, but started by attacking the
elements in Hinduism which contrasted most with Christianity and Islam
(polytheism, idol-worship), and promoted their Christian-Islamic
counterparts instead. 

 

         What about the Sangh?

 

         Where Hindus have an acute problem with Muslims or Islam, they
tend to vote BJP except where they have tougher alternatives.  Yet, the
record does not bear out the deduction that the BJP must be quite an
anti-Muslim party.  It will never initiate any policies specifically
targeting the Muslims (such as the unkept promise of a crackdown on
Bangladeshi infiltrators) except in an externally provoked Hindu-Muslim
crisis of major proportions, i.e. a genuine armed Muslim uprising,-- but
under such circumstances most non-BJP governments would take similar
positions.

 

         Contrary to certain impressions created in the media, the
BJS-BJP and RSS leaders have a heartfelt desire to woo the Muslims.  The
present official position of the RSS (and *a fortiori* of the BJP) is,
more than ever, that Islam itself is quite alright, only fundamentalism
is wrong.  Even the well-known secularist theory that the Hindu-Muslim
conflict was merely a concoction of the wily British colonizers is often
repeated in RSS publications, sometimes with the addition that Congress
and other secularist parties have now assumed the divisive role which
the British once played.  In every case, the role of the intrinsic
hostility which Islam itself preaches and practises against "idolatry"
is downplayed or kept out of the picture.

 

         It is easy to establsh that the Sangh is not preparing but
rather avoiding any confrontation with Islam.  The BJP and other Hindu
organizations do perceive militant Islam as a genuine threat to Hindu
society: "It is being realized by all democratic countries that today
the greatest threat to world peace emanates from Islamic
fundamentalism."[\[1\]](#_edn1)  But though the claim of an actual
consensus in the democratic countries is exaggerated, this is hardly an
original or outlandish observation.  Among the many who made similar
remarks, we may mention former NATO Secretary-General Willy Claes, who
said in early 1995 that militant Islam may be about to replace Communism
as the global threat claiming the vigilance (and hence justifying the
existence) of NATO.

 

         A few RSS authors do expect a confrontation between Islam and
other powers, and some have even brought in Samuel Huntingdon's
well-known theory of the "Clash of Civilizations".[\[2\]](#_edn2) 
Mostly, the thrust of this line of thought is not to predict a
Hindu-Muslim confrontation, but a conflict between Islam and the West. 
The Hindutva audience likes this a lot, for the same reason why it is so
fond of astrological predictions that India will become a Hindu state in
the near future: Huntingdon's predicted clash between Islam and the West
would *make things easy for the Hindus*, viz. by taking the pressure off
India.  Hindus often translate Huntingdon-type predictions as: "the West
will take care of Islam" -- meaning that for all their apprehensions
about the rising power of Islam, Hindus will not need to do anything
themselves.  This type of discourse confirms that many Hindus are
profoundly uncomfortable with the Islamic presence in and around India,
yet they do not consider themselves to be the rock in the storm on which
victory against Islam depends.

 

         But the Hindutva forces are not content to just dream of third
parties eliminating the Islam problem.  They also actively counter those
in India who want to get serious about uprooting Islam.  The BJP goes
out of its way to assure everyone that it has no bad feelings towards
Islam as such, e.g.: "To oppose Islamic fundamentalism does not mean to
oppose Islam, which like all other major faiths is a religion of love,
peace and brotherhood."[\[3\]](#_edn3)  It strongly discourages those
within its own ranks who want to face the Islam problem squarely.  The
BJP government of Delhi has refused to cancel judicial proceedings
initiated by its secularist predecessors against **Voice of India** for
the publication *Understanding Islam through Hadis* by Ram Swarup.  In
fact, the Sangh tries to blunt the sword of those who take on Islam, and
thereby effectively defends Islam.

 

         Even in the RSS weeklies, while the case against Islamic
"fundamentalism" inside and outside of India is documented and argued
week after week (nowadays mostly in the well-written columns of V.P.
Bhatia and Muzaffer Hussain), criticism of Islam itself is extremely
rare.  When in the 1980s the historian Sita Ram Goel filled a weekly
column in *Organiser* with mustering evidence for his position that
fundamentalist intolerance is the essence of Islam itself rather than a
deviation, RSS General Secretary H.V. Seshadri intervened to have the
column discontinued and the editor, the arch-moderate K.R. Malkani,
sacked.  The reason given for the discontinuation was that "otherwise,
with such attacks on Islam, the Muslims will not join us".  The same
reason was given by the BJS leadership when asking Balraj Madhok to
leave the party, in 1973, "on the grounds that since Muslims had become
allergic to me they would not join the party".[\[4\]](#_edn4) 

 

         It is hard to conceive of a situation where a society is vexed
and tortured by a persistent enemy, then generates a millions-strong
organization pledged to the defence of this society, and yet this
organization, this boastful "vanguard", fails to produce even the most
sketchy analysis of the motives and methods of this enemy.  Only Hindus
could fare this badly.  Fifty years after the Partition, twenty-six
years after the East Bengal genocide, there are still Hindus singing
mendacious refrains like *Ram Rahim Ek Hai* and "equal truth of all
religions", because their supposed leaders have never bothered to inform
them.  A large part of the reason is to be found in specific choices
made by the Sangh leadership, most of all the choice to seek secular
respectability by means of appeasement policies including flattery of
Mohammed and Islam.

 

         Now that the Sangh exists, many activist Hindus gravitate
towards it, but otherwise they would have set up their own shops and
worked for Hinduism according to their own lights rather than follow the
Sangh party-line.  I am sure that in that case, the ideological struggle
against Islam would have been waged much more vigorously, because most
normally intelligent people consider it obvious that the existence of a
problem warrants an investigation of its causes, i.e., that the
suffering of Hindu society under Islamic aggression urgently warrants
scrutiny of the doctrine and historical models underlying the
characteristic behaviour pattern of Islam.  By deliberately suppressing
this perfectly natural ideological mobilization of the Hindus against
Islam, the Sangh has effectively acted as Islam's first line of defence.

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  *Foreign Policy Resolutions*, p.5
(1995).

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(             \[2\])  V.P. Bhatia: "The coming clash of
civilisations", *Organiser*, 18-25/2/1996.  I myself was invited by the
Deendayal Research Institute to speak on this theme (February 1995).

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(             \[3\])  *Foreign Policy Resolutions*, p.5
(1995).

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref4)^(             \[4\])  That at least is Madhok's own
version, see Balraj Madhok: "A Question of Power", *Indian Express*, 29
October 1995.

 

    **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section19.html)**

**    [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section17.html)**

</div>

</div>
