+++
title = "20 20. How to deal with Islam"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**20. How to deal with Islam**

 

         The "communal" problem is simple, and so is its solution.  The
root cause of communal riots, of the Partition with its nearly a million
victims, and of the East Bengal genocide with its three million victims,
is the Islamic doctrine of permanent hostility against the
unbelievers.[\[1\]](#_edn1)  As the Quran says: "Fight them until
idolatry is no more and religion belongs to Allah alone" (2:193 and
8:39), and: "Enmity and hate shall reign between us until ye believe in
Allah alone" (60:4).  More than 70 passages in the Quran teach that
non-Muslims are to be shunned and treated as enemies, that they are
bound for hellfire, and that rulership in this and bliss in the next
world is reserved for Muslims alone.  This body of doctrine is further
corroborated and enriched with like-minded statements and model acts of
Mohammed and his companions, and systematized by theologians and
jurists.  The solution is obvious: remove the intrinsically communal and
separatist doctrine of Islam from the minds of its misguided followers. 
Educate them so that they can laugh at the primitive beliefs which have
held them captive for so long, just as adults can take a laugh at their
own childhood illusions.

 

         Sounds radical?  This was the solution offered by the Arya
Samaj, a progressive Hindu reform movement, which put the large-scale
reconversion of Muslims to the Vedic tradition high on Hindu society's
agenda.  Its central doctrinal book, Swami Dayananda Saraswati's
*Satyartha Prakash* (1875), contained the first Hindu vivisection of
Islamic doctrine, still a bit clumsy but on the right track.  The
movement had its martyrs, several authors of publications on Islam and
leaders of the reconversion movement killed by Muslim activists; but it
never indulged in any similar forms of violence. 

 

         Indeed, frank debate on ideas is inversely proportionate with
riots and bomb attacks.  For this reason, the secularist editors and
professors and politicians who suppress debate on the record and
doctrines of Islam are among the chief culprits of India's communal
conflagrations.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  The BJP is making a grave mistake by
actively and passively joining the "secular" (in Europe we would call it
anti-secular) effort to shield Islam from rational investigation and
informed debate.  Instead, it should make and support every effort to
expose Islam and break the spell it has cast on hundreds of millions of
fellow Indians now known as Muslims.

 

         Today, the liberation of the Muslims from Islam should be a top
priority for all those who care about India's and the world's future. 
This is all the more obvious when we notice that in the Muslim world
itself, many writers have stood up to publicize their break with Islam,
and to show their brethren the way out of the religion which was forced
on them by Mohammed and his companions.  Some have done so from a
newfound atheist conviction (e.g. Taslima Nasrin), others from a
rediscovery of the ancient ever-young spirituality of the Vedic
tradition (e.g. Anwar Shaykh).  Given the intolerance for dissident
opinions in the Muslim world, and given the actual spate of murders and
murder attempts against fellow dissidents, each one of these apostates
has had to muster far more courage than Sangh Parivar people will need
when they finally speak up against Islam in the relative safety and
freedom of secular India.

 

         The case against Islam is not limited to its record of
intolerance, aggression, persecution and barbarity.  Quite apart from
its violent self-righteousness and its anti-national attitudes, Islam is
reprehensible for the more fundamental and more universal reason that it
*is not true*.  Most ancient religious traditions are not based on
belief systems, e.g. though the theory of reincarnation has gained
widespread popularity among Hindus, there is no law which excludes
non-believers in reincarnation from the Hindu fold.  Religions like
Shinto or Taoism consist in a set of practices and ritual or ethical
conventions, established as a practical framework of life within which
people can exercise their freedom to seek spiritual upliftment; they are
not based on a belief system.  In contrast to these ancient communal
religions, Christianity and Islam make a truth claim which is
non-provable but must nonetheless be accepted and will be enforced with
grim punishments in this world and the next.[\[3\]](#_edn3)  It is
meaningless to talk about these creedal religions without evaluating
their central truth claims.

 

         In the case of Islam, this creed is quite simple: *There is no
god except Allah, and Mohammed is the prophet of Allah.*  The first part
may or may not be true, depending on the meaning of the terms.  Like the
Vaishnava term *Bhagwan*, "the sharer", effectively "the Lord", the
Pagan-Arab term *Allah* (from *al-Ilah*, "the god", cfr. Hebrew
*Eloha/Elohim*) seems to have been an inclusive term, subsuming every
god in the Arab pantheon.  But to read this meaning into the Islamic
creed would be unhistorical: the whole of Islamic scripture is entirely
consistent in denouncing the worship of any "other god" (or what a
Vaishnava inclusive-monotheist might call: "God under any other name")
as irreconcilable with the worship of Allah.[\[4\]](#_edn4)  It
necessarily implies hostility to Hinduism as long as Hindus do not
worship Allah to the exclusion of all the Hindu gods and to the
exclusion of non-theistic worldviews.

 

    The second part of the *Shahada*, that Mohammed is Allah's prophet
(assuming that Allah is the almighty Creator of the world), is decidedly
untrue.  First of all, it is entirely unproven.  Every single sentence
in the Quran can be explained from Mohammed's own socio-cultural
background, like any perfectly human product.  Someone rich ought to
announce an award for anyone who can find in the Quran a single sentence
which proves by its contents that the Almighty had dictated it.  That is
what rationalist associations do to expose quack exponents of the
paranormal: award a hundred thousand dollars for whomever can
demonstrate even a single paranormal fact under foolproof conditions (so
far, no one ever collected the prize).

 

         Allah is supposed to be omniscient.  For such a Being it should
be very easy to demonstrate some knowledge which is beyond the reach of
ordinary human beings like Mohammed, say, being able in 620 AD to
predict the events of 2000 AD, or to give the then-unknown chemical
formula of water, or to write a then-unknown language including modern
Arabic.  This would not be proof of omniscience yet, but at least proof
that the Quran is not the handiwork of an ordinary mortal; but nothing
of the sort is done in the Quran.  Moreover, the Quran contains many
contradictions and inaccuracies, both in terms of modern physical and
medical knowledge and in terms of its references to Biblical characters
and events, e.g. mistaking Moses' sister Miriam for Jesus' mother
Miriam/Mary, though there is a time-gap of more than twelve centuries
between the two.  The omniscient Allah, who claims to be the God of
Abraham and Moses, had somehow forgotten the details of his interactions
with the Hebrew prophets, and while confidently predicting the Doomsday,
He was ignorant of the scientific knowledge accumulated by mankind
centuries before this Doomsday.

 

         Mohammed's own contemporaries were almost unanimous in
dismissing his "revelations" as anything but divine, though they
disagreed on whether his problem was demonic possession (as is still
taught by some Christian missionaries) or just his imagination run
wild.  Modern scholars have analyzed Mohammed's behaviour and
"revelations" as typical symptoms of paranoia, while Swami Vivekananda
opined that Mohammed suffered from the neuropathological effects of
unguided yogic experiments.[\[5\]](#_edn5)  At any rate, there is
nothing God-given about the Quranic revelation. 

 

         Islam stands or falls with Mohammed's prophethood.  The entire
Muslim law is based on it through its four pillars, either directly
(Quran and *Hadis*, the lore about his model behaviour) or indirectly
(*Qiyas*, or analogy of new situations with those in which Mohammed
showed the way, and *Ijma*, the consensus of men well-versed in the
former three).  Those who are now Muslims will be free to replace
*Sharia* laws with more humane laws once they emancipate themselves from
their veneration for the man on whose words and acts the *Sharia* is
based.  Then alone will they be able in good conscience to drop their
hostility to Hinduism.  Moreover, then they themselves will opt for a
Comon Civil Code, and they themselves will turn the Kashi and Mathura
mosques into temples of Shiva and Krishna, rather than have these
changes forced on them by meddlesome Hindus.  So, the Hindutva activists
should replace the Common Civil Code and temple agitations, which claim
things *from* the Muslims, with a campaign to reclaim the Muslims
themselves, or at least to emancipate them from the grip of Islamic
doctrine and leave them free to choose a more humane spiritual path for
themselves.

 

 

 

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  The victims of the Pakistani
repression in East Bengal in 1971 (of whom the big majority were Hindus,
while the Bengali Muslims too were killed for anti-Hindu reasons, viz.
for being "half-Hindu renegades"), like those of the Sultanate and
Moghul regimes, have never been properly counted; careerwise, it is
suicidal for a scholar to calculate the magnitude of Islam's crimes
against humanity.  The figure of 3 million is probably too high, but as
it was given by a Muslim secularist (Bangladesh founder Mujibur Rahman),
and as the secularists themselves have thrown their full weight against
a proper study of the magnitude of Islamic massacres of Hindus, they
cannot fault us for provisionally sticking to it. 

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(             \[2\])  You wouldn't guess it from their
polished convent-school English, their trendy terminology, or their
sanctimoniousness, but the likes of Romila Thapar, Irfan Habib or
Gyanendra Pandey have blood on their hands.  The wave of Muslim violence
after the Ayodhya demolition (and the boomerang of police repression and
Shiv Sena retaliation) was at least partly due to the disinformation by
supposed experts who denied that the disputed building had a violent
iconoclastic prehistory, and implied that Hindus can get away with
concocted history in their attacks on innocent mosques.  This
disinformation gave Muslim militants the sense of justification needed
to mount a "revenge" operation and to mobilize decent Muslims for acts
of violence which they never would have committed if they had known the
truth about Islam's guilt in Ayodhya.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(             \[3\])  In this context, I want to caution
against the imprecise use of the term "Semitic" when referring to the
Prophetic-monotheistic religions.  Apart from being tainted by the
related term "anti-Semitic", it is also hopelessly inaccurate.  Judaism
(which is linguistically "Semitic" in that its basic texts are in Hebrew
and Aramaic) is a communal religion just like Hinduism and most tribal
and traditional religions, not a creedal one like Christianity and
Islam.  The Semitic peoples including the Arabs until the 7th century AD
and the early Israelites were heathens worshipping goddesses in sacred
groves and the like.  The founding texts of Christianity were written in
Greek, a non-Semitic language.  Monotheism was brought into Judaism by
Moses, culturally an Egyptian, and had already been briefly imposed on
the Egyptians by Pharaoh Ekhnaton.

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref4)^(             \[4\])  Allah is given "one hundred names",
or rather Arabic epithets, but this does not mean that Isis or Apollo or
Shiva will do just as well.  The non-Quranic Persian god-name *Khuda*
did admitteldly manage to sneak into Muslim parlance; but it is no
coincidence that with the increasing grip of the theologians on public
life in Iran and Pakistan, this term is being phased out in favour of
"Allah", e.g. *Khuda hafiz*, "God preserve you" (for "goodbye") is being
replaced on Pakistani television by *Allah hafiz*.

</div>

<div id="edn5" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref5)^(             \[5\])  See Swami Vivekananda: *Complete
Works*, vol.1, p.184.  The psychopathological thesis on Mohammed has
been developed in great detail by Dr. Herman Somers: *Een andere
Mohammed* (Dutch; Hadewijch, Antwerp 1992).

 

    **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section21.html)**

**    [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section19.html)**

</div>

</div>
