+++
title = "23 23. Conclusion"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**23. Conclusion**

 

         In spite of Hinduism's nominal magnitude, the chance that
Hinduism gets wiped out by its enemies can no longer be discounted. 
More than ever, fortunes are spent on the war to destroy Hinduism in
favour of Islam or some suitably adapted variety of Christianity or
Marxism.  The hostile activities of Islamic and Christian agitators and
the attempts at Hindu demoralization and loss of Hindu self-respect by
the secularists are now compounded by a fast-spreading loss of Hindu
memory at the mass level by consumerism and Western pulp media.  I have
seen with my own eyes how local cultures within European civilization
are being as good as wiped out in a few decades by the onslaught of
mindless "Americanism", and this loss of cultural roots is a major
factor in the current defencelessness of the affected populations
vis-Ã -vis the rising threat of Islam.  Hindus would be mistaken to think
that this cannot happen to their old civilization; most civilizations at
the time of their demise were old and venerable.  For Hinduism too, time
is running out.

 

         The seriousness of the situation should first of all concern
the Hindus themselves.  Come to think of it, I have very little personal
stake in the political success of Hindu revivalism and the continued
existence of Hinduism.  Of course, there is an invaluable heritage
contained in the Upanishads and other Hindu books; but they are
available in Western libraries, we can take from them what we like
without needing the help of a living Hindu.  It was a comforting idea to
know that at least one ancient society had managed to preserve its
traditions down to the present, but if that society fails to defend
itself and disappears, I am confident that we can find our way without
it.  If Sanskrit scholarship or yogic expertise dies in India, I am sure
some aficianados in the West will keep it alive as a matter of
antiquarian hobbyism, somewhat like the thriving clubs for amateurs
long-dead Pharaonic lore.  It is always deplorable when a dinosaur dies,
but we can survive the demise of really-existing Hinduism without
serious losses.  Whether Hinduism will survive as a living civilization
in control of its own territory, or merely as a museum piece, is a vital
concern only for the Hindus themselves.     

 

         The issue is the survival of the besieged Hindu civilization. 
The stakes are high, and the question is whether Hindus intend to go for
the big one or settle for less.  A general rule for this type of
situation is that if you aim high and put in an effort commensurate with
the calibre of your goal, you may achieve it.  Even if you don't achieve
it, you may still achieve a number of lesser objectives as a spin-off of
your effort.  But if you aim low, your enthusiasm and hence your effort
will be proportionately limited, so the chance is *a priori* small that
you will achieve anything more than your limited goal.  Further, your
enemies will try to thwart your little efforts with as much zeal as they
would your big efforts, so you may still fail to achieve what you
intended to.  If the Hindu movement continues to aim for petty gains and
peripheral achievements, it will continue to fail in its real task, and
even the hoped-for petty successes may continue to elude it.

 

         If the Hindutva politicians and activists want to spare
themselves the prospect of going down in history as a bunch of buffoons,
who stood by and worked on inconsequential things while their country
was taken over by their mortal enemies, they will have to get their act
together quickly.  Instead of wasting energy on petty politicking and
limited goals such as the reconversion of sacred sites, all eyes should
be set on the major goal, which is the liberation of fellow Indians from
the predatory religions which have alienated them from their ancestral
culture.  The goal could in fact be set even higher, so as to include
among other things the emancipation of the West-Asians and the
liberation of the Kaaba (a temple to Hubal, the Arab Shiva) from Islam;
but it will already be good if the self-styled vanguard of Hindu society
can save its own people and country. 

 

         There is nothing "fundamentalist" or "fascist" about this.  The
emancipation of fellow Indian from closed creeds is a very humane and
responsible project.  It could best be summed up in the motto with which
the Muslim-born humanist Ibn Warraq opens his book *Why I Am Not a
Muslim*: "The best thing we can do for Muslims is to free them from
Islam."  More concretely, it is the only way to avoid the extremely
bloody conflagrations which are sure to break out if the Muslim and
Christian agitators smell victory in ever-larger sections of the
country.  As they smell blood, they will become more openly and more
fiercely aggressive and Hindus will not go down without a fight; the
subsequent loss of life should not be minimized as just one more of
those inevitables in history.  The ideologies which pit believer against
unbeliever should be neutralized before they can add some more
achievements to their ugly record.

 

         As part of this great project, smaller projects such as a
Common Civil Code or the restoration of some Hindu sacred sites may be
legitimate steps on the way, depending on the circumstances, and even
temporary compromises with the hostile forces may be justified in
certain cases; but the final goal should be kept uppermost in everyone's
mind.  In the case of the organized Hindutva movement, there is reason
to fear that amid all its campaigns for limited demands it has lost the
awareness of the larger challenge.  Today, when you question Hindutva
leaders and ideologues about their puzzling policy of kowtowing before
Mohammed and Nehru, the typical answer is that this is all part of a
very very clever strategy which you unfortunately haven't understood
yet.  Admittedly, victorious strategists have often started out with
seemingly self-defeating moves which their underlings didn't understand
but which produced the desired results in the long run.  Let the
Hindutva spokesmen ask themselves if their own clever tricks have this
calibre, and whether they are really outwitting their enemies rather
than themselves.

 

**[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/appendix.html)**

**[BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section22.html)**

 

 

</div>
