---
title: Khitai
---

## Liao (eastern khitan) empires. 
- "In their first phase the Khitans restored power of the Mongolic people through the conquest of northern China and the remnants of the Tang dynasty under their resourceful Khan Ambaqai (sinicized as Abaoji). Thus, they brought to the Mongolic world key political, administrative (e.g. the postal system) and knowledge developments that had occurred during the high-point of Chinese civilization." \[[MT17](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2017/07/30/mongolica-chingiz-khan-and-the-rest/)\]
- "As the Tang empire was on decline, the Khitan Mongols under their great Khan Yel체 Ambagai conquered the whole of Mongolia, Korea and Northern China in 907 CE and his successors eventually made the Han of the Song a vassal state. But over time they sinicized as the Liao dynasty and their Mongol traditions declined. The Han of the Song with aid from coethnic Hans within the Khitan empire made an alliance with the Khitan vassals, the Jurchen from Manchuria belonging to the Tungoosid branch of the Altaic peoples. The latter in 1124 CE defeated the Khitan and usurped all of their possessions in China, Manchuria and northern Korea."  {[MT](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/12/09/some-reflections-on-the-khans-qaidu-and-dua-and-the-great-khans-lost-legacy/)}
- Toppled by Tungustic jurchen. The jurchen were in turn toppled and pushed south by Chingiz Khan; aided by khiTan remnants who acted as their bridge with Chinese.

## Qara Khitai
- Yel체 Dashi's Qara (western/ black) khiTai uncharacteristically resisted conversion to Islam even while ruling over muslim subjects, in contrast with several other turkish and mongol branches.
- "Yel체 Dashi the Khan of the Khitan founded a smaller empire empire the Qara Khitai which occupied whole of Mongolia and Uighuristan after Uighurs accepted them as overlords to form an alliance against the Islamic onslaught. They routed the Ghazis led by Qarakhanids in the great battle of Balasagun in Khirgizstan. Then the combined army of Islam under the Qarakhanids and Saljuqs launched Jihad against the Qara Khitai but it was smashed in the battle of Qatwan after which Transoxiana was added to Mongolian domains. "  {[MT](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/12/09/some-reflections-on-the-khans-qaidu-and-dua-and-the-great-khans-lost-legacy/)}
- Mullas conducting D훮yi activity in their realm promptly rounded up and executed. \[[SP16](https://twitter.com/Rjrasva/status/725049903102197761)\] \[[MT17](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2017/07/30/mongolica-chingiz-khan-and-the-rest/)\]
- "The Qara Khitai continued to sinicize and were subverted by the Naiman Turks. "