+++
title = "00 Preface"

+++
Preface

The concept of Secularism as known to the modern West is dreaded,
derided and denounced in the strongest terms by the foundational
doctrines of Christianity and Islam. Both of these doctrines prescribe
Theocracy under which the State serves as the secular arm of the Church
or the Ummah, and society is regimented by the Sacred Canon or the
Shariat.

This fact is more than evident if we survey the history of Christianity
till the French Revolution, and the practice which prevails in all
Islamic states till today. It is a different matter that Christianity
has reconciled itself to Secularism because of its steep decline in its
traditional homelands - Europe and the Americas. The doctrine remains
unchanged and Christianity will restore Theocracy if it were to acquire
power again. Islam has yet to evince any sign of similar reconciliation
with Secularism either in doctrine or in practice. In fact, the recent
trend in most Islamic countries has been to revert to Theocracy in its
pristine form, that is, as it existed under the four "rightly guided
caliphs".

It is, therefore, intriguing that the most fanatical and fundamentalist
adherents of Christianity and Islam in India - Christian missionaries
and Muslim mullahs - cry themselves hoarse in defence of Indian
Secularism, the same way as the votaries of Communist totalitarianism
coming out vociferously in defence of Democracy. The puzzle needs
unravelling unless one is satisfied with the mere sound of the word
'secularism', and at the same time nails pluralistic Hinduism as a
closed monotheism like Islam and Christianity as India-watchers in the
West and their lickspittles in this country have been doing for a long
time.

It is significant that the word 'secularism' occurs neither in the
writings and speeches of Pandit Nehru nor in the vocabulary of its other
present-day votaries if we consult the record from the pre-independence
period. Even in the Constitution of India as enacted in January 1950 the
word does not find a place either in the Preamble or anywhere else; it
was inserted there arbitrarily by Indira Gandhi during the Emergency she
imposed on the Country during 1975-76. But ever since Pandit Nehru rose
to supreme power in the Indian National Congress and the country at
large after the death of Sardar Patel in December 1950, we find this
word becoming increasingly frequent in his writings and speeches and
fashionable in the parlance of parties that have otherwise nothing in
common except their hatred of Hindus and Hinduism. All sorts of
Hindu-baiters have come to describe themselves as 'secularists' 'Secular
forces' and 'Secular front' while distancing themselves from what they
denounce as 'Hindu communalism'. It can be concluded quite safely that
although all 'secularists' may not be scoundrels, all scoundrels in
India are 'secularists'.

The puzzle stands solved when we learn from the post-independence
writings and speeches of Pandit Nehru, the father of Indian Secularism,
that he had borrowed from the modem West only the word and not its
meaning in Western political parlance. In fact, he himself stated what
he was doing in a letter he wrote to C.D. Deshmukh on 22 June 1952.
"Nothing amazes me so much," he said, "as the perversion of well-known
words and phrases in political and other controversies today. I suppose
every demagogue does it."[1](#1) He was either being blatantly dishonest
or was blissfully unaware that he had proved himself to be a despicable
demagogue when he picked up a well-known word from the Western political
parlance and perverted it to mean the opposite of what it meant over
there. Secularism in the West had risen as a revolt against the closed
creed of Christianity and had meant, for more than 150 years, a freeing
of the State from the clutches of the Church. In the Indian context it
should have meant a revolt against the closed creed of Islam as well,
and keeping the state aloof from the influence of mullahs. He, however,
turned Secularism in India into a poisonous slogan for the use of a
Muslim-Communist Christian combine which he had forged in order to keep
the national majority down.[2](#2) L.K. Advani had hit the nail on the
head when in a moment of clarity and courage during the Ayodhya Movement
(1989) he had said that. Secularism in India was a euphemism for
Hindu-baiting.

That was the intention when Pandit Nehru launched his 'Secularism'
around 1951-52. The intention materialized into a grim reality in the
next few years. Meanwhile, he permitted his courtiers, particularly the
Gandhians, to provide the window-dresssing to this formidable fraud.
Secularism in India, they said, cannot mean the irrelevance of religion
in mundane affairs as it meant in the modern West. India being a
religious - infact, a multi-religious - society, they asserted, religion
was very much relevant to the lives of the Indian people. So Secularism
had to acquire a new meaning in the Indian context. Instead of meaning
irrelevance of religion, they proclaimed, it should mean the relevance
of all religions prevailing in this country - Hinduism, Islam,
Christianity, Sikhism, Jainism, Buddhism, and Zoroastrianism. In short,
they defined Indian Secularism as *sarva-dharma-samabhâva* - equal
respect for all religions - as expounded by the Father of the Nation,
Mahatma Gandhi.

But Gandhi's *sarva-dharma-samabhâva* did not stop at equal respect for
all religions; it went much further and stood for *equal validity* of
all religions. The Mahatma had spared no ink or breath to inculcate the
belief that all religions embody the same truths, pursue the same goal,
and lead to the same spiritual fulfilment. This second dimension of
*sarva-dharma-samabhâva* was brought forward very forcefully when the
big-wigs of the Indian establishment - the President, the
Vice-President, the Prime Minister, the Chief Ministers - started
broadcasting their messages to the nation on the birthdays of Sri Rama,
Sri Krishna, Prophet Muhammed, Jesus Christ, Guru Nanak, Mahavir and
Buddha. According these worthies, all these founders of 'great
religions' blazed the same path to salvation, and stood squarely and in
the same measure for human brotherhood, social justice, economic
equality, world peace, self-sacrifice, compassion - in fact, for every
spiritual virtue and sociopolitical value which happened to be in
fashion at the time they brushed up their verbiage. The grandiose
rhetoric has remained unabated till today.

These worthies may sound like a bunch of buffoons to those who have
studied various religions from their primary sources, and who know for
sure that there is nothing in common between monotheistic dogmas (blind
beliefs) like Christianity and Islam on the one hand, and pluralistic
spiritual traditions of Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism[3](#3)
on the other. Ascribing human brotherhood, social justice, world peace,
self-sacrifice and compassion to Christianity and Islam is tantamount to
proclaiming that the wolf is a votary of vegetarianism. But that makes
no difference to the worthies who never suspect that what they are
mouthing does not amount to equal respect but *equal ignorance* of all
religions! They frown upon those who doubt their wisdom and accuse the
latter of being 'chauvinists' out to wreck 'India's age-old communal
amity'. *Sarva-dharma-sambhâva* has thus become another religious dogma
(blind belief) sponsored by the Indian State.

It would have been a blessing indeed if the Indian State had stopped at
proclaiming the dogma and left it to the citizens to believe in it or
not. But what has happened is that the Indian State actively patronizes
the exercise aimed at making all religions *mean* the same things, and
*persecutes* those who defy the exercise. A whole army of 'secularist'
scribes in the media and the academia has been employed and paid
handsomely for whitewashing Islam and Christianity so that whatever is
bigoted in the scriptures and blood-soaked histories of these creeds, is
carefully exorcised. On the other hand, whatever is liberal and
large-hearted, humane and civilized in the pluralistic spirituality of
India is remorseless pruned to the prescribed and proper size. In the
process, Christianity has been made to mean only the Sermon on the
Mount, and Islam equated with two Quranic sentences tom out of context -
"Unto you your religion, and unto me my religion" and "There is no
compulsion in religion."[4](#4) At the same time Hindu Dharma has been
reduced to Brahmanical tyranny, caste oppression, satee, cowdung-eating,
untouchability, bride-burning etc., and Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism to
revolts against 'all these evils'.

Again, it would have been same solace if Muslims, Christians, neo-Sikhs,
neo-Buddhists and neo-Jains had subscribed to *sarva-dharma-samabhâva*
and shown respect for Hinduism. But what happened was just the opposite.
While Hindus were harangued, even forced, to swear by and practise
*sarva-dharma-samabhâva* vis-à-vis Islam, Christianity, neo-Sikhism,
neo-Buddhism, and neo-Jainism, followers of the latter creeds were left
free not only to propagate their pet dogmas but also to attack Hinduism
and proselytize Hindus. What emerged as a result was a united front of
Muslims, Christians, neo-Sikhs, neo-Buddhists and neo-Jains (the
so-called minorities) which stood arrayed against Hindus, and insisted
vehemently that Hindus accept the 'secularist' version of Hinduism thus
forcing Hindus to become apologetic and remain on the defensive always.

In short, the *sarva-dharma-samabhâva* version of Indian Secularism
turned out to be the same as the Nehruvian version. According to this
version, Hindus were always in the wrong no matter who committed
aggression in the first instance and who was the real culprit for
creating communal tension at any time. History of the Freedom Movement
(1885-1947) was tailored in order to put Hindus in their proper place,
that is, as those who brought about the 'tragedy of Partition'. It did
not mean a fig to the Indian 'secularists' that Hindus by and large as
well as their organizations (Hindu Mahasabha, Arya Samaj, Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh) had resisted tooth and nail the Muslim League demand
for Pakistan; that 97% Muslims of India ruled by the British had opted
for Partition in 1946; that the Communist Party of India had marshalled
ideological and statistical arguments in support of the Muslim League
case; that Socialists had pounced upon Hindus who criticized Muslims
and/or Islam; that it was the Indian National Congress which had
accepted the Mountbatten Plan of Partition in June 1946; and that
Mahatma Gandhi had thrown up his hands in utter helplessness at the last
moment after having continued to assure the Hindus of Punjab, Sindh,
NWFP and Bengal that "vivisection of the Motherland could take place
only on his dead body"! The exercise used the Nazi logic of accusing the
sheep of provoking the wolf.

The most unkindest cut of all, however, came from the Bharatiya Jana
Sangh, (BJS), the new Hindu party floated by the Rashtriya Swayamsevak
Sangh (RSS) in 1951. While it continued to proclaim that it stood for a
united India (Akhanda Bharat), it did not take long to start mouthing
the slogan of *sarva-dharma-samabhâva*. The only saving feature in this
sorry situation was that the BJS did not incorporate the slogan in its
Constitution finalized in 1973, nor forced its members to subscribe to
it. That was left for the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) launched in 1980.
This new avatar of the BJS incorporated the slogan as Article IV[5](#5)
in its Constitution adopted in 1992, and made it obligatory for its
members to take a pledge that they would abide by it. This abject
surrender to Secularism was camouflaged by adding the word 'positive' to
an essentially negative concept. The party was out to hoodwink Hindus
who were led to believe that it stood for Hindu causes. It ended by
deceiving itself as became more than obvious in the next few years. In
any case, the 'secularist' camp viewed with contempt its secularist
pretensions, and continued to denounce it as a party of 'Hindu
communalists, chauvinists, Fascists and Nazis'. The outcome has been
what it was bound to be. The BJP has been shying away from defending
Hindus or Hinduism in order to earn certificates from the 'Secularist
front'. Or, if it has espoused a Hindu cause once in a while, as in the
case of the Ramajanmabhumi Movement, it has done so purely for its own
private purpose of mobilizing Hindu votes and then run away from the
battle when it came to the crux, leaving Hindu society at large to
suffer the slings and arrows of an outraged 'secularist' mob.

The court cases and other articles in Section I of this book bear ample
testimony that the Indian State has become a Theocracy for all practical
purposes with *sarva-dharma-samabhâva* serving as its official dogma.
The twist given by Pandit Nehru and all other parties to the word
'secularism', had turned Indian Secularism into a shield for protecting
creeds and cults hostile to Hindus, and also into a sword for wounding
and maiming Hinduism which has always stood for an open society and
religious pluralism. And as the Indian State has been dominated by
Communists, Socialists and Leftists of all hues, I have chosen to label
Indian Theocracy as Secular. For Leftists in general have always opposed
Theocracy in Muslim and Christian countries. It is only in India that
they have become its unrivalled champions.

Muslims in India have taken full advantage of Indian Theocracy to
prevent critical examination of Islam, its prophet, its scriptures, its
history, its heroes, and its ethical and legal prescriptions. They have
staged street riots, murdered innocent Hindus and policemen, and
destroyed public and private property wherever the call has gone forth
from their leaders that Islam has been insulted. Thereby they have
succeeded in getting books, articles and films banned by invoking
Sections 153 and 295 of the Indian Penal Code and similar provisions of
the Indian Customs Act. At the same time, they have honeycombed the
whole country with maktabs and madrasahs which train an army of
missionaries and militants, and provide shelter to terrorists sent by
Pakistan, Bangladesh and other Islamic countries. They have formed
themselves into a vote bank which all political parties, particularly
the BJP, go out of their way to cultivate and woo. The BJP has coined a
clever slogan - "justice for all, appeasement of none" - in order to
cover up its courting of Muslims and hoodwink Hindus. But if you examine
the record of State Governments of the BJP, it becomes more than clear
that it has gone out of its way towards appeasement of Muslims. It is
only the Muslims who have refused to oblige 'the party of Hindu fascists
and Nazis'.

It is true that Christians in India do not behave like Muslims except
once in a while, and one is free to criticize Christian dogmas and
institutions, even its totem - Jesus Christ - if one chooses to do so,
which is rare because of the inhibitions fostered by
*sarva-dharma-samabhâva*. But Christian leaders do shout from the
housetops that the norms of Indian Secularism are being violated.
Christianity also enjoys an advantage over Islam in this context. In
spite of all the blah blah about *sarva-dharma-samabhâva*, there are
very few Hindus who really respect Islam or its prophet. The record of
Islamic crimes committed over the centuries and continued at present,
has sunk too deep into the psyche of Hindus at large to encourage them
to honour Islam or its scriptures or its heroes. On the other hand, due
to the accidents of history, Christianity arrived too late in this
country to create a similar record except for a brief period and over a
small area - under the Portuguese and the French. The British who won
the race for consolidating a European empire in this country, were
interested more in preserving their empire then making Jesus Christ
preside over it. They did not permit Christian missionaries to use their
patent methods, particularly after the Mutiny of 1857. In any case,
Hindus could always laugh at the Christian missionaries foaming at the
mouth and using foul language for all that Hindus cherish. Add to that
the Hindu infatuation for Jesus Christ starting with Raja Ram Mohun Roy
and coming down to Mahatma Gandhi and the Ramakrishna Mission. There has
always been an abundance of Hindu elite and gurus, here and abroad,
selling Jesus as a spiritual giant. For a large number of Hindus
educated in Christian schools and colleges, Christianity means
'humanitarian services' which Hindus themselves have 'never undertaken'.
Small wonder that the Christian establishment in India has remained
confident that it has only to invoke Jesus and Mother Teresa to silence
the rare Hindu voice of dissent. In any case, Hindu scholars who have
studied Christianity in depth and detail are too few and far between to
bother the giant Christian apparatus funded by fabulous sums from
abroad. The modem West may not have any use for Christianity, but it
continues to maintain it for export to Third World countries like the
rest of its junk. And the West never fails to rush to the defence of the
Christian establishment in India whenever the latter protests that it is
being molested by 'Hindus fundamentalists'.

**II**

Hindu intelligentsia by and large has been led to believe by the
votaries of *sarva-dharma-samabhâva* that this is an ancient Hindu
doctrine accepted and practised by all Hindu schools of thought, always
and everywhere. Nothing can be farther from the truth. The fact is that
we do not find this phrase - *sarva-dharma-samabhâva* - in any Hindu
*shâstra* down to our own days. It was Mahatma Gandhi who coined the
phrase and prescribed it for all Hindus. In the earlier history of
Hinduism, we do come across a few *sarva-darshan-saMgraha* - compendium
of all schools of thought. But what we find in them is not that all
schools say the same things or that all schools are equally valid, but
only expositions of the various points of view together with a critique
of them by the compiler concerned. What is more telling is the hoary
Hindu history of *shâstrârtha* (debate) going back to the Vedas. In
subsequent ages, we come across lively debates among the main schools of
Sanâtana Dharma - six systems of philosophy on which Buddhism, Jainism,
Vedanta, Shaivism, Shaktism, and Vaishnavism are based. Each of these
schools has bequeathed to posterity a vast literature defending its own
position and demolishing those of all others. Then there is a lot of
debate among the sects within each school, following the same pattern.
The language of these debates is not always refined. Quite often, it is
harsh, and occasionally downright derisive. And *shâstrârtha* was not
confined to the written word. It was held in royal courts as well as in
assemblies of the learned. The only thing we miss in these debates is
going beyond words, written or spoken, and calling for breaking of
heads. In the long history of *shâstrârtha* we do not come across a
single instance of any school or sect calling for suppression of any
other school or sect, or mobilizing its adherents to stage street riots
in its support and against another - a method brought to India by Islam
at its very advent.

But Islam was never accepted as a *dharma* by mainstream Hinduism. It
was only in the fourteenth century of the Christian era that we meet the
so-called Nirguna school of bhakti or santamata, founded by Kabir, which
started treating Islam as a way of worship and even equating it with
Hindu Dharma - Rama with Rahim, Veda with Kateb (*Kitâb*, the Book or
Quran) Kashi with Ka'ba, Pandit with Mullah, Temple Bells with Azan, and
so on. Quite a bit of this equating was done for ridiculing the rituals
of both Islam and Hinduism, and proclaiming that the spiritual secret
was known only to the *sadguru*, the True Teacher like Kabir. For the
rest, the bulk of the *santamata* literature is Vaishnavite derived from
the Puranas, particularly the *Bhâgavata-purâNa*. The only variation is
the mention of a few sufis like Mansur Al-Hallaj, Abu Yazid (Bayazid)
and Adham Sultan, who were hardly sufis like those we meet in the latter
day *silsilas* (orders). It is significant that none of the sufis from
the *silsilas* finds place in this literature.

The *santamata* gave birth to many *sadgurus* and sprouted into many
off-shoots in North India. But none of its offshoots ever became known
in South India. In North India, too, it remained confined to a few
low-caste communities amongst whom the Puranic lore had been popular
long before *santamata* appeared on the scene. The main-stream Bhakti
Movement which was wide-spread among Hindus including those belonging to
most of the lower castes, always looked down upon the *santamata*, even
when the latter became increasingly more and more Hindu except for its
incongruent streaks of monotheism, prophetism (*guruvâda*) and
anti-Brahminism. It is significant that no adherent of any school of
Santamata is known to have converted to Islam. What we know is that some
converts to Islam joined its ranks, notably Dadu and Sadhna.

So the doctrine of *sarva-dharma-samabhâva* cannot be attributed to the
*santamata*. What we find in *santamata* is not equal respect for all
religions but *equal contempt* for all rituals and institutions, whether
Hindu or Islamic.

It is only when we move to modem times that we find the first traces of
*sarva-dharma-samabhâva* surfacing in India in the form of the Brahmo
Samaj. Raja Ram Mohun Roy, the founder of this cult, was a votary of
Islamic monotheism, and later on became infatuated with Jesus Christ. He
confused the monism of the Upanishads with the monotheism of Biblical
creeds, and gave birth to a lot of confusion. But, by and large, he
stayed a Hindu who had some very hard words to say about the doings of
Islam and Christian missionaries in India. Even Keshub Chunder Sen
cannot be called a votary of *sarva-dharma-samabhâva*, strictly
speaking. The man fancied himself as the prophet of a New Dispensation
(*Nababidhâna*) which had not only equated all religions but also gone
beyond them. He ended by becoming a bag of nauseating nonsense. In any
case, the Brahmo Samaj remained confined to a miniscule minority in
Bengal. One of its splinters, the Adi Brahmo Samaj, returned to Hinduism
for all practical purposes. That is more than obvious in the works of
Rabindranath Tagore, particularly his poetry which is saturated with
Vedic imagery and Vaishnavite devotion.

The trail blazed by Keshub Chander Sen, however, did not go in vain. It
was followed by the first disciples of Sri Ramakrishna who took over the
Mission after the death of its founder, Swami Vivekananda. Most of these
desciples of Sri Ramakrishna, particularly those two who compiled his
*Gospel* and *Biography* had come from the flock of Keshub. It took them
no time to swallow the 'synthesis' and its 'transcendance' offered by
their earlier guru. The only difference was that they replaced Keshub by
Sri Ramakrishna as being the last and the best who had seen the equal
truth of all religions including Christianity and Islam, and
'synthesised' them in his own avatarhood. He was thus supposed to have
given birth to a new and perfected religion, Ramakrishnaism. In my
opinion, this new 'religion' cannot be equated with
*sarva-dharma-samabhâva*. It is more a way of showing equal contempt for
all religions, as in the case of Keshub. It is a different matter that
the Mission has not been able to live upto its pretensions, and has
become a Christian mission for all practical purposes.

Theosophy brought to India yet another strain of
*sarva-dharma-samabhâva*. It proclaimed that all religions were
ultimately derived from and were distortions of the Original One
Religion known to the ancient Mahatmas, who had kept themselves hidden
for a long time. But so far as the prevalent religions are concerned,
Theosophy never said that they were the same or equally true. In fact,
the first Theosophists who come to South India showed a marked
preference for Hinduism, and encouraged Hindus to redicule and denounce
Christianity, its totem, and its missions. Later on, Annie Besant
founded the first Hindu College at Varanasi, and could never see eye to
eye with Mahatma Gandhi when it came to Islam. The only Theosophist who
really stood for *sarva-dharma-samabhâva* came from the heartland of
Indian Islam, U.P. in North India. That was Dr. Bhagwan Das. But anyone
who has studied different religions in right earnest can say without any
hesitation that Bhagwan Das' magnum opus, *Essential Unity of All
Religions*, is not much more than silly and sentimental humbug. He has
missed the forest for the trees in the case of all religions when he
picks up stray sentences from different scriptures and strings them
together without any reference to context or their real meanings beyond
the literal. Rather than studying and understanding all religions he is
out to foist his own pet and preconceived notions on all of them.

So we are left with Mahatma Gandhi as the first and real prophet of
*sarva-dharma-samabhâva*. I have gone through volumes of his *Collected
Works* published so far. There is, little doubt that he is very proud of
his Hindu Dharma, Hindu cultural heritage, Sanskrit language,
idol-worship, the sacred thread, adoration for the cow, *varNâshrama
dharma*, and so on. At places, his understanding of Hindu Dharma is
pretty deep as, for instance, when he says that whatever is of substance
in other religions is included in Hindu Dharma, and what has been
excluded has no merit. He places the Gita above all other scriptures,
though he may be much mistaken in his interpretation of Sri Krishna's
message. There is no doubt that he is infatuated with Jesus Christ whom
he identifies with the Sermon on the Mount, ignoring the rest of Jesus'
sayings and doings in the Gospels. But when he compares Jesus with the
Buddha, the latter, scores over the former. He is rather tough with
Christian missions and accuses them of spreading poison. On one
occasion, he goes to the extent of saying that Christianity became an
imperialist creed when it captured the Roman Empire, and has stayed so
ever since.

It is only in his encounter with Islam that we find him faltering and
making terrible mistakes. The first seeds of his crawling at the fect of
Islam can be seen during his days in South Africa. He had made a
Gujarati translation of Washington's Irvine's *Life of Mahomet* and
started serializing it in his weekly. The Muslims snarled and ordered
him to stop the series. He surrendered without going through even the
motions of a protest. He had asked Hindus to be very hospitable to
Professor (Bhai) Parmananda who was on a visit to South Africa. But the
moment the professor uttered a few words in criticism of Islam, the
Mahatma turned his back on him and advised Hindus to have nothing to do
with him. The Muslims in South Africa criticized him for 'sacrificing'
their interests when he signed an agreement with General Smuts and
called off his satyagraha. A Pathan attacked and almost killed him. He
kept quiet when Muslims accused him of not giving an account of the
money they had contributed to his campaign fund. Again, he kept quiet.

The acme of his surrender to Islam was reached when he came out in
support of the Khilafat agitation, and persuaded the Indian National
Congress to launch the first all-India Non-Cooperation Movement in
cooperation with the mullahs. The encomiums he heaped on the 'noble
faith of Islam' sound like a mad man's ravings. The mullahs were mighty
pleased with him. But as soon as he withdrew the Non-Cooperation
Movement in the aftermath of Chauri Chaura, the same mullahs came out in
their true colours and accused him of stabbing them in the back! He
never came out with a rejoinder, and kept mum even when foul abuse was
hurled at him. Soon after, he did something much worse; he praised the
'brave' Moplah butchers of Hindus in Malabar for "being true to their
religion as they understood it", and denounced the British Government of
India for putting down the gangsters. (Moplahs who got killed by the
British are now being hailed as freedom fighters!) When his attention
was drawn to the fact that mullahs were inviting the Amir of Afghanistan
to invade India, his only comment was, "But that is what their religion
teaches them." He could never find any fault with any teaching of Islam,
howsoever ugly, crude, cruel, and inhuman. On the other hand, he was
quite outspoken in criticism of the Arya Samaj, particularly the
*Shuddhi* Movement launched by Swami Shraddhananda in response to Hasan
Nizami's plan to convert Hindus, particularly the untouchables, by means
of fraud and inducements with a view to achieve parity of Muslim
population with that of the Hindus.

The record of the Mahatma's sins against Hindu society is long and goes
on piling up till the time of his tragic death. I have given only a few
instances of how it all started. The explanations for his pervert
behaviour can be many. It can be attributed to his deep seated
conwardice which he transmuted into a religious principle. It can be
attributed to his ambition to pass as a leader of all communities
including Muslims. It can be attributed to his political opportunism
which sought Muslim cooperation against the British Raj - at any cost.
Whatever the explanation, the fact remains that he bound the Hindus
hands and feet with the shackles of his *sarva-dharma-samabhâva*, and
made them helpless in the face of Islamic gangsterism. At the same time,
he gave full freedom to Muslims to deal with Hindus as they pleased. The
record of what Muslim did under the leadership of the mullahs and the
Muslim League exists in cold print. It never occurred to him to appeal
to Muslims *even once* to practise *sarva-dharma-samabhâva* vis-à-vis
Hinduism. That he thought was against their religion with which he could
not interfere. The dope was meant only for Hindus.

The Mahatma had claimed all along that he had studied all religions
including Islam, and found them equally imperfect. He never hesitated to
point out imperfections in Hindu Dharma, once in a while even in
Christianity. But nowhere in his voluminous writings and sayings do we
find a single word pointing out the imperfections in Islam. On the
contrary, we find him picking and choosing whatever fascinated him in
the scriptures and history of this creed, and identifying the whole of
Islam with those lollipops. It was the same exercise as the one
undertaken by Dr. Bhagwan Das. The temptation to become the spokesman of
all religions was irresistible for him, as for many Hindu gurus before
and after. He ended by being the spokesmen of none, and made a mess of
whatever religion he touched. He never evolved a criterion for
distinguishing *dharma* from *adharma*.

It is, however, not only the Mahatma's behaviour vis-à-vis Islam which
needs an explanation. A larger question which needs to be answered, is
the behaviour of Hindus at large vis-à-vis the Mahatma. Why did Hindus
ignore the voices of sanity raised about the Mahatma's leadership by Sri
Aurobindo, Swami Shraddhanand, Veer Savarkar, Bhai Parmanand, K.B.
Hedgewar, M.S. Golwalkar - to cite the names of the most-notable? Why
did Hindus permit the Mahatma to barter away their most cherished
interests for nothing in exchange? In fact, why did Hindus raise him to
the status of a Mahatma, and sole spokesman on their behalf in spite of
his oft-repeated disclaimer that he was not only a Hindu leader? Why did
Hindus hail as 'nationalist Muslims' the likes of Maulana Azad and the
Deoband flock who wanted the whole of India as *dar al-Islam* instead of
being satisfied with a part as in the case of the Muslim League, simply
because the Mahatma conferred that counterfeit certificate on them? Why
did Hindus at large fall silent whenever the Mahatma unleashed his pet
hounds - the Congress Socialists led by Pandit Nehru and Jayaprakash
Narayan - on those rare Hindus who could muster the courage to object to
Muslim behaviour? How come the Arya Samajists lost their teeth vis-à-vis
Islam and got tamed as soon as they joined the Indian National Congress
led by the Mahatma? Why did Hindus accept an inveterate Hindu-hater like
Pandit Nehru as their supreme commander as soon the Mahatma proclaimed
"this boneless wonder of the East" (Motilal's words) as his heir? How
come Hindus indulged in breast beating en masse, and hailed the Father
of Pakistan as the Father of the Nation as soon he was consumed by the
flames he had himself lit, in spite of the fad that he was the man most
hated by Hindus in the aftermath of Partition? Why has the RSS, which
has been trounced and tormented by the followers of the Mahatma ever
since its birth, started falling back on the path blazed by the Mahatma?
How come the BJS and the BJP, the political platforms manned by the RSS,
embraced the mindless slogan of *sarva-dharma-samabhâva*, and placed the
Hindu nation again in a cul-de-sac? There are many other questions which
can be asked in the context of Mahatma Gandhi vis-à-vis Islam on the one
hand and the Hindu nation on the other. Hindus have to find honest
answers for all of them if they want to put their act together and
survive. The only answer that occurs to me as a student of prolonged
Islamic terrorism in India, is that Hindus are a terrorized society
which has internalized and made a virtue out of a cowardly habit - the
habit of surviving by flattering Islam and Muslims acquired during the
long spell of Islamic invasions and rule. Mahatma Gandhi was the best
representative of this damaged Hindu psyche. I can also say with
confidence that the Sangh Parivar today has come to subscribe to
*sarva-dharma-samabhâva* by internalizing the terror let loose on it by
the 'secularist' State, particularly in Maharashtra in the aftermath of
the Mahatma's murder.

**III**

Finally, I want to give a first hand account of my experience with the
police and the courts and the Delhi Administration.

When I started writing in the *Organiser* my series on Islam, friends
and well-wishers had warned me not to touch Islam because they thought
the consequences could be terrible. They had in mind the crimes
committed by Muslims against critics of their creed in recent times. A
similar advice had been tendered to me when I started writing a critique
of Communism in 1949 in that communist den - the great city of Calcutta.
Tarashankar Bandopadhyaya, the noted Bengali novelist, had advised me to
keep on armed guard! I had thanked them but ignored their advice. I did
the same this time also. I received no threat from Muslims. A few
postcards came several years later. They abused me in obscene language
for presenting some facts in a Hindi daily about Muinuddin Chishti of
Ajmer. I had only quoted from the orthodox biographies of the sufi. All
these missives were anonymous.

It may sound surprising but it is true that the first attack on me was
mounted by RSS leaders. I had been writing in the *Organiser* for an
year or so (1981-82) when a RSS member quoted some Urdu poetry to
counter my reading of Islam. He did not seem to know that Urdu poetry
has been a revolt against the closed creed of Islam, most of the time. A
more serious development was a meeting of some RSS top brass in which it
was said, "Goel is not Gandhi, and the Organiser is not the *Harijan* so
that he should write every week." As a result, K.R. Malkani who had
nursed the weekly for more than a score of years, through thick and
thin, was sacked all of a sudden, V.P. Bhatia who took over told me
point blank, "Our people do not look favourably on your writing about
Islam.' I stopped writing in the *Organiser*.

The fact about the meeting and what was said about me in it, became
known to me much later. Immediately, I felt mystified because my
articles had been acclaimed widely by the readers in India and abroad,
from whom I had received several hundred laudatory letters. The cat came
out of the bag when I chanced to meet H.V. Seshadri, and asked him why
my series in the *Organiser* had been stopped. He barked back, "You…you
go and attack Islam. Then how will any Muslim come to us." I said, "Do
you want Muslims to come to you?" He replied, "As a strategy…." I walked
out of his room before he could complete the sentence. This word
'strategy' makes me feel sick when it is used as a substitute for
truthfulness. Later on, I learnt that Seshadri was voicing the BJP view
that my articles were "costing the party all its Muslim votes"!

So I went ahead on my own and joined Ram Swarup's **Voice of India** to
present our case to the Hindu society at large. The response was
rewarding and, in due course, we were able to mobilize a lot of first
rate scholarship.

But it was not before long that hints of trouble from the Delhi
Administration came. I had reprinted in 1983 Ram Swarup's *Understanding
Islam Through Hadis*, which A. Ghosh (Houston, Texas) had got published
in the U.S.A. in 1982. A bookseller informed me that he had seen this
book among those which were being examined by the Home Department of the
Delhi Administration, and may be banned. I sought an interview with the
concerned Deputy Secretary in the Home Department. He was a Hindu by
accident of birth as I soon discovered. His Press Adviser, a Muslim
gentleman, was present. I told them, "This book is a summary of the
*Sahih Muslim*, chapter by chapter. The author has only added some
comments, here and there, to elucidate some theological terms or
episodes in the life of the Prophet. Tell me if Ram Swarup has added
anything which is not in the *Sahih Muslim*, or suppressed some material
which goes in favour of Islam or the Prophet." The Press Adviser did not
reply to my question, and turned me over to the Deputy Secretary. This
worthy had kept on looking grim all along, and did not relax even after
my explanation. He dismissed me without saying a word, with his lips
pressed in a pout of utter contempt as if I had uttered some obscenity.

I waited for four years to see if the book invited a ban. Nothing
happened. So I brought out a second reprint in 1987 as the first reprint
had been sold out fast. At the same time, I commissioned Rameshwar
Shukla 'Pankaj' to translate the book in Hindi. Two thousand printed
copies of the Hindi translation were sent to the binder in early
December 1987. It was Saturday the 19th of December. I was at my home
when I received a phone call from my office that the SHO of Hauz Kazi
Police Station in Old Delhi had arrested the binder, and taken away the
whole lot of translation copies which were still unbound. I rushed to
the office, and tried to contact my lawyer, Alok Kumar. But before I
could locate him, policemen wielding lathis surrounded the office, and
asked me to accompany them to an Assistant Police Commissioner (ACP) to
explain matters. They assured me that I was not being arrested. But the
ACP uttered obscenities as soon I opened my mouth, and told me that he
had nothing to do with the case. And as I came out of his room, I found
the SHO Hauz Kazi waiting for me. He shouted at me and ordered me to get
into his jeep which had its engine running.

Soon after we reached the Police Station, he shouted at me, "*tû kaun
hai? yeh kyâ kiyâ? bahut baDi riot hote hote ruki hai* (who arst thou?
what hast thou done? A big riot was about to break out)." I told him
that I was nobody, and did not understand the accusation. He barked,
"*musalmân ubal rahen haiN. unke gharoN kî chhatoN par behisâb îNt
patthar rakkhâ hai, gharoN ke bhîtar golâ bârûd: wê jab châheN shahar
meN âg lagâ sakte haiN* (Muslims are excited. They have heaps of bricks
and stones piled up on the roofs of their houses, and firearms within.
They can set the city on fire whenever they want). I asked him why the
police had allowed them to collect and keep the arsenal. He snarled,
"*yeh bât to apne netâoN se pûcho, meN to ek garîb policeman huN,
bacchon kâ pet pal rahâ huN* (put this question to your leaders, I am
only a poor policeman trying to feed my family). I kept quite.

Meanwhile, the news that I had been picked up by the police had spread.
A score of Hindu youngmen rushed into the SHO's office, and demanded my
release unless the SHO wanted them to organize a demonstration outside
his Police Station. The SHO was taken aback. Suddenly he became very
polite, and said, "I assure you that I will not arrest him. Muslims in
the area are holding a meeting, and happen to be very much excited. Let
them calm down, and I will set him free." At the same time, he asked the
binder to go home.

The youngmen went away, believing in his assurance. Now he turned
towards me with his face softened for the first time. He asked me, "*âp
kyâ haiN?* (what are you?)." I repeated my earlier reply that I was
nobody. He smiled and send, "*âp zarûr koi important âdmî haiN. itminân
rakhiye meN âpko giraftâr nahiN karûNga. musalmânoN kî meeting khatam ho
jâye to âp ghar jâ sakte haiN* (you are surely some important man. I
assure you I will not arrest you. Let the meeting the Muslims are
holding be over, and you can go home).

By this time, the husband of the printer who happened to be a lady and
lived across the Jumuna, had also been brought to the Police Station.
Fortunately, the constables the SHO had sent to the press were in a
hurry, and did not try to find out who owned the press. They just picked
up her husband who had come out to talk to them. Thus the lady escaped
the disgrace by an hair's breadth.

The SHO was now fully relaxed, and became jolly. He started speaking in
English. He tried to get from me the addresses of Ram Swarup and
'Pankaj'. I kept quite. He laughed and said, "I am not the man to be
fooled so easily. I know you have written the book, and also translated
it. You are functioning under three different names." I heaved a sigh of
relief. I was praying that the author and the translator do not get into
trouble.

An hour passed. It was nine o'clock in the evening. A peon came, and
requested the SHO to take a telephone call on an extension in another
room. The SHO went, and came back after a few minutes. He pulled a long
face and said, "I am sorry, Mr. Goel. I have to arrest you." He asked us
to empty all our pockets, and made inventories of whatever cash etc. we
had. We were given the receipts. But we were treated very well. My sons
who were present all along were asked to get our bedding and food from
home. We were allowed to sleep in a normal room, and not in the lock-up.
It remains a mystery who had pulled the strings at nine o'clock.

My lawyers came next morning, a Sunday, and assured us that we would be
granted bail by the duty magistrate. We had a change of clothes and took
our lunch brought from home. It was 2 p.m. when we were driven to the
Tis Hazari Courts, and presented to the magistrate. The police lawyer
asked that we be kept in police custody, at least for another week. Our
lawyers argued for immediate bail. The magistrate refused to oblige the
police, and bailed us out.

As we emerged out of the court, there were a number of friends,
relatives, and sympathisers waiting outside. One of them, a rich man,
asked me, "What was the matter?" I told him that I had published a book
which Muslims thought offensive. He observed, "Why do you do such
things? There is no problem. If Muslims take power, we shall become
Muslims. It is as simple as that. Why should you invite trouble on a
minor matter (*chhotî sî bât par*)?" What could I say. Hindu psyche had
suffered a serious damage.

I learnt that Professor Balraj Madhok and some other leaders belonging
to the Hindu Manch, had held a meeting on Saturday night and registered
a protest against police highhandedness. But there was not a word from
anyone in the RSS or the BJP. I wonder if anyone in their ranks had even
noticed the event. Or may be they did not want to offend their Muslim
voters. It was after a month that I received a telephone call from Bhai
Mahavir, a BJP leader out of favour with the big ones. As I told him the
story, he asked me, "And none of our people protested?" I told him that
they had not even noticed the event. He said he was sorry that things
had reached such a pass.

Three years rolled by. The Delhi Administration made its Screening
Committee examine the English original of the book as well as its Hindi
translation. They could find nothing objectionable and ordered the court
to close the case. It was closed on 28 September 1990. Our lawyers
applied for release of the two thousand copies lying in the Police
Station. But what we received was a letter from the Home Department of
the Delhi Administration stating that the Hindi translation stood banned
whenever published. That was in November 1990. In March 1991 we received
another letter proclaiming that the English original had been banned as
well. Both the letters were signed by M.U. Siddhiqui who had taken over
as the Deputy Secretary.

In the meantime, the earlier Deputy Secretary whom I had met in
connection with *Understanding Islam Through Hadis*, had succeeded in
involving me and the lady printer in another criminal case in the middle
of 1986

A friend in the Hindu Mahasabha had sold to me in 1985 a few hundred
copies of a booklet, *The Dead Hand of Islam* by Colin Maine, published
in 1982 by the Rationalist Association of Australia. It was reprint of
an article which had been published earlier in The Truth Seeker, organ
of the Rationalist Association of the U.S.A. It was a 16-pages booklet
with as many as ninety quotation from the Quran, the Hadis, and the
writings of well-known Islamologists from the West. I put the title on
my next catalogue and the entire stock of the small priced publication
got sold in a few months. So I published a reprint in 1986 from **Voice
of India**.

Some Muslim gentleman seems to have lodged a complaint against it with
the Delhi Administration. I came to know of it when a policeman from the
Daryaganj Police Station in New Delhi, was reported to be in search of
'Wife of India' who had published *Islâm Kâ Murdâr Hâth*. Obviously, the
complaint was written in Urdu and the word 'voice' had become 'wife' due
to the peculiarity of the Urdu script. He had also missed the metaphor
in 'dead hand' and translated it literally as '*murdâr hâth*', which
certainly sounded offensive. Finally, the policeman stumbled on our
office, and took away a copy of our catalogue. Some days later, **Voice
of India** received a letter from the Home Department, Delhi
Administration, citing a number of passages from the booklet as falling
under Sections 153A and 295A of the Indian Penal Code, and informing me
that a criminal case had been instituted against me and the printer. The
letter had been signed by the above mentioned Hindu Deputy Secretary.

The policeman from the Daryaganj Police Station came again, and asked me
to go and see a certain officer in the Crime Branch at Police
Headquarters. I met the officer on the appointed date and time. He was a
perfect gentleman. He made me sign some papers, and granted bail within
a few minutes. Next day, he went all the way to the press, and bailed
out the lady printer on the spot. I felt rather good about the Delhi
police. I had yet to have the experience related earlier.

But the ordeal that followed in the Tis Hazari Courts in Delhi taxed my
patience to the limit. The case dragged on for eleven long years. The
lady printer and I had to spend long hours in crowded corridors outside
many a magistrate's room, once every one or two months. The sprawling
court building had no drinking water or toilet facilities worth the
name. What was more taxing, the concerned court had no magistrate for
long intervals, and we had wait till the court clerk thought it fit to
take us to some other magistrate for assigning the next date. Many a
time, the court was closed on the assigned date because some holiday had
been declared suddenly, or the lawyers went on a strike on one pretext
or the other which was quite frequent. We had to present ourselves again
the very next day for getting another date, which became more difficult
because the court had to deal with persons called on that day as well as
the previous day. All we could get was the next date after a day-long
wait.

We had put ourselves in the hands of Alok Kumar (now a BJP Member of the
Delhi Legislative Assembly) who all along tried to do his best. He had
specialized in cases under Sections 153A and 295A, and succeeded every
time in arguing so well that all cases he handled fell through without
charges being framed. He argued our case before the first two
magistrates, but both of them got transferred before they could write a
judgement. The third magistrate pleaded lack of time for hearing
argument after assigning a date and time. She was also transferred soon
after. The next magistrate looked at me from head to foot (I am always
poorly dressed), and asked me how old I was. Then he said, "Your lawyer
has been dragging the case in the hope that you will die soon, and he
will be spared the trouble of arguing the case." His speech was in Hindi
and had an unmistakable tinge of contempt. But he was taken aback when I
addressed His Honour in English, and told him how the case had remained
undecided in spite of being argued twice. Alok Kumar had been delayed,
so that he had not accompanied me when the call for us came. He appeared
soon after, and lodged a strong protest when I told him what the
magistrate had said. Now the magistrate was all smiles, but not at all
apologetic. He observed, "You may argue before me as well if you like.
But I will also not be able to write a judgement. Who would like to
decide such delicate cases?" Fortunately for us, he was transferred soon
after.

The next magistrate was reluctant to fix time for argument because he
said he had too much on his hands. But after assigning several
postponements, he finally agreed to hear the argument. When we presented
ourselves on the an time fixed, we learnt that the magistrate had been
dismissed from service for some reason.

Another magistrate took up our case after a delay of several months. He
showed surprise, assured us that he will deliver a judgement, and gave
us the next date. But the lawyers went on strike on that day. Alok Kumar
could not appear. On the next date, Alok Kumar came but the magistrate
could not attend due to some unavoidable reason. What we heard next was
that he too had been transferred.

Our luck took a turn when Shri S.K. Kaushik came to preside over the
concerned court. He dismissed the case on 5 April 1997, the very first
day we appeared before him, on the basis of a new Supreme Court ruling
(known as Common Cause judgement) that cases which had lingered for more
than two years without charges being framed, could be dismissed straight
away. We heaved a big sigh of relief that the eleven year long ordeal
was over. But in the next few days we received summons to appear again
in the same case on 26 April. The prosecution had complained that the
Supreme Court judgement did not cover cases involving public
tranquility. Sri Kaushik, however, was determined to decide the case one
way or the other. He heard the argument from both sides on that very
day. The public prosecutor did not have much to say except presenting a
copy of the Supreme Court ruling, and pointing out that the booklet was
indeed a serious threat to public tranquility. Alok Kumar, however, put
up a brilliant performance, citing the relevant case law, and pointing
out very forcefully that if the Indian Constitution gave freedom to
missionary religions to seek converts by presenting their creeds in
luminous colours, the other side had not only the *right* but was also
under *obligation* to examine the creeds and inform the public about
their shortcomings. His argument was heard by the magistrate, the public
prosecutor, and by us in pin-drop silence, such was his build up of
facts and logic. Even so, we came out of the court with out fingers
crossed. Shri Kaushik delivered his judgement on 5 May 1997. He
dismissed the case. Our ordeal was over at last.

I may add that though the criminal cases against the publisher and
printer of both publications were dismissed, the publications themselves
remain banned. I am told that lifting of ban on publications comes under
another procedure. I do not have the heart or the health or the means to
pursue the matter.

In 1993, the Dariyaganj Police Station was out to repeat the performance
by the Hauz Kazi Police Station when Syed Shahabuddin wrote a letter to
P.M. Sayeed, Minister of State, Government of India requiring a ban on
Ram Swarup's *Hindu View of Christianity and Islam*. A policeman came to
our office and took away a copy of the book. He returned next day, and
said, "The police cannot judge the book on its own. There should be some
government department which performs the duty." Our office informed him
about the Press Advisor of the Delhi Administration. In fact, our office
telephoned the Press Advisor's office in the policeman's Presence. The
office said that the book may be sent to them by the Police Station. The
policeman went away. He, however returned again next day, and said, "Our
SHO wants to see either Ram Swarup or Sita Ram Goel. One of them should
go and meet him at 4 o'clock in the afternoon tomorrow." I could smell
the mischief immediately. I went into hiding, advised Ram Swarup to do
the same, and asked Alok Kumar to get us anticipatory bail. Due to the
persuasive powers of Alok Kumar, the Court granted the bail in the next
few days, and we came out of hiding. Then came Arun Shourie's piece,
*How should we respond?* in his syndicated column appealing to Hindus to
defy the ban if imposed. The police took no further step.

**IV**

Section II of this book reproduces twelve reviews[6](#6) of the book,
*Why I Am Not A Muslim* by Ibn Warraq, published in the U.S.A. in 1995,
and an article by Shabir Akhtar spelling out what Islam means vis-à-vis
freedom of expression. Eleven of them have been sent to us by Hindu
residents in the U.S.A. and England. They show how the press functions
freely in Western democracies which practise Secularism in its original
sense. There is only one review from India which appeared in a Telegu
monthly. That is why I have named this Section as Liberal Democracy.

It is true that there is no dearth of apologists for Islam in the
Western democracies.[7](#7) Some of them are hired scribes, others
inhibited because Islam is after all a sister creed of Christianity to
which they subscribe. Moreover, a new cult called 'multiculturism' has
also surfaced in the West after the Second World War, particularly after
the flow of fabulous Muslim finance from the oil-rich Middle East. The
votaries of this cult frown, sometimes in very strong language, on those
who examine Islam on rationalist and humanist grounds. Most of the time,
they belong to the tribe which had apologised for and heaped laurels on
Stalinism and Maoism before the collapse of Communism. Western
universities and a large part of the Western media remain their
strongholds, as in the case of India. In fact, Multiculturism in the
West has a very close resemblance to Indian Secularism, because the same
scholars and scribes throw no end of mud on the religion of the majority
- Christianity. Even so, there is Western media which refuses to be
dictated by Multiculturism, or cowed down by Islamic terrorism. I wanted
to highlight this fact in this book. Rest is for the readers to judge
for themselves.

Sita Ram Goel

New Delhi,  
20 May 1998

  

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) S. Gopal (ed.), Selected Works of *Jawaharlal Nehru*, Second
Series, Volume 18, New Delhi, 1996, p. 661.

[2](#2a) Pandit Nehru's fondness for Islam and Islamic heroes is
well-known, particularly in his *Glimpses of World History* and *The
Discovery of India*. His commitment to Communism may be seen in Sita Ram
Goel, *Genesis and Growth of Nehruism*, Volume I, voice of India, New
Delhi, 1993. His doting on Christianity can be read in his circular
letter to Chief Ministers dated 17 October 1952 (*Selected Works*,
Second Series, New Delhi, Volume 19, pp. 733-34) cited in Sita Ram Goel
(ed.), *Vindicated By Time: The Niyogi Committee Report on Christian
Missionary Activities*, Voice of India, New Delhi, 1998, Introduction,
pp. 6-7. See also Sita Ram Goel, *Perversion of India's Political
Parlance*, Revised Reprint, Voice of India, New Delhi, 1995.

[3](#3a) I mean by Sikhism the principles and practices prescribed in
the *Adi Grantha* and the lives of the Gurus, and not what the
latter-day neo-Sikhs have forced it to mean, that is, a monotheistic
cult close to Islam and Christianity.

[4](#4a) Quran, 109.6 and 2.256. Harsh Narain has placed both these
sentences in their proper context and shown that they mean the opposite
of what they have been made to mean by Islamic apologists and
'secularists' in India (*Myths of Composite Culture and Equality of
Religions*), Voice of India, New Delhi, 1991, pp. 55-57

[5](#5a) Constitution and Rules *(as amended by the National Council at
Gandhinagar, Gujarat, on 2nd May 1992) of the Bharatiya Janata Party*,
pp. 3-4 and 19.

[6](#6a) Six of these reviews have already been included in an earlier
publication, *Time For Stock Taking: Whither Sangh Parivar?*, Voice of
India, New Delhi, 1997.

[7](#7a) See Daniel Pipes, *The Rushdie Affair*, Voice of India, New
Delhi, 1998.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
