+++
title = "12 Swords to sell a god"

+++
TWELVE  
Swords to sell a god[1](#1)

Ram Swarup

Mr. Mushirul Hasan's innocous opposition to the ban on *The Satanic
Verses* has stirred a hornet's nest. He attempted an apology but could
not save himself from the hounds. On May 22, the fire-eating Imam of
Jama Masjid declared from the pulpit that "anyone who defends Salman
Rushdie is defiling Islam." The students of the Jamia Millia shouted:
"*Qaum ka gaddar, Maut ka haqdar*" (Betrayer of the community, deserver
of death).

Did Mr. Hasan badly miscalculate? Did he not realise the moral pressures
under which he was working? Or, did he think he could brazen it out and
earn an instant reputation as a liberal and a progressive without having
to pay a price for it?

Whatever his compulsions, the episode has proved again that there are
not many Muslim liberals around, that they have to work under great
pressure, and that though they might establish their credentials cheaply
among Hindu secularists, they will have to work at a more fundamental
level to deserve it.

The Jamia Millia controversy offered its own dilemma to India's
secularists who have a close alliance with Islamism. The alliance works
under a veneer of liberal-sounding slogans. But when the Muslims
themselves are divided, the secularists too are paralysed and take
recourse to equivocation. To retain their ideological face, they must
appear to support the Muslim liberals, but in practice they go along
with the Bukharis, Ali Mians, Saits and Shahabuddins. The sleight of
hand satisfies no party. The Muslim liberals feel let down. The Muslim
fundamentalists feel the secularists must follow the lead of mainstream
Islam more gracefully. They expect the Hindu secularists to abandon
hypocrisy and own up to the alliance with Islam.

The fundamentalists have repeatedly proved that the so-called Muslim
liberals do not matter. It is they who represent the authentic voice of
Islam. That is, the voice of the Quran and the Sunnah, and Muslim law
and history. They expect Hindu secularists to realise this.

Muslim fundamentalists have proved that Islam's scripture, its Sunnah,
its canonical writings and its history are on their side. A book like
*The Satanic Verses* is blasphemous and the punishment of its author is
death. This was clear from the controversy that followed the banning of
the book and the death fatwa by Ayatollah Khomeini against Salman
Rushdie. The Muslim world was seized by a paroxysm of hate and demanded
his blood. The author had few defenders even on compassionate grounds in
his community. Muslims in India were no exception.

But there was one exception. Mr Wahiduddin Khan, editor of Al-Rasala,
wrote against the death sentence. He based his arguments not on the
principle of free speech, but on humanitarian grounds. He argued the
death sentence was against the spirit of Islamic scriptures and law and
it had no support in Islam's history. He tried to present a humane face
of Islam.

The effort is commendable, but it was at the expense of historical truth
and the subsequent controversy demonstrated this. His protagonists had
no difficulty in demolishing his arguments and showing that Islamic law
and history were on the side of the death sentence.

Maulana Muhassan Usmani Nadvi, Assistant Professor of West Asian Studies
at Jawaharlal Nehru University, wrote a reply published by the Islamic
Research Centre, Zakir Nagar, New Delhi, which deserves special mention.

In his article, Mr. Khan had argued that Muhammad was a prophet of
mercy, not of slaughter. In his reply Mr. Nadvi said killing a *Shatim-e
rasul* was a most merciful act. If he remained unpunished, it would
invite the wrath of Allah which could destroy the whole world. To
prevent this wrath from becoming operative, the punishment of the
defiler was imperative. In that way alone lay the salvation of mankind.

Mr. Khan had appealed in the name of "mercy", of which he thought Islam
had an excess. Mr. Nadvi reminded him Islam is not all spirituality
(*ruhaniyat*). It was also a state and politics (*siyasat*). He said the
question had much to do with the prestige, power, glory and domination
(*izzat*, and ghalba) of Islam. The author here refers to the widely
recognised fact among Muslim theologians that the success of Islam owed
more to the awe of its political power than to its religious appeal. The
initial era of "reconciling or gaining hearts" (*mulla-fa qulubhum*),
the Quranic doctrine of winning the hearts of adversaries or of
strengthening the loyalties of recent converts with gifts, soon gave way
to the era of "arbitration of the sword." The kingdom of Islam is not
within but without. It should inspire respect through awe, both among
foes and the faithful.

Mr. Nadvi argued that Mr. Khan's effort to show the punishment of a
detractor of the Rasul in Islam is not death is "proof of his
unfamiliarity with the spirit of Islam and its history." He wrote that
during all the 14 centuries of Islam, its theologians and divines
provide a united testimony in favour of a death sentence. Indeed, a
Muslim offender incurs a double death penalty. One by reviling the
Prophet. The second by becoming an apostate from Islam. He quoted
extensively from Muslim commentators, jurists and from the practices of
the Companions, the first four rightly-guided caliphs, and from the life
of the Prophet to prove the point.

Mr. Nadvi gave the example of one lady, Umm Qurfah, who after converting
to Islam committed apostasy: She was asked to make amends but upon
refusal was put to death by Abu Bakr, the first caliph. During Abu
Bakr's reign, we also learn of another case from *Tarikh-i-Tabari*. A
songster of Yemen was accused of writing a satire on the Prophet.
Mohajir, the Muslim governor, had her hands cut off and her teeth pulled
out so that she could not sing in future. When Abu Bakr heard of this,
he said that if the case had been referred to him first, he would have
ordered her execution.

Mr. Nadvi quotes another case that belonged to the period of the second
caliph, Umar. Umru bin Al'as, governor of Egypt, informed him of a
person who had been in and out of Islam several times. Umar wrote to him
to offer the accused Islam again but, if he refused, to put him to
death. Similarly, Usman, the third caliph, was informed of some
followers of Maslamah, who claimed prophethood in rivalry to Muhammad;
Usman ordered they should be asked to become Muslims but on their
refusal be put to death. Similarly, Ali, the fourth caliph, was informed
of some persons who had gone back to Christianity, their religion before
they became Muslims. At his orders they were all put to the sword and
their children made slaves.

In another case belonging to the early period of Islam, a woman
Companion, daughter of Haris Alkindi, had asked a Zimmi to embrace
Islam. He not only refused but also spoke negatively of the Prophet. The
lady killed him on the spot. Umru bin Al'as, Egypt's governor, approved
of this. He said that a Zimmi had no right to give pain to a Muslim
about Allah and the Rasul.

Mr. Wahiduddin Khan had quoted some cases of clement behaviour of the
Prophet belonging to his early life. Mr. Nadvi argues these cases
belonged to the Meccan period when the "orders of the Sunnah had not
descended." During the Medina period, when Islam began to acquire
political power, all this changed. He gave several examples including
those of poets who wrote satirical verses against the Prophet and who
were assassinated at his orders. These cases are cited in Mr. Wajid Ali
Khan's *Muqaddas Aayat* (Holy Verses), written in reply to *The Satanic
Verses*.

One case is that of a lady poet of Medina, Asma, daughter of Marwan. She
wrote a poem where she warned the tribes of Medina against the Prophet.
"Do you expect good from him after the killing of your chiefs/Like a
hungry man waiting for a cook's broth," she wrote. When the Prophet
heard this, he said to his followers: "Who will rid me of Marwan's
daughter?" A follower named Umayr, eager to prove his loyalty to Islam,
offered to assassinate her. This he did that very night while the victim
was asleep with her youngest baby on her breast. The Prophet thanked him
and told him: "You have helped Allah and his apostle." We are told by
Muslim traditionalists that the message went home and the people of the
husband of Asma instead of resorting to retaliation, the customary
tribal custom, "became Muslims because they saw the power of Islam."

Another case relates to Abu Afak, a Medina poet aged over-100 years.
Seeing the power-equation in Medina fast changing in favour of Islam, he
appealed to the valour of the Medina people "who overthrew mountains and
who never submitted to anyone," but who were now allowing themselves to
be spilt by "an outsider," meaning the Prophet. The latter asked his
followers: "Who would deal with this rascal?" Another follower
volunteered his service and killed the aged poet one night while he was
asleep.

Another case relates to Kab bin al-Ashraf, a Jewish poet of Medina. He
tried to incite the Meccans through his verses. Again some loyal
followers offered to assassinate him. The Prophet saw them off with the
words: "Go with the blessings of Allah and assistance from High." The
Prophet received them warmly after they accomplished their mission. We
are told by orthodox Muslim biographers of the Prophet that this "attack
upon the enemy cast terror among the Jews," and after it "there was no
Jew in Medina who did not fear for his life."

Mr. Wajid Ali Khan quotes all these cases to show how serious is the
offence of Salman Rushdie "of evil religion, apostate and accursed"
(*bad-din murtadd mal'un*). Interested readers can find a still fuller
account of all these cases in the Lives of the Prophet by Ibn Ishaq, Ibn
Hisham, at-Tabari, all respected, orthodox biographers. Ibn Ishaq's
Sirat Rasul Allah is also found in English translation by A. Guillaume
and published by Oxford University Press.

The earliest traditions were incorporated into Muslim orthodoxy and they
shaped much of subsequent Muslim history. They continue to do so at
present too. Mr. Nadvi quotes from the book of Ibn Taimiyyah, a medieval
theologian, *Al-sarim al maslul al shatim al Rasul* (the sword drawn
against the defilers of the Prophet). Today, there is an increasing
demand for reviving the Shariat law even in those Muslim countries where
it had been kept in abeyance. For example in Pakistan, as recently as
October 31, 1991, all the five judges of the Highest Islamic Court ruled
that the punishment for defiling the Rasul was death and not life
imprisonment as the prevailing penal law provided. But in countries like
India where the Shariat law no longer prevails, but where Muslim opinion
counts, any critical discussion of the Prophet and Islam is regarded as
lacking in good taste. It is unsecular, a great lapse from accepted
ideological morality. Critical writings are as a rule edited out and
even often banned. Indian intellectuals have complete freedom to admire
Islam and its Prophet and they make full use of it.

Fundamentalism is not accidental but essential to Islam. It is inherent
in those religious ideologies which are built on a narrow spiritual
vision, have a limited psychic base, and which emphasise dogma and
personalities, other than experience and impersonal truth. Islam's
fundamentalism is rooted in its theology, its founder and his practices.
It means that it will also have to be fought there. But this point is
ill understood and, therefore, the struggle is at the best of times
phoney war.

A worthwhile liberalism among Muslims does not consist in merely having
a dissenting opinion on certain matters of personal law and social
usage. It involves waging a deeper struggle against Islam's
fundamentals, its concept of God, the last Prophet (*khatimunnabiyin*)
and the Revelation that ends all revelations. For example, it will have
to discuss whether the Prophet speaks for Allah or Allah speaks for the
Prophet. It will have to rethink the whole question of *kafirs*, Islam's
name for its neighbours. It should raise the question whether Muslims
should have the *kafirs* treat them as they treat *kafirs*. But this is
a question best raised by the *kafirs* themselves and the Muslim liberal
can follow suit.

The need of the time is to examine the whole concept and assumptions of
revelatory religions, such as of a particular community being "chosen"
as the swordsmen or salesmen of god. When a divine message commands,
kill the idolators wherever you find them, we must give a close look not
only to the message but also to the messenger and his source of
inspiration. Judged by this standard, we find that most of the Muslims
who sail under a liberal banner bring no honour to it. They represent a
variant of Muslim fundamentalism.

There was a time when the West faced a similar problem when it had to
fight Christian fundamentalism. It did so by fighting Christianity's
deep beliefs and assumptions. And though it still keeps Christianity for
export and as an aid to imperialism, it has tabooed its wild claims at
home. A similar task awaits those who are called upon to fight Muslim
fundamentalism, or rather Muslim fundamentals.  

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This article was published on 16 June 1992 in *The Telegraph*,
Calcutta.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
