+++
title = "23 Demystifying Islam"

+++
TWENTY-THREE  
Demystifying Islam[1](#1)

Curt van den Heuvel

*Why I am not a Muslim* is a rare book. It is not often that one comes
across Muslim apostates who are willing to openly share their views of
Islam. As such, Warraq does an excellent job of demystifying Islam, and
revealing it's very human origins.

Through several chapters devoted to Muhammed and the Koran, Warraq
traces the development of Islamic thought in Arabia. Contrary to the
opinions of Islamic propagandists, Warraq shows that the Koran evolved
over several centuries (just like the Bible). As for Islamic tradition
and practice, Warraq shows how Muhammed simply incorporated a number of
elements from Arabia's pagan history into his 'new' religion.

But Warraq's best work is done in showing exactly how dangerous Islam
really is. Beginning with Muhammed, violence, intolerance and human
rights abuses have been part and parcel of Islam to this very day. This
cannot be ascribed to isolated Fundamentalists, Warraq explains, but is
built into the very core of the religion. Islam is Fundamentalism - it
cannot be otherwise.

This raises a thorny ethical dilemma. Freedom of religion is a part of
every civilised country. Having learned their lesson from the horrors of
the past, few First World governments are willing to legislate the
practice of religion in any way. However, what do we do when one of
these religions is antithetical to everything that Democracy stands for?
Islam does not recognise the right of any other religion to exist.
Murder of apostates is not only condoned, but encouraged by the Prophet.
Women are treated shamefully, and accorded a status far inferior to that
of Muslim men. If we are going to give Muslims the right to practise
their religion free of interference, can we not expect them to accord
others the same right?

My only criticism of Warraq's book is that at times he goes into far too
much historical detail, which detracts a little from it's overall
message. There are one or two chapters which, in my view, could have
been relegated to appendices. Other than that, Warraq's book is an
excellent and concise reference for non-Muslims who wish to know more
about the religion of Islam.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This review appeared on the website *Honest Intellectual
Enquiry*, California, U.S.A., on 11 August 1997.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
