+++
title = "05 CHAPTER 6 - The Role of Leftist Language"

+++
## CHAPTER 6 - The Role of Leftist Language

The language of Communist imperialism continued to lambast the Congress
leadership, particularly Mahatma Gandhi for the latter's *"failure to
mobilize the toiling masses towards an immediate overthrow of the
British rule in India."* But when the Congress launched a mass movement
in March, 1930, the spokesmen of this language kept strictly aloof from
it. Instead they published a Draft Plam of Action in December, 1930
characterising the Congress as a *"class organisation of the capitalists
working against the fundamental interests of the toiling masses."* And
they tried to sabotage the freedom struggle by splitting the trade union
movement over which they had acquired some hold with the help of
finances flowing from the Soviet Union.

The song changed suddenly in 1935. The Soviet Union was feeling
threatened by the rapid militarisation and rising anti-Bolshevik tone of
Nazi Germany. She was now serioulsy in search of mutual security pacts
with Britain and France. But the governments in London and Paris had
failed to respond to Soviet diplomatic feelers. The Communist
International (Comintern), therefore, sent out a call of the Communist
Parties of Britain and France to strive for a *"broad national front of
all anti-fascist forces."* The purpose was to build pressures for such
Popular Front governments in London and Paris as would be amenable to
Soviet approaches.

The Communist Party of France was strong. It had an ally also in a
strong socialist Party at home. So it succeeded on its own in securing a
Popular Front government in Paris. But the Communist Party of Great
Britain was too weak to exert any pressure on a strong conservative
government in London. That task was, therefore, assigned to the
Communist Party of India. This party was instructed to join the Indian
National Congress via the newly formed Congress Socialist Party and to
push the national organisation towards another mass movement.

That is how the Congress Socialists ceased to be *"petit-bourgeois
Left-reformists"* and became *"the revolutionary Left-wing of the Indian
National Congress."* The Congress itself ceased to be a *"class
organisation of capitalists"* and became a *"broad national front of all
patriotic people."* The language of Communist imperialism was employing
no end of casuistry to prove that a *"Popular Front government in London
was the best guarantee for a early dawn of freedom and democracy in
India."* The Congress Socialists themselves were worshippers of the
Soviet Union as a proletarian paradise. They swallowed this language,
hook, line and sinker. The language of Communist imperialism was fast
getting transformed into the language of Leftism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SPLIT IN THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT

The Congress leadership had, in the meanwhile, moved in an opposite
direction. It was toying with idea of trying the experiment in
provincial self-government envisaged in the Government of India Act
1935. The language of Leftism immediately launched a campaign against
the *"Rightist leadership"* which was *"trying to compromose with
British imperialism in the interests of feudal and capitalist elements
and against the interests of the toiling masses."* Simultaneously, it
claimed that the *"Left wing of the Congress was working for a
democratisation of the national organisation by bringing into its fold
the peasantry and the working class so that this organisation could play
a revolutionary role at home and an anti-fascist role in international
affairs."*

The chief patron of this Leftist language inside the Congress leadership
was Pandit Nehru. Formally, he kept aloof from the communist-Socialist
combine. But he used it surreptitiously to hurl all sorts of
insinuations, innuendos and invectives on Sardar Patel whom he
considered to be his main contempt for the Leftist language. But he was
a man of few words and deemed it below his dignity to descend to the
level of Leftism. The Leftist campaign, therefore, succeeded to large
extent in pillorying the Sardar as an *"arch reactionary in alliance
with the Birlas,"* and as a *"fascist out to suppress all democratic,
progressive, revolutionary and socialist elements in the Congress."*
Quite a few other members of the High Command who were supporters of the
Sardar got tarred with the same brush.

The Congress had thrown up several contending schools of thought in the
course of its development and it was not unoften thet issues had been
debated on its platform with considerable heat. But it was now for the
first time that the Congress stood split by slogans imported from abroad
and in the interests of a foreign power which had its own scores to
settle in the power politics of Europe. The issues on which the Leftists
were generating so much heat had little relevance to the Indian
situation.

Finally the Leftists egged on Subhash Chandra Bose to challenge the
leadership of Mahatma Gandhi, only to leave him in the lurch at the last
moment when wires were pulled from Moscow. A section of sterling
patriots had to leave the Congress to form the Forward Bloc. In due
course, the Leftist pressure inside the Congress became ministries, soon
after the Second World War broke out. The field was thus left clear for
the Muslim League to spread its tantacles and mount its campaign for
Pakistan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## STANDARDS OF PUBLIC LIFE LOWERED

The so-called Congress Right had many people in its ranks who had
renouced inherited wealth or self-earned fortunes of lucrative
professions and who had chosen to lead a life of poverty in the service
of the motherland. But these people bacame branded as reactionaries and
fascists simply because they refused to serve as Soviet Union. On the
other hand the so-called Congress Left had quite a few people who were
living in luxury on incomes derived from landed estates or from shares
held in capitalist companies. But they were now strutting around as
democrat,s progressives, revolutionaries and socialists merely by
mouthing certain slogans and without the least change in their life
style. Most of them used the opportunity to make the best of both the
worlds.

This diparagement of personal character was a significant contribution
made to India's politics and public life by the language of Leftism. It
opened the floodgates for all sorts of questionable characters to come
forward and occupy the front seats on the public stage. The full harvest
of these seeds sown in the years before independence was reaped in the
post-independence period when politics and public life became
progressively a safe haven for all sorts of scoundrels masquerading as
servants of the people.

And it was not only the dichotomy in personal and public life which got
deepended. The rational in man suffered a still more serious blow.
Differences of opinion could no more be settled by reference to recorded
facts or to logic or to the universe of discourse. People could no more
agree to differ. All this was dismissed as mere feudal fuss about
keeping forms or as bourgeois hypocrisy for hiding vested interests. One
who differed with a Leftist was either a fool who did not know his class
interest or a knave trying to curry favour with this or that feudal lord
or capitalist paymaster. Everyone except the Leftists had to be somebody
else's agent.

The swearology that followed this renunciation of reason was simply
staggering and few people could manage the manners to match it. There
was no limit any more to the filthy language which Leftism could marshal
at a moment's notice. This language felt fulfilled only after it had
assassinated the entire character of an opponent and made him or her
look like the lowest specimen of the human race.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## NATIONALISM NAMED AS HINDU COMMUNALISM

The language of Islamic imperialism as also that of British imperialism
had been saying for a long time that Congress nationalism was nothing
but Hindu communalism. The Congress had tried its best to disprove the
ccusation by making more and more concessions to the Muslimks. Its
participation in the Khilafat agitation was a generous gesture to move
Muslim hearts. But all had gone in vain. Muslims had not only remained
unreconciled but had become increasingly prone to frequent violence and
vile vituperations. Fanaticism inherent in Islam had turned them into a
frenzied mob.

There were many freedom fighters inside as well as outside the Congress
fold, who were not happy with the pro-Muslim politics of the Congress.
They held the very correct view that Hindu society constituted the
nation in the ancient Hindu homeland. That is why Hindus alone had
manned the fight for freedom and had made all the sacrifices for the
motherland. Muslims, on the other hand, had either played the British
game or stood aloof or come forward only to share the concessions which
Hindu freedom fighters had wrested from the British from time to time.
And this state of things was likely to last till Muslims could cure
themselves of the illusion that they were a race of conquerors and that
they could get almost anything by committing violence.

The language of Leftism launched a blistering attack on these
nationalists. They were branded as *"Hindu communalsits who were bent
upon breaking the broad national front against British imperialism by
bringing in religious obscurantism and cultural chauvinism borrowed from
the primitive Hindu past."* The *"Hindu communalists"* were not only
*"provoking Muslim communalism"* but also *"serving feudalism,
capitalism and imperialism by raising narrow and sectarian issues which
had no relevance to the burning national problems and which sabotaged
the struggle of the toiling masses for a bit of bread and a piece of
cloth."* The nationalists were thus made suspect in the eyes of the
Congress which could never get over its supine stance vis-a-vis Islam
and the Muslims. The suspicion has deepened in subsequent years, so much
so that all nationalists have been ostracised from the Congress fold.

In the second round, the language of Leftism accused the Congress itself
of using far too many Hindu symbols and songs and ceremonies to give
comfort to the *"Muslim minority which was becoming increasingly
conscious of its own religious and cultural identity."* Bande Mataram,
the national song which had been the soul of the freedom movement for
several decades, was subjected to special criticism as an *"anti-Muslim
crusade."* And an apologetic Congress was sent on a wild-goose chase
after *"a non-communal mode of functioning such as could satisfy the
Muslim masses."* The search has not yet ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## MUSLIMS MARCHED TOWARDS NATIONHOOD

The language of Communist imperialism had addressed itself to the
*communal problem* quite early in its career in India. As early as 1922,
M.N. Roy had appraised the Lucknow Pact of 1916 as a *"coming together
of the Hindu and the Muslim bourgeoisie in a common compact with British
imperialism against the toiling masses."* Later on, this language had
characterised the Muslim League as a *"close preserve of feudal
interests in confronation with the capitalist Congress."* Still later,
*the communal problem* had been explained away as a *"competition for
jobs between the Hindu and the Muslim petit-bourgeoisie."*

But all this looked like groping in the dark when the full light dawned
some time later. The language of Leftism started presenting the Muslims
as *"poor peasantry and proletariat exploited and oppressed by Hindu
landlords, moneylenders and capitalists."* It was now proclaimed that
the confrontation had an economic character. It was a class conflict.

The consequences were far reaching. Henceforward, Hindus were expected
to hang their heads in shame. Quite a few of them did start showing a
guilt-complex and indulging in breast-beating. On the other hand,
Muslims became armed with an unprecendented degree of
self-righteousness. In the new climate, it was a privlege to be known as
peasantry and proletariat. The vocal section of Muslims, particularly
their press, started becoming more and more aggressive. Their cause,
they said was eminently just and it was upto Hindus to show some
fair-play.

Meanwhile Aligarh professors and Muslim comrades in the Communist Party
had come out with a new thesis about the progressive role of Islam in
Indian history. Islam, in their opinion, had brought with it a *message
of equality and human brotherhood.* The *"caste-ridden and hierachical
Hindu society"* could not absorb that message and thus free itself from
a *moribund social system* mainly because *"the Brahmins saw in Islam a
threat to their privileges and profits.*" M.N.Roy endorsed this thesis
in 1939. The book was pure trash. But the message was loud and clear.
Islam, said Roy, had tried to complete the *social revolution* started
centuries earlier by Buddhism. But, like Buddhism Islam was also
defeated by *Brahminical reaction.* He did not reveal the reasons for
these repeated defeats of *progressive forces* by a *reactionary relic.*
Nor did anyone enquire for those reasons. The main purpose of the
language of Leftism had been served by making a whipping-boy out of
Brahminism.

The stage had thus been fully prepared for the climax which came in
1942-43. The Communist Party of India started quoting chapter and verse
from the masters, Lenin and Stalin, on order to prove that India, like
pre-revolutionary Russia, was seething with a number of submerged
nationalities -- Andhras, Assamese, Bengalis, Gujratis, Kashmiris,
Malayalis, Marathas, Oriyas, Pathans, Punjabis, Sindhis and Tamils. Each
of these had a right of its secede from the Indian federation and set up
a sovereign state of its own. And as the people in Assam and Bengal in
the east and Punjab, Sindh and North-West Frontier Province in the west
were predominantly Muslim, they could set up a separate federation of
their own and call it Pakistan. The Hindus and Sikhs in these provinces
had to learn to love the Muslims with whom they *shared a common
culture.*

This is not the place to discuss why the communists adopted this party
line and how they collaborated actively with the British by sabotaging
the Quit India struggle, Suffice it to say that a number of Communist
Scholars equipped the Muslim League with a lot of statistics and endless
casuistry. So far the League had been strong in bluster but weak in
self-confidence while pleading its case for hurling at the *Hindu
communalists.* The language of Leftism had worked a miracle. The
Congress Socialists, Forward Blocists and some other Leftist groups and
factions parted company with the Communists over the Quit India movement
and the question of Pakistan. But they continued to share with the
Communists the language of Leftism so far as Islam and Indian
nationalism were concerned. The spectre of *Hindu communalism* has never
ceased to haunt them. Nor has their love for Islam and Muslims suffered
any loss even efter all Hindu Leftists have been bounded out of the
Islamic state of Pakistan. The love for Islam and Muslims has been
labelled as secularism in the post-independence period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
