+++
title = "80 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


\*[Open Letters to Sir Syed Ahmed Khan](txt_lajpatrai_1888.html#index)\*
(1888) by Lala Lajpat Rai

LETTER TWO

  

It is more than two weeks now since my first letter was published, and I
think I have waited long enough for the reply which, it seems, you have
no mind to send. However, in fulfilment of my promise, I am bound to go
on giving quotation after quotation, bringing home to you your own
former political teachings, and I hope I shall be able clearly to prove
that you once believed in all the principles upon which the different
Resolutions of the National Congress are based. This will leave you no
alternative but either an open and unreserved confession of your
apostasy, or an unreserved retreat from politics.

Do not think, Sir Syed, that I shall rest satisfied with the publication
of these letters in India. No, they will be duly published and
distributed in free England, side by side with the pamphlets of your own
pet \[United Indian Patriotic\] Association of yesterday \[August
1888\]. In the book already so often referred to, i.e. "The Causes of
the Indian Revolt," you say: "Government were but slightly acquainted
with the unhappy state of the people. How could it well be otherwise?
There was no real communication between the Government and the governed,
no living together or near one another, as has always been the custom of
Mahomedans in countries which they subjected to their rule. Government
and its officials have never adopted the course without which no real
knowledge of the people can be gained." Further on you say that "this
cannot be expected from the English, as they almost all look forward to
retirement in their land, and seldom settle for good amongst the natives
of India."

Now I take the liberty of asking, has there been any improvement of late
in this direction? Have the majority, or even one per cent, of the
retired English officers, permanently settled in India? On the contrary,
we find that they are birds-of-passage just as much now as, or perhaps
more than, they were when the above sentences were written. Then, have
the Englishmen and the natives taken to living together, or near one
another? Do you ever see Englishmen living in the Mahallas
\[=neighborhoods\] of your towns, however large the towns or however
respectable the Mahallas may be? None of the Englishmen have ever been
seen doing that. In fact, their mode of living is so peculiar that they
cannot.

Or, do you think that the point has been gained by a few Anglicised
natives like yourself having taken to living in bungalows? If that is
what you argue, I assure you you are sadly mistaken. Your living in
Europeanized houses cannot be said to be a gain to native society. It is
rather, if I may be allowed to say so, a very severe and deplorable
loss. In the sentence quoted above, you admit that living together or
near one another enhances our sympathies and gives us more occasions of
seeing, mixing with, and obtaining a more intimate knowledge of, each
other. It is thus clear that Europeans can only really know us if they
see us in our native homes, in our small thatched huts full of misery
and sickness. How poor and miserable India is, they can feel only if
they live amongst or near the houses of our agriculturists, and there
see with their own eyes respectable native families sleeping in rooms
into which an English beggar would scorn to step.

Why is this? Is it because we Indians do not know how to live? Now, if
you say that, go to those Indian residences which are occupied by our
few rich or even well-to-do countrymen, and there you will find that our
mode of living is quite on a par with that of Europeans. Does anyone
then ask how it is that I say that repectable natives live, everywhere,
in buildings which can only properly be called hovels? The answer is,
because they are miserably poor and cannot afford to build comfortable
houses. Taxation is so high that they never feel themselves secure of
their respectability. In fact, that is always in danger. The poor
fellows are daily and nightly engaged in making the two ends meet.

What I mean to say is that the fact of you or a few other natives having
to live in bungalows and imitating the English customs of eating and
drinking and dressing cannot do any good either to India or to England.
In fact, this will never help the English to realize the unhappy state
of the people. Then the question is, how can the Government know the
wants and wishes of its subjects? They cannot know them through official
reports, because these reports are almost all prepared by persons who
seldom see the real state of the people whom the reports concern. You
yourself said: "But even these officials themselves were ignorant of the
real thoughts and opinions of the people, because they had no means of
getting at them" (*vide* your *Biography* by Colonel Graham, p. 49.)

Then, can the Government get this knowledge through the petitions of
their subjects? I say, as you said, *no*. You said that these petitions
"were," and I say they *are*, "seldom if ever attended to and sometimes
never heard" (*vide* the same page of your *Biography*). I add to this
that even if they are ever attended to, enquiry into the aIlegations
made in them is often entrusted to the same officials whose conduct
forms the subject of complaint. Their reports are taken to be gospel
truth and the petitions are thrown out.

Then, can the Government know the real opinion of the people through the
Native press? No, because the Government officials have always been
hostile to it, and have even asserted that these papers represented
nobody but themselves.

Public meetings even are not effectual, because these are invariably
declared to be the work of professional agitators, stump orators and
wire-pullers.

The question then is that, admitting as you do that it is essential for
the purpose of good adminstration that the people should have a voice in
the consultations of the Government, how should that voice reach the
Council Chambers, and how should the people be consulted before laws are
passed? You once said that "laws affecting the subjects should be made
after consultation with the representatives of the people" (*videSocial
Reformer* of the 15th Shawwal 1290, Hijri, equivalent to the 6th
December, 1873, p. 163), and there cannot be any other answer to this
question. Further on you said: "I am very sorry that this is not being
done in India, and in not doing so Government is in error to a certain
degree, but in a larger measure it is owing to the incompetency of the
subjects, but I am confident that after a certain period sufficient
education will remove both" (*vide* the same Journal, same page).

It is fifteen years now, Sir, since the above lines were written, and it
is surely time to ask, or at least to consider, whether that period, or
*chand roz* \[=some days\], to speak in your own words, has not expired
yet. I am ready to concede, though it may be for argument's sake only,
that the period has not expired, but are we now making steady progress
towards the desired end? Your objections, unfortunately, are not based
upon considerations of time, but are put forward as matters of
principle.

Then admitting, as you do, that this voice can only reach the Council
Chamber through the representatives of the people, the only question to
be solved is -- who should be those representatives, or in other words,
how should they acquire that position? Can men like Raja Shiva Prashad
and yourself, be properly considered as representatives of the people,
and can the method of selection by which you were sent to the Council
Chamber, be accepted as of any value? I think no reasonable man would
contend that it would have been possible, if Raja Shiva Prashad had been
an elected representative of the people of India, for him to have
libelled the whole Indian nation, as he did in his notorious speech on
the Ilbert Bill \[1882\]. Could Raja Peary Mohan Mukerjee and other
native members have consented to the raising of the Salt tax \[1886\],
if they had thought that their seats depended on the voices of the
people, whose throats were, so to speak, to be cut by that abnoxious and
inhumane measure?

Then the correct solution is this and no other, that the people must be
represented by delegates elected by themselves; and subject of course to
the restrictions to be imposed by the Government. Co-sharers in the
business of governing or legislating, these representatives must be such
as to be totally independent of official favour or disfavour. If the
selection of members for the Legislative Council is to be entrusted to
officials, I say it is a downright farce, and there can be no
representation.

The majority of the quotations given above come from a book which was
written about thirty years ago, and you may find an excuse by saying
that the state of people has since then undergone a mighty change, and
that in consequence of this, the remedies then suggested are no longer
suitable. My dear Sir, this reply cannot stand a moment's examination. I
am going to show that in 1881, which is only seven years ago, you held
the same views and felt rather proud of them. When it was proposed to
raise the old Punjab University College to the status of a University,
you were one of the foremost opponents of the proposal. You, \[and\]
your admirers and followers, should not have forgotten that you wrote
certain articles under the heading "Our Vernacular," and got them
published and circulated in a pamphlet form. These articles were
published in almost all the leading vernacular papers of Northern India,
and the educated community of the Punjab, who were strongly opposed to
the establishment of a University on the \[traditionalist\] lines
suggested by Dr. Leitner, obtained effective support from these writings
of "the ablest of the loyal Mahomedan gentlemen."

In one of them (paper 2nd perhaps), which was published in your *Social
Reformer* for 1297-98 Hijri (equivalent to 1881), at p.135, you say:
"National progress and National Government are both sisters born of the
same mother. When a nation loses its independence, its progress only
depends upon its learning the language and sciences of the conquerors
and thus taking a part in the Government of the country. By way of
flattery whatever may be said, and as a matter of policy whatever may be
stated, the fact is that *in reality the relations of Hindustanis to
their rulers are no better than those of slaves to their master*." The
italics are mine. I have tried to give a faithful translation of your
Urdu sentences. If I have erred, I hope to be excused, and that my
mistake may be pointed out.

However, to satisfy the scruples of sceptical readers, I prefer to give
the last portion of the sentence in Roman characters and leave them to
judge for themselves whether the rendering is correct or not. The
original words are: *Khushamad ki baten jo chahe kah le, aur 'political'
tariq men jo kuchh bayan karna ho, kiya jawe, magar Hindostaniyon ka hal
apni fatahmand qaum ke sath gulami ke halat se kuchh ziyada nahin hai*.
In the same article, further on, you said that the "University College
was being raised to the status of a University with the object of
throwing obstacles in the way of our National advancement, and that the
result of the clamour after Oriental studies could be nothing but that
of keeping ourselves in the state of serfdom."

Sir Syed, would you still call us "seditious"? Remember that we are the
product of that education which you so strongly recommended and which
you have never been known to condemn. Our English education, the study
of eminent European minds and European sciences -- alas! that you cannot
feel this -- has expanded our souls, and we can no longer be selfish
"Sat Bachnia" prodigies of your Oriental language. Sir, your fall seems
to remind me of the fall of Adam. Just as Satan is said to be the cause
of the fall of that progenitor of our race, this seeking after worldly
honours seems to be real explanation of your decline. It is nothing to
you, because your term in this world must at no very distant period
expire; but to us, who are yet, we hope, to live long and to fight out
the bloodless battle of liberty, it is destined to remain a permanent
disgrace. The line of argument against us would be that the races which
produce such inconsistent philosphers are not fit to receive the boon of
Local Self­Government.

Sir Syed, if you have changed your political opinions, the sooner you
announce it the better it will be, both for yourself and for us. It is
simply childish to persist in your claim to consistency in the face of
the above quotations. Better announce this change, and explain why and
how this took place. Again pausing. for a reply, with a promise of more
in my next, I beg to subscribe myself,

The Son of an old Follower of Yours

15th November 1888

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- ["Open Letters" index page](txt_lajpatrai_1888.html#index) --
[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html) -- [FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
