+++
title = "81 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


\*[Open Letters to Sir Syed Ahmed Khan](txt_lajpatrai_1888.html#index)\*
(1888) by Lala Lajpat Rai

LETTER THREE

  

Well may we apply the opening sentence of Dickens' *Tale of Two Cities*
to the present times in India. Well may we say that it is "the best of
times" as well as "the worst of times." Best as the country is on the
point of having a nation, worst as a particular section of the community
wants to check the progress of the country; and unfortunately is headed,
or at least is said to be headed, by a man who has been a frequent
advocate of representative Government in India. It is "the age of
wisdom" as the country has risen from its deep lethargy and made up its
mind to assist the Government by wise counsels. It is "the age of
foolishness" as a particular party has the audacity to believe that
their opposition will cause the national movement to die in its infancy.
It is "the epoch of belief" because the different sectional interests
have begun to believe in each other's sincerity; it is "the epoch of
incredulity" because you, Sir, are said to be nowadays against the
introduction of a representative element into the Legislative Councils
of India. It is the "spring of hope" when we see eminent English
statesmen advocating the rights of the dumb millions of India. It is the
"winter of despair" when we see her own sons deserting the cause of
awakened India.

Sir Syed, I must remind you that it is the same India for the welfare of
whose sons you established "The Siddor's Union Club" at Aligarh. Do you
remember, Sir, that in that Club the alumni of the Mahomedan College
were trained in the art of discussing public matters in public councils?
I ask you, Sir, why you established that Club? Why did you formulate
those rules of discussion which predict the establishment of
representative institutions in the country? Oh, if we had only known
that it was to end in this! I feel that I have gone astray, and must
look to those extracts from your writings and sayings so dear to me,
which foretold the establishment of representative Councils in India.

Will you please turn to page 49 of your *Biography* by
Lieutenant-Colonel Graham, where you are described as saying: "The
people were isolated, they had no champion to stand up for their rights
and to see justice done them, and they were constrained to weep in
silence." Can you in the face of these words still say that the people
never needed such champions, and that the Government has been doing and
will go on doing, without demand, what it has thought and what it will
think necessary for the welfare of the people? That it never needed the
voice of such champions for the redress of grievances and the attainment
of rights?

Having pointed out what the Government ought to have done to make itself
popular (quotations as to which have been given in letters Nos. I and
II), you said in the end of the same book, "The Causes of Indian
Revolt," that "it was necessary for the Government to win the friendship
and the good feeling of its subjects." Further on you said: "As yet,
truth compels me to state, Government has not cultivated the friendship
of its people as was its duty to do: the father loves his child before
the  
child loves him. If a man of low degree tries to win the esteem of one
in high position he is liable to be styled a flatterer and not a friend.
It was, therefore, for Government to try and win the friendship of its
subjects, not for the subjects to try and win that of the Government. If
Government say that what I say is untrue -- that they have tried to
cultivate friendship and have only been repaid with enmity -- I can only
say that if it had gone the right way to work, its subjects would most
undoubtedly have been its friends and supporters instead of, as in many
instances, rising up in arms against it. Now, friendship is a feeling
which springs from the heart and which cannot be kindled by
'admonitions'. Government has hitherto kept itself as isolated from the
people of India as if it had been the fire and they the dry grass -- as
if it thought that, were the two brought in contact the latter would be
burnt up."

I have given this large quotation to recall to your mind some of the
reasons upon which you formed the opinions which I have already quoted
in my letters Nos. I and II. These reasons may also go to prove that the
prayers of the National Congress as to the concession of volunteering to
be allowed to the native subjects of Her Majesty, are nothing but
reasonable and consistent with the noble principles involved in the
above lines. Now I have done with your book on "The Causes of Indian
Revolt" so far as it concerned that resolution of the National Congress
which prays for the introduction of a representative element in the
Legislative Councils of India. Most of these extracts, except one or two
here and there, were abstract, and perhaps you may, with your usual
calmness, have the boldness to say that there is nothing in these
quotations which goes to prove that you ever meant to say that these
representatives to the Council of India should be elected by the
subjects.

Very good, I will search out quotations which will leave nothing
doubtful. You may not have forgotten that months after the opening of
your Scientific Society you delivered "a vigorous speech" at the laying
of the foundation stone of the New Ghahipore, now the Victoria College.
In the course of that address you said: "Bear in mind, gentlemen, that
Her Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria has had proclaimed in this country
that her servants and subjects, European and native, are to be
considered as being on an equal footing; *and this assurance, gentlemen,
is not a mere matter of form, but a reality*." The italics are mine.
Now, Sir Syed Ahmed, will you still laugh at us because we believe this
-- this very proclamation -- to be our Magna Carta?

Further on in the course of the same address you said: "The appointment
of Natives to the Supreme Council was a memorable incident in the
History of India. The day is not far distant, I trust, and when it does
come you will remember my words, when that Council will be composed of
representatives from every division or district, and that thus the Laws
which it will pass will be laws enacted by the feelings of the entire
country."

"You will see that this cannot come to pass unless we strive to educate
ourselves thoroughly. I once had a conversation with one in high
authority on this very subject, and he said that Government would be
only too glad if a scheme such as I have­sketched above were
practicable, but he felt doubtful; if it were stated that there were
qualified men in every District, Government would gladly avail itself of
their knowledge and give them seats in Council. I knew this only too
well, and felt ashamed that such was the case. What I have above stated
is only to inculcate on your minds the great fact that Her Most Gracious
Majesty wishes all her subjects to be treated alike; and let their
religion, tribe, or colour be what it may, the only way to avail
ourselves of the many roads to fame and usefulness is to cultivate our
intellects and to conform ourselves to the age."

Sir Syed, have the happiness to know that the day which you in 1864 said
was not far distant, is coming nearer, and that you need no longer feel
so much ashamed of your countrymen for not conforming to the age. Your
prophecy is not fulfilled yet, but we are certain that sometime or other
it is sure to be fulfilled, and then you will have the satisfaction of
feeling that you did not prophesy in vain. Sir Syed, do you wish to
withdraw this prophesy of yours, and if so why? Please explain -­ I and
others like me are waiting in suspense. Only say that with the return of
sobriety and the calmness of old age you have come to know your own
errors, and we will no more trouble you with these prophecies. Sir Syed,
would you please point out what else could be the meaning of the above
sentence except that -- that India would some (in 1864, not far distant)
day be governned by Councils composed of members elected by the people
themselves? If not this, how can the laws be said to be "enacted by the
feelings of the entire country"?

Two months before you spoke the words quoted above, you, on the 9th
January 1864, started a Translation Society now known as the Scientific
Society of Aligarh; and in the course of a speech then delivered,
pointing out the ignorance of your countrymen, you said: "From their
ignorance of the events of the past, and also of the events of the
present; from their not being acquainted with the manner and means by
which infant nations have grown into powerful and flourishing ones, and
by which the present most advanced ones have beaten their competitors in
the race for position among the magnates of the world -- they are unable
to take lessons and profit by their experience." Sir, we took your
advice, and your countrymen have learnt the means and the manner by
which they can advance the growth of their "infant nation" to the
position of a "powerful" and a "flourishing" one.

How is it that this growth which you so much desired in 1864 is an
eyesore to you now? How is it that now at this period you cannot feel
any pleasure in seeing a combination of all the different races and
sects towards the accomplishment of the great end for which you have
been until recently struggling so hard? How is it that you are going to
prove that you did not deserve the distinctions so deservedly, as we
thought, bestowed upon you? By your present attitude, by your present
utterances, you mean to prove that all that you once said, all that you
once did, for which you were rightly honoured both by the Government and
the people, and for which you were said to be deserving of being
"awarded a conspicuous place on the list of benefactors" of India, was,
after all, but utter nonsense -- because that is the phrase you now
apply to the repetition of those same principles -- which you once so
strenuously advocated -- by the supporters of the National Congress.

On the 10th of May, 1886, you addressed a large and influential meeting
of the European and native residents of Aligarh on the necessity of
Indian affairs being more prominently brought before Parliament, and of
forming an association for this purpose (at .least so says your
biographer on pp. 88 and 89). In the course of this speech you compared
the British rule with that of the "former emperors and Rajas" of India.
You said "it" (i.e. the rule of the latter) "was based upon nothing but
tyranny and oppression; the law of might was that of right; the voice of
the people was not listened to; the strong and the turbulent oppressed
the feeble and the poor, and usurped all their privileges with impunity
for their own selfish ends. It is only therefore by such usurpers and
turbulent spirits that a despotism such as flourished in Hindustan for
many long centuries, is at all to be desired."

Know, sir, that the National Congress wants nothing but that \[the\]
voice of the people be listened to, and that "the strong and turbulent"
may not oppress "the feeble and the poor." The National Congress wants
to achieve these ends by peaceful means, and in fact by prayers; while
it can only be the usurpers and the turbulent who desire to threaten, as
you now do, the use of arms. It can only be the self-assumed "strong"
who can threaten "the poor" with the use of the arms by "the followers
of the prophet." Further on you regretted the indifference with which
the affairs of India were treated in the Parliament, and laid the blame
of it to a great extent upon the shoulders of your own countrymen. You
said: "India, with that slowness to avail herself of that which would
benefit her so characteristic of Eastern nations, has hitherto looked on
Parliament with a dreamy apathetic eye, content to have her affairs, in
the shape of her Budget, brought before it in an annual and generally
inaudible speech by Her Majesty's Secretary of State for India."

You entreated your countrymen to discontinue this apathy, and you asked
them to exert themselves towards securing the proper representation of
their interest in the governing body of the British Nation. You appealed
to the "entire native community" to "co-operate" with the London
Association established for the purpose. To your countrymen you
continued to say: "You will have only yourselves to reproach when in
after years you see the European section of the community enjoying their
well-earned concessions, whilst your wants remain still unmet." Sir
Syed, the country then responded to your call, though imperfectly, and
it is now that the country has felt the value of your words and begun to
throw away the deep indifference which you so forcibly lamented.

Pray will you tell me whether, prior to the movement of National
Congress, there was no agitation for the redress of the grievances of
the Indians in India? If so what was all this which you were doing? Why
did you establish and support all these: associations? Why did you call
upon the entire country to "co­operate" with these associations, if the
Government had of its own accord been doing all that was needed for the
welfare of India? In your criticism upon the Lucknow speech of the
Hon'ble pandit Ajudhia Nath of Allahabad you meant to ask (if I did not
err in understanding and reproducing it from memory) the
Congress-wallahs if any of their agitations had been existing when the
Government granted all the boons which we enjoy. I have quoted largely
from your own writings to show that such an agitation did exist, and
that you yourself were one of the most prominent agitators.

You even went to the length of saying that no fear need be entertained
of your (i.e., of those who meant to take part in such associations,
&c.) being called discontented by the Government. To quote your own
words, you said: "I am afraid that a feeling of fear -- fear that the
Government or the district authorities would esteem you factious and
discontented, were you to inaugurate a measure like this -- deters you
from coming forward for your country's good.... Believe me that this
moral cowardice is wrong -- the apprehension unfounded; and that there:
is not an Englishman of a liberal turn of mind in India who would regard
with feelings other than those of pleasure and hope, such a healthy sign
of increased civilization on the part of its inhabitants. The natives
have at present little or no voice in the management of the affairs of
their country, and should any measure of Government prove obnoxious to
them, they brood over it, appearing outwardly satisfied and happy while
discontent is rankling in their mind."

Further on you said that the natives were in the habit of inveighing
against such measures in their homes, but to the Europeans they
represented that they were satisfied with the justice and wisdom of
these very measures. You loudly proclaimed "that such a state of affairs
is inimical to the welfare of the country. Far better would it be for
India were her people openly and honestly to express their opinions as
to the justice or otherwise of the acts of Government." Would you pray
tell me, Sir, why we are sedition-mongers; is it because we speak
"honestly" as to the justice or otherwise of the acts of the Government;
is it because we have overcome the moral cowardice with which you
charged us? Are we seditious because we do not want to keep "discontent
rankling" within our hearts? Are we disloyal because we, according to
your own teachings, have come forward to speak up for our country's
good?

If we deserve all these epithets on account of all these I must say,
Sir, that you are the father of all this. You taught us to do exactly
what we have begun doing now. You not only taught but encouraged us by
your own example. Why do you now deprecate "this healthy sign of
civilization," as you once called it, on the part of Indians? If we, the
followers of your old principles, have exceeded the proper dimension --
which, I humbly maintain, we have not -- it is surely not advisable to
root out these instincts from within us, but rather to point out the
place and the occasion where we have exceeded. How have you come to
oppose the principles themselves, the principles so lovingly promulgated
by you?

Say that the principles are not to be discarded, but the men abusing
these principles are to be despised. We will then know how to love the
principles and not the men. We loved you because you held these
principles, because we thought you loved your country above everything,
because we considered you to be one of the fathers of the present India;
and if we have erred, we must say we think that you should have pointed
out our error in time. Truly has a poet said: *Khwab tha, jo kuchh kih
dekha tha; afsanah tha, jo kuchh kih suna tha*; i.e., "What I saw was
but a dream; what I heard, an idle tale." Ah! human delusions are then
destined to delude the human eye for ever!

Again with a pause, with a promise of more in my next.

I am yours, &c.,

The Son of an old Follower of Yours

22nd November 1888

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- ["Open Letters" index page](txt_lajpatrai_1888.html#index) --
[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html) -- [FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
