+++
title = "01 CHAPTER 1 New Labels for Old Merchandise"

+++
CHAPTER 1  
New Labels for Old Merchandise

The emergence of Catholic ashrams in several parts of the country is not
an isolated development. These institutions are links in a chain which
is known as the "Ashram Movement", and which different denominations of
Christianity are promoting in concert. The Protestants and the Syrian
Orthodox have evolved similar establishments. Taken together, these
institutions are known as Christian ashrams. Several books and many
articles have already been devoted to the subject by noted Christian
writers.

The Ashram Movement, in turn, is part of another and larger plan which
is known as Indigenisation or Inculturation and which has several other
planks. The plan has already produced a mass of literature[1](#1) and is
being continuously reviewed in colloquies, conferences, seminars, and
spiritual workshops on the local, provincial, regional, national, and
international levels. High-powered committees and councils and special
cells have been set up for supervising its elaboration and
implementation.

What strikes one most as one wades through the literature of
Indigenisation is the sense of failure from which Christianity is
suffering in this country. Or, what seems more likely, this literature
is being produced with the express purpose of creating that impression.
The gains made so far by an imperialist enterprise are being concealed
under a sob-story. Whatever the truth, we find that the mission
strategists are trying hard to understand and explain why Christianity
has not made the strides it should have made by virtue of its own merits
and the opportunities that came its way.

Christianity, claim the mission strategists, possesses and proclaims the
only true prescription for spiritual salvation. It has been present in
India, they say, almost since the commencement of the Christian era.
During the last four hundred years, it has been promoted in all possible
ways by a succession of colonial powers - the Portuguese, the Dutch, the
French, and the British. The secular dispensation which has obtained in
this country since the dawn of independence has provided untrammeled
freedom to the functioning as well as the multiplication of the
Christian mission. Many Christian countries in the West have maintained
for many years an unceasing flow of finance and personnel for the spread
of the gospel. The costs of the enterprise over the years, in terms of
money and manpower, are mind-boggling. Yet Christianity has failed to
reap a rich harvest among the Hindu heathens.

"It is a remarkable fact," writes Fr. Bede, "that the Church has been
present in India for over fifteen hundred years[2](#2) and has had for
the most part everything in its favour, and yet in all this time hardly
two in a hundred of the people has been converted to the christian
faith. The position is, indeed, worse even than this figure would
suggest, as the vast majority of Christians are concentrated in a very
few small areas and in the greater part of India the mass of people
remains today untouched except in a very general way by the christian
faith. It is necessary to go even further than this and to say that for
the immense majority of the Indian people Christianity still appears as
a foreign religion imported from the West and the soul of India remains
obstinately attached to its ancient religion. It is not simply a matter
of ignorance. This may have been true in the past, but in recent times
there has been a remarkable revival of Hinduism, which is more or less
consciously opposed to Christianity, and the educated Hindu regards his
religion as definitely superior to Christianity."[3](#3)

The state of things described by Fr. Bede would have caused no concern
to a normal human mind. There is nothing obstinate about Hindus
remaining attached to their ancient religion which has given them a
large number of saints, sages and spiritual giants, and enriched them
with an incomparable wealth of art, architecture, music and literature.
There is nothing wrong with Hindus who find their own religion more
satisfying than an alien faith brought in by imperialist invaders.
Moreover, Christianity has yet to prove that it has something better to
offer in terms of spiritual seeking, or vision, or attainment. But the
missionary mind, unfortunately, has never been a normal human mind. It
has always suffered from the hallucination that it has a monopoly on
truth and that it has a divine command to strive for the salvation of
every soul. That alone can explain why the mission in India, instead of
dismantling itself, is making determined efforts to regroup and return
for yet another assault on Hinduism.

Coming to the causes of Christian failure in India, one searches in vain
for a single line in the voluminous literature of Indigenisation which
tries to examine the character of Christian doctrine vis-à-vis what the
Hindus expect from a religion. In fact, the doctrine is never mentioned
in this context. It is assumed that the doctrine has been and remains
perfect and flawless. What is wrong, we are told, is the way it has been
presented to Hindus. "These facts," continues Fr. Bede after mourning
the failure of the mission, "which can scarcely be questioned, suggest
that there has been something wrong with the way in which the gospel has
been presented in India (and the same remark would apply to all the Far
East) and especially in the relation which has been established between
Christianity and Hinduism.

We shall review at a later stage the relationship which Fr. Bede
envisages as correct between his religion and that of the Hindus. The
literature of Indigenisation has a lot to say on the subject. What we
must find out first is the mistake which, according to Fr. Bede, the
mission has made in presenting the gospel. "When we consider the number
of conversions to Christianity over the last four hundred years,"
observes Fr. Bede, "we must admit that the Christian mission has largely
failed. As soon as we ask why, I think we find the answer quite clear
before us: the Church has always presented herself to the eastern world
in the forms of an alien culture. A culture is the way people naturally
express themselves; it embraces their language, music, art, even their
gestures, their ways of thought and feeling and imagination. It is their
whole world. In every case the Church has come to eastern people in an
alien form."[4](#4) It may be noted that Fr. Bede has excluded religion
from his definition of culture which he regards as a people's "whole
world". This is not an oversight as we shall see. It is deliberate and
calculated design.

What is the way out? It is obvious, say the mission strategists.
Christianity has to drop its alien attire and get clothed in Hindu
cultural forms. In short, Christianity has to be presented as an
indigenous faith. Christian theology has to be conveyed through
categories of Hindu philosophy; Christian worship has to be conducted in
the manner and with the materials of Hindu *pûjâ*; Christian sacraments
have to sound like Hindu *saMskâras*; Christian Churches have to copy
the architecture of Hindu temples; Christian hymns have to be set to
Hindu music; Christian themes and personalities have to be presented in
styles of Hindu painting; Christian missionaries have to dress and live
like Hindu *sannyâsins*; Christian mission stations have to look like
Hindu ashramas. And so on, the literature of Indigenisation goes into
all aspects of Christian thought, organisation and activity and tries to
discover how far and in what way they can be disguised in Hindu forms.
The fulfilment will be when converts to Christianity proclaim with
complete confidence that they are Hindu Christians.

The only alien way which does not seem to call for Indigenisation is the
finance of the mission. There is, of course, an occasional speculation
whether the mission can do without foreign finance. Off and on, some
romantics raise the protest that Christianity can never pass as an
indigenous religion so long as it does not learn to live on indigenous
resources, but the point is never permitted to be pressed home. The
realists know that the mission will collapse like nine-pins if the flow
of foreign finance stops for even a short time or is reduced in scale.
The theme is brought up once in a while in order to maintain the
pretence that the mission is not unmindful of Hindu misgivings on this
score. The controversy always ends in a compromise, namely, that "the
foreign support should be maintained just for the purpose of getting rid
of it".[5](#5) In other words, Hindus should become Christians if they
wish to see the mission freed from foreign support!

In the end one finds it difficult to withhold the comment that the
literature of Indigenisation reads less like the deliberations of
divines than like the proceedings of conferences on marketing and
management convened by multinational corporations. The corporation in
this case is old and experienced. It commands colossal resources in
terms of money and manpower and prestige. It is also conversant with and
employs the latest methods of salesmanship. But the problem is that its
stock-in-trade is stale and finds few buyers in Hindu society. At the
same time, the corporation is congenitally incapable of producing
anything new and more satisfying.

The solution to the problem, as the Board of Management sees it, is to
invent spurious labels which can hoodwink Hindus into believing that a
brand new product is being brought to them. That is what the Christian
theologians, historians, sociologists, artists and musicians are working
at today. It makes no difference that they pull long faces, look solemn,
and invoke the Holy Spirit whenever they come together in conference, or
deliver pep talks, or pen pompous phrases. The business remains as
sordid as ever. It is true that there are still left among them some
simple souls who believe sincerely that there is no mansion outside the
Church save hell; but, by and large, they know what they are doing and
that they are doing it because their own jobs and positions and
privileges are at stake.  

  

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) U. Meyer lists as many as 196 articles published in 8 major
Christian journals from 1938 to 1965 (*Indian Church History Review*,
December, 1967, pp. 114-120). Books and reports of committees and
conferences, etc. which constitute a sizable segment of this literature,
are not included in this list. The literature has tended to become more
and more prolific in years subsequent to 1965.

[2](#2a) Mercifully, Fr. Bede does not repeat the currently fashionable
Christian story that Christianity was brought to India in 52 A.D. by St.
Thomas. He opts for sober history which records that the first
Christians came to Malabar in the second half of the fifth century.

[3](#3a) Bede Griffiths, *Christ in India*, Bangalore, 1986, p. 55.

[4](#4a) Ibid., P. 179

[5](#5a) U. Meyer, *op. cit.*, p. 102

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
