+++
title = "20  Back to Contents            Pagexa0xa0xa0 Back to VOI            Booksxa0xa0xa0 Back to Home "

+++
APPENDIX 2  
"Liberal" Christianity[1](#1)

Whether Christianity improves the general morals of its followers is
doubtful, but it is certain that it does not widen their intellectual
sympathies and does not open their hearts to the larger spiritual wealth
of different peoples and cultures. This is also true of Islam, another
revealed religion, but in the present discussion we shall restrict
ourselves to Christianity alone.

From its early days, Christianity has claimed a monopoly of things
divine. It has held that there is no salvation outside of the Church.
But the world has considerably changed during the last two hundred
years. A wave of rationalism and humanism has reached the shores of
Europe. This has made Christian theology with its exclusive claims look
pretentious. This has also fostered a new spirit of liberalism and
universalism and also a new awareness of a wider human family, including
within itself members who are neither European nor Christian and yet are
rich in the things of the spirit.

This new intellectual ferment has not left the Christian theologians
entirely untouched. In the past, they saw in religions other than their
own nothing but the hand of the Devil and it cost them little pang of
conscience to send even the best and wisest of the men of these
religions to Hell. But in the new intellectual and humanist climate,
this will not do. The Christian Devil and Hell have lost their terror;
their old monopolistic claims have also become laughable. In the new
context, if they are to be heard at all, they must appear somewhat more
modest, and must not appear to reject altogether or too summarily
religions other than their own.

So under the changed conditions there is a new theology under
construction. This does not regard other religions as the handiwork of
the Devil. On the contrary, it says that there is a natural religious
impulse which has been at work throughout history and throughout the
world giving birth to natural religions having their own validity. But,
it further adds, that this impulse, so necessary at a particular stage,
finds its culmination and fulfilment in the *revealed* religion of
Christianity. Other religions are preparatory to Christianity.

There is also another problem that the new theologians face, the problem
of finding a place in their scheme for non-Christian saints and good
men. True, they cannot yet be sent to Heaven - Christian theology
precludes that - but they cannot also be so unceremoniously sent to Hell
as in the good old days. The new intellectual climate does not
countenance it.

So some theologians, liberal and ingenious, have been at work trying to
find a solution. One of them was the late Cardinal Jean Danielou. In his
*Holy Pagans of the Old Testament*, he observes that even the Bible
mentions saints who are not Biblical. Abel, Seth, Henoch, Daniel, Noe,
Job, Melchisedec, Lot, the Queen of Sheba are examples of non-Christian
and even non-Biblical saints mentioned in the Bible. Abel was anterior
to Abraham; and so were Henoch and Noe. Lot was a relative of Abraham
but was not a party to the God's Covenant. Daniel was a Phoenician and
Job an Edomite; the Queen of Sheba was a non-Jewish princess.

All these examples show that some sort of saintliness or holiness is
possible outside the Christian fold though, according to the Cardinal,
that holiness by its very nature "must always be inferior to Christian
holiness." But "nonetheless, the fact remains that holiness of that sort
is possible."

This does not seem to say much or concede much, but considering that it
comes from a Christian theologian trained to see Devil in everything
connected with non-Christians, it is a great deal. Danielou goes on and
makes a further concession. He admits that "there are men who did not
know Christ either because they lived before Him or because knowledge of
Him did not come their way \[presumably because a Christian missionary
had not reached their locality\], and yet were saved; and some of these
too were saints." But that is all. For he hastens to add that "they were
not saved by the religions to which they belonged; for Buddha does not
save, Zoroaster does not save, nor does Mohomed. If they were saved,
then it is because they were saved by Christ Who alone saves, Who alone
sanctifies." Again, if they were saved, it is because "they already
belonged to the Church for there is no salvation outside the Church."

**II**

The new theology will not go as far as to say that the holy men of other
religions are damned, though it knows that they are not saved except
through the Church.

These holy men are not saved partly because their holiness is not holy
enough. There are three levels of holiness, the pagan holiness being the
lowest, governed as it is merely by the law of conscience and not by
God's own revealed Laws. Danielou tells us that God's will is "expressed
on the Christian plane by the law of the Gospel, on the Jewish plane by
the Mosaic law, on the cosmic plane by the law of conscience," the last
being obviously an inferior agency of holiness corresponding to the
inferior religion of the pagan which is merely *natural*, merely
*cosmic*. According to Danielou, at the lowest level, which is the pagan
level, "holiness within the sphere of cosmic religion consists in a
response to the call of God made known by conscience." At a more
advanced stage, God makes His will known through a Revelation to Moses.
Finally, God comes down into the world in a human form as Jesus Christ
completing His Revelation. Hence the three degrees of holiness and three
orders of holy men. "The glory which shines from the face of Jesus
Christ overshadows, as St. Paul tells us, that which shone from the face
of Moses. In like manner, the glory shining from the face of Moses
overshadows that which shone from the face of Noe."

Man's religion, like holiness, has progressed from the natural or cosmic
to the Jewish, to the Christian. "All Christian liturgy - Easter,
Pentecost, Christmas - have at the back of their Christian significance,
a Jewish significance; and behind the latter there is a cosmic
significance."

This three-level development is evident in all spheres and aspects
touching on religious life. For example, there is a three-level
development in the mode of worship. On the lowest level, the pagan
level, there is a cosmic temple. The house of God is the whole Cosmos,
heaven His tent, and the earth His footstool. In the Old Testament, this
primitive atmosphere still lingers. Abraham has that *parrhesia* with
God - that freedom of speech which in ancient Greece was the right of
free citizens.

This gave way to the Temple of Moses. The establishment of the
Tabernacle, whose ultimate form is the Temple, is the fundamental
mission entrusted by God to Moses. The Covenant was Abraham's mission,
the Temple that of Moses. Up-till then, God was everywhere but from the
time of Moses till the death of Christ, when a still higher stage
begins, the Temple is the dwelling in which the glory of Yahweh abides.
Up to the time of Moses, sacrifices could be offered to God anywhere.
But after that only those sacrifices were pleasing to God that were
offered in the Tabernacle. "Ye shall utterly destroy all the places,
wherein the nations which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the
high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree." (Bible,
Deuteronomy 12.2)

In a divine plan, we are assured by Cardinal Danielou, this was a
necessary stage, for the great danger was polytheism; the singleness of
the sanctuary was, as it were, the sign of the Oneness of God.

Thus a second great step is taken. The religion of Sinai creates a gulf
between God and man. No longer does Yahweh talk on easy terms with the
patriarchs. Henceforth, He dwells in the secrecy of the Holy of Holies.
Separating man from God marks an advance, for it draws attention to two
things: first, to God's transcendence, His incomprehensibility, that He
is wholly Other; no easy-going anthropomorphism any longer; second, to
man's sinfulness, his essentially fallen nature. Without this, the next
and third step was not possible.

In the next stage, the abode of Yahweh is no longer the Temple, but the
Manhood of Jesus. "The glory of the lord dwelt in the Temple until the
coming of the incarnation. But from that day it began to dwell in Jesus.
'Me divine presence is no longer to be found in an enclosure of stone,
it dwells in Jesus Himself. With Him the Mosaic order comes to an end."
There is a qualitative leap, as the Marxists would love to call it, for
Jesus is not just "a higher kind of Moses. Moses and the Temple are
figures but Jesus is the reality."

From this to the Temple of the Church was a most natural and easy step.
In fact, it was no new step at all. It is a mode of saying the same
thing. "It is the Manhood of Jesus that is the Temple of the New Law,
but this Manhood must be taken as a whole, that is to say, it is the
Mystical body in its entirety; this is the complete and final Temple.
The dwelling of God is this Christian community whose Head is in the
Heaven." God now resides in the Church.

There are other variations but the above is the essential theme of the
new liberal theologians. For example, there is Henry de Lubac, the
author of *Catholicism: A Study of Dogma in Relation to the Corporate
Destiny of Mankind* (Publishers: Bums, Oates & Washbourne, London,
1950). In this book, he says: "Outside Christianity humanity can
doubtless be raised in an exceptional manner to certain spiritual
heights, but the topmost summit is never reached, and there is the risk
of being the farther off from it by mistaking for it some other outlying
peak. There is some essential factor missing from every religious
'invention' that is not a following of Christ. There is something
lacking, for example, in Buddhist charity: it is not Christian charity.
Something is lacking in the spirituality of great Hindu mystics; it is
not the spirituality of St. John of the Cross. Outside Christianity
nothing attains its end towards which, unknowingly, all human desires,
all human endeavours, are in movement: the embrace of God in Christ."

If this is true, then his conclusion is a fair one: "So long as the
Church does not extend and penetrate to the whole humanity, so as to
give it the form of Christ, She cannot rest."

F. H. Hilard in his *Man in Eastern Religions* finds that to the
question what is man, the Christian answer is the best. According to
Christians "man is to be understood as primarily a person and not a mere
manifestation." In this view man is "an individual," while the others,
"Hinduism, Buddhism and Taoism, agree in thinking of man primarily as an
aspect of ultimate Reality."

Nicolas Berdyaev, in his *Spirit and Reality* (Publishers: Geoffery
Bles, Centenary Press, London, 1939) says: "Theosis makes man Divine,
while at the same time preserving his human nature. Thus instead of
human personality being annihilated, it is made in the image of God and
the Divine Trinity. The mystery of the personality is intimately related
to that of freedom and love. Love and charity can flourish only if there
are personal relationships. Monistic identity excludes love as well as
freedom. Man is not identical with the cosmos and with God; man is a
microcosm and a microtheosis."

Again, he says: "in Hindu and Platonic mysticism everything is
diametrically opposed to the dialogical and dramatic relationship
between man and God, between one personality and another. Spirituality
is interpreted as being opposed to personality and, therefore, as
independent of love, human freedom and a relation between the plural and
the one. The mystical way is that of Gnosis rather than that of Eros."
According to him, Hindu spirituality "is an austere and unloving
mysticism. The absence of love is explained by the fact that this
mysticism is unconscious of personality; it is concerned with abdicating
rather than preserving the personality."

Evelyn Underhill, the well-known author of Mysticism (Publishers:
Methuen & Co., Ltd., London, Reprint 1952), too seems to share this
scheme. She says: "In Christianity, the natural mysticism which like
natural religion is latent in humanity, and at a certain point of
development breaks out in every race, came to itself; and attributing
for the first time true and distinct personality to its object, brought
into focus the confused and unconditioned God which Neo-Platonism had
constructed from the abstract concepts of philosophy blended with the
intuitions of Indian ecstatics, and made the basis of its meditations on
the Real."

She repeats similar sentiments at another place. After making the
statement that a mystic is "willing to use the map of the community in
which he finds himself," which means that mystical experience is
compatible with different theologies about it, she continues to add that
"we are bound to allow as a historical fact that mysticism, so far, has
found its best map in Christianity," and that "the Christian atmosphere
is the one in which the individual mystic has most often been able to
develop his genius in a sane and fruitful way."

**III**

In India, too, there is a group of Christian theologians working in the
direction of liberalism. These theologians have become noticeable after
India's independence. While Christian money and missions continue to
work by and large in their old style (see the *Report of the Christian
Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee*, Madhya Pradesh), there is a
group of Christian theologians who want an encounter with Hinduism on a
different plane.

Here their greatest difficulty is the rival slogan that is fashionable
among Hindu intellectuals that all teachers preach more or less the same
things and that different religions are just different paths to the same
goal. The problem of these new liberal Christian theologians is how to
salvage their religion from this demolishing, equalizing slogan. So they
preach that every religion is unique and that we should all meet in our
individual richness in a fruitful dialogue. While secretly hoping that
this dialogue would prove that they are unique in a superior way, they
invite us all to this encounter. And this should be welcome.

Some of them have taken Hindu names, live in Indian style and have put
on Indian dress. Some of them have even donned the habits of Hindu
Sanyasins. The motives are mixed. Some may be following St. Paul's
practice "to become all things to all men, by all means to win over some
of them" (1 Cor. 9.22); others because they find this style more
informal and under Indian conditions more comfortable; still others, as
they argue, in order to understand and enter into the Hindu psyche
better. For some it may be no more than a change of tactics and fronts,
but there are genuine elements too. They simply don't have the heart to
send a whole people to eternal perdition which their orthodox theology
demands.

The late Dr. Jacques-Albert Cuttat, the Swiss Ambassador to India in the
1950s, poses the problem and invites us to this dialogue. He says in his
*The Spiritual Dialogue of East and West* (Max Muller Bhavan
publication): "The West inclines to exclusivism, the East to syncretism.
The view that salvation is only possible within the visible Church - a
view expressly rejected by the Catholic Church - has been sustained by
missionaries and eminent theologians even today; such blindness for the
spiritual riches of the East, for its mystical depth and intuition of
the transparence of the cosmos to higher Realities, such blindness
always implies a blindness for some basic aspects of Christianity
itself. The East is tempted by the opposite extreme, syncretism; it
consists in wrongly equating biblical values with Eastern religious
categories. Such universalism is undoubtedly more tolerant, less violent
than Western Exclusivism, but equally blind to the specific inner visage
of Christianity and other biblical spiritualities." Dr. Cuttat teaches
that each religion is unique and different religions should meet and
encounter each other in their individual uniqueness. He is a philosopher
of *uniqueness, encounter, dialogue*, and exchange.

Another eminent name which has to be mentioned in this connection is
that of the late Fr. J. Monchanin. He was attached to India and settled
in Tiruchirapalli. He built for himself a retreat to which he gave the
name Sacchidananda Ashram. He himself assumed the name Swami Param Arubi
Anandam and put on the dress of an Indian Sanyasin. From these facts one
should not assume that he became a Hindu monk. He understood his own
mission differently. As the editors of his papers said when he died in
1957, his "mission here was not so much to become fully an Indian or to
realize in himself the final synthesis of West and East as to bring to
India in a pure form, yet with a remarkable sympathy and understanding,
the riches of a Christian soul." He himself defines his mission in these
terms: "I have come to India for no other purpose than to awaken in a
few souls the desire (the passion) to raise up a Christian India. I
think the problem is of the same magnitude as the Christianization, in
former times, of Greece (the Hellenization of Christendom modelled on
the forms of Greek sensibility, thought and spiritual experience). It
will take centuries, sacrificed lives, and we shall perhaps die before
seeing any realizations. A Christian India, completely Indian and
completely Christian will be something so wonderful; to prepare it from
afar, the sacrifice of our lives is not too much to ask."

Just two years before his death in 1957, he was writing: "I believe more
in 'exchange'. India must give the West a keener sense of eternal, of
the primacy of Being over Becoming, and receive, in turn, from the West
a more concrete sense of the temporal, of becoming, of the person, of
love (of which India alas! knows so little)."

Fr. J. Monchanin found a good deal in Hinduism which he appreciated. But
let us see what all this 'appreciation' amounts to. All the merit
Hinduism has accumulated is only a pointer to her conversion to
Christianity. We give in his own language what he says on the subject:

"India has received from the Almighty an uncommon gift, an unquenchable
thirst for whatever is spiritual. From the Vedic and Upanishadic times,
a countless host of her sons have been great seekers of God. Centuries
after centuries there arose seers and poets, singing the joys and
sorrows of a soul in quest of the One, philosophers reminding every man
of the supremacy of contemplation: upward and inward movements through
knowledge to the ultimate.

"Communion with Him and liberation from whatever hinders that
realization, was for them the unique goal.

"Hundreds and thousands of men and women have consecrated themselves
entirely to that end… We may rightly think that such a marvellous seed
was not planted in vain by God in the Indian soul. Unfortunately, Indian
wisdom is tainted with erroneous tendencies and looks as if it has not
yet found its own equilibrium. So was Greek wisdom before Greece humbly
received the Paschal message of the Risen Christ. Man, outside the
unique revelation and the unique Church, is always and everywhere unable
to sift truth from falsehood, good from evil.

"But once Christianized, Greece rejected her ancestral errors; so also,
confident in the indefectible guidance of the Church, we hope that
India, once baptized to the fullness of her body and soul, will reject
her pantheistic tendencies and, discovering in the splendours of the
Holy Ghost the true mysticism.

"Is not the message she had to deliver to the world similar to the
message of the ancient Greece? Therefore the Christianization of Indian
civilization is to all intents and purposes an historical undertaking
comparable to the Christianization of Greece."

Hindus may have the necessary underlying spiritual qualities like a
sense of the holy in abundance, but the Church has the Truth in its
possession. Therefore, "India has to receive humbly from the Church the
sound and basic principles of true contemplation. The genuine Christian
contemplation is built on the unshakable foundation of revealed truths
concerning God and men and their mutual relations." The mystic East
should be led by the doctors of theology of the West, the forest-sages
by the university men.

On another occasion, he says:

"In that mystery, Hinduism (and specially Advait) must die to rise up
again Christian. Any theory which does not fully take into account this
necessity constitutes a lack of loyalty both to Christianity - which we
cannot mutilate from its essence - and to Hinduism - from which we
cannot hide its fundamental error and its essential divergence from
Christianity.

"Meanwhile, our task is to keep all doors open, to wait with patience
and theological hope for the hour of the advent of India into the Church
in order to realize the fullness of the Church and the fullness of
India. In this age-long vigil, let us remember that love can enter where
intellect must bide at the door."

He hopes that "India cannot be alien to this process of assimilation by
Christianity and transformation into it." But "should India fail in that
task, we cannot understand, humanly speaking, how the mystical body of
Christ could reach its quantitative and qualitative fullness in His
eschatological Advent."

**IV**

The discussion will gain in fullness if we referred to two colloquies
organized by Christian theologians of this approach. These were held at
the invitation of Dr. Cuttat who attended them both personally. The
first one was held at Almora in April, 1961; the second one at Rajpura,
Dehradun, in the same month, next year. A general and sympathetic
account of the second one is given by Bede Griffiths in his *Christ in
India: Essays Towards a Hindu-Christian Dialogue* (Publishers: Charles
Scribner's Sons, New York). We ourselves shall discuss here only the
first colloquy at Almora. It was attended by individuals connected with
various Christian institutions, Catholic and Protestant, like Asirvanam,
Kenkeri; Snehasadan, Poona; Santi Bhavan, Calcutta; Vrindavan,
Kottagiri; Jyotiniketan, Kareli. One Hindu, Shri Viveka Dutta, was also
present at the discussion for the first few sessions. The summary of the
papers and discussion was prepared by Fr. J. Britto C.M.I., of
Dharmarain College, Bangalore, himself one of the participants. The
summary is titled *Indian Interiority and Christian Theology*.

All the participants in this colloquy advocate a dialogue with Hindu
India on a deeper level. But let us see what kind of mind they bring to
the proposed dialogue.

As the *Indian Interiority and Christian Theology* tells us, the
participants start with the assumption that "Christianity as the one
revealed religion for all men, cannot be lacking in any truth necessary
for the salvation of man; it has the guarantee of the Divine testimony."

But their procedure is not to be to denounce Hinduism forthright; on the
other hand, it is to take different categories of Hindu thinking and
"after exhausting all the positive points that Hinduism provides as
solutions, proceed to show that Christianity gives fuller and ultimate
solution to those and all other problems."

The intention is also not to inquire whether "Hinduism has some positive
religious values which are wanting in Christianity"; for that is "not
logically tenable", believing as they do that Christianity is "the true
revealed religion for all humanity." But they are prepared to look at
particular values more intensely realized by some Hindu sages which may
direct "the Christian back to his own religion, in which he finds the
same values more naturally embedded." This position is not without its
modesty. It seems that Christians, if not Christianity, too can learn a
few things even from the heathens, though these things are nothing but
the neglected truths of their own religion.

But the participants soon forget the learning part and assume the
teaching role, probably due to compulsion of habit. They become
polemical. According to the procedure they laid down for themselves,
they take different Hindu categories of thought and spirit and show that
Christianity offers a better answer. One such category is
Teacher-Disciple or Guru-Shishya relationship, an important spiritual
institution in Hinduism. After discussing it, the participants find that
"the only person in whom the positive values of the Hindu Guru are best
verified is Christ."

Similarly, after discussing the Hindu concept of history, the colloquy
finds that the positive values found "in the Indian view of history have
their full meaning and natural setting in the Christian concept of
history."

The participants discuss Yoga too, its positive as well as its negative
aspects. At the end, they find that while in Christianity the negative
aspects are avoided, the positive aspects of Hindu Yoga "find their
natural setting and full meaning in Christianity. Non-dualism, and
dualism, Yoga absolutism and Bhakti personalism, Sankara and Ramanuja
are in different ways related to Christianity. The Christian worships
the Absolute of Sankara with the devotion of Ramanuja."

The Hindu concept of Avatarhood is discussed. It is found inferior to
the Christian one. "Christ's incarnation is a unique fact, and not
repeated in every age... He is true Godhead in true humanity."

Hindu symbolism and idol-worship have some positive points but the
dangers are far greater. "The fundamental defect of Hindu idol-worship
is that it is purely a human attempt so to say to trans-substantiate the
material things into the divine without a prior incarnation, namely,
without a-divine guarantee which assumes the human symbol, into the
divine economy of self-communication to man. Man cannot by his own
powers raise himself to the divine level, which far transcends him.
Hence the Hindu conviction that when the priest recites the prayers over
the idol it becomes inhabited by the deity is gratuitous assumption and
hence superstitious."

But it is different with Christian symbolism. For example, "the
Eucharist marks the culmination of human symbolism. In it the food of
man is turned into the body and blood of God. There man's attempt to
trans-substantiate the material world into the divine is wonderfully
realized - the Eucharist may be taken as a summary and completion of all
human endeavour to grasp the divine Reality in human symbols. Hence it
should form the converging point of all religious cult."

Hindu Bhakti too has more demerits than merits. Its chief defects are
that (1) "the notion of love itself is not perfect;" (2) "there is no
integration between knowledge and love," - one has to choose between
them; and (3) it lacks a "perfect concept of alterity and there is no
proper concept of sin."

Nevertheless, the Bhakti of a Hindu could still be a "preparation for
the final confrontation with the personal God who manifests Himself in
the Christian Revelation."

Discussing *jnânamârga*, the colloquy finds that the Hindu doctrine of
Advaita is irreconcilable with the Christian doctrine of Trinity, but
even that could become a step to the understanding of the doctrine of
the three Persons in One. How? First, by opposing polytheism. Second, by
its strong metaphysical bias for unity: "Only against the background of
the unique and absolute of God can the doctrine of the Trinity and the
immortal personality of man be properly understood. God in his
providence insisted on the strictest monotheism, and uncompromisingly
exterminated all tendency to polytheism, in the chosen people in the Old
Testament, before revealing against the background of the monotheism the
Trinity of Persons in that one God, in the New Testament. Hence Advaita
with its strong metaphysical basis can be a *proper preparatio
evangelica* for an understanding of the Christian message."

**V**

Once it is admitted that Christianity is the uniquely true religion, the
summit towards which all religions are advancing, the liberal
theologians will not mind conceding certain subordinate spiritual
qualities and attributes and values to Hinduism. In this expansive mood,
they generously admit that some European Christians "have felt the
wealth of India's religious past." The deep inferiority which India has
inculcated has even "led some of them to deepen their-own Christian
inferiority." Some of them have been "struck by the vision of the spirit
of poverty preached by Christ (but) so fully and cheerfully practised by
millions in India." The religious outlook in which everything of every
event is looked upon as a work of God, a manifestation of the divine,
has impressed many. Many have noted with admiration "the so to say
national aptitude for deep prayer and the contemplation of divine things
which Indians manifest."

When the Pope came to India in 1964, he "praised" India's deep
spirituality. But it is in the fight of the above approach that this
praise should be understood. It was not anything spontaneous or genuine.
It was diplomatic and deceptive. In fact, it amounted to cheating, if
cheating includes a double-tongued approach, half-truths spoken and full
aim unstated. The Pope's "praise" concealed more than it revealed. It
meant to say: Hinduism is very good. It is a useful preparation for
Christianity. The Pope praised Hinduism for its *secondaries*, hiding a
condemnation of its *primaries*.

His deputy in India, Cardinal Gracias, could afford to be more candid in
putting forth the unstated aim. He bemoaned: "It is a matter of grave
concern for us that hardly three percent of the local population in
India could so far be drawn to receive the Grace of Christ over the last
several centuries." The strategy may change but the aim remains fixed.
It may be a soft-spoken approach now, but the goal is unaltered. Liberal
Christianity is like Euro-Communism; the tactics and the slogans have
changed but the mind remains the same.

In the past, in the heyday of British imperialism, fanatic Christians
like Carey and Wilberforce were telling their people something like
this: "The natives live in the sin and superstition and darkness of
paganism. Surely God has not granted us their charge for nothing. He
wants us to bring them to the light of the Gospel, to convert them to
Christianity." But it seems the rulers were less convinced about the
benefits of Christianity to the natives. But in a Christian country,
they could not express this feeling or belief too openly. So they took
to a more equivocal course. They pretended to agree with the crusaders
but counter-argued thus: "You are very correct in your judgement of the
natives. But precisely because they are superstitious, we must go slow
with them and their religious beliefs; if we touch their religion, it
would become a law and order problem and we may lose the Empire itself."
This attitude of the British rulers saved India from the worst ravages
of Christian missionaries.

But now the political equation has changed and also the ideas have
changed. What was possible a hundred years ago is no longer possible
now. The Church is also less powerful now even in countries nominally
Christian. Its pretentious claims jar on the more sophisticated ears and
minds of the age. So a new liberal - or at least liberal-sounding -
theology is in the offing, which is trying to give up the old method of
forthright denunciation and taking the new method of partial praise, a
grudging (and sometimes even genuine) appreciation of the values of a
religion they aim to supplant.

Behind the praise of the neo-theologians, we can hear, if our ears are
attentive, another message expressed sometimes openly, sometimes *sotto
voce*. They are saying something like this: "You are too good to remain
what you are. Your destiny is to become Christians. We see in your
country spiritual things deep and uncommon. But God could not have
planted these things amongst you in vain. He must have been preparing
you for Christianity, for blessing you with the truth he blessed us
with; in short, he must have been aiming to make you as good as we are."

The neo-theologians admit that the Hindus have lived a life of
dedication and constant quest, that they have pondered over things
spiritual from times immemorial. But, in spite of that, somehow, the
*Truth* eluded them. Why? Because, as they seem to say, while the Hindus
had the seeking, they lacked the key. They did not know Jesus Christ.
God has to be found not in God but in Jesus Christ and the Church.

The Bible says: Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and you shall
find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. But to the Christian
theologians, seeking and knocking, however dedicated and sincere, are
not enough. For don't we meet the strange phenomenon that while the
Hindus asked, as the neo-theologians are ready to grant, God gave it to
the Christians; while the Hindus sought, the Christians found; while the
Hindus knocked, it was opened unto the Christians. A mystery, perhaps a
Trinitarian mystery, perplexing to the heathens but easily understood by
the Christians.

The Christian theologians call pagan religions *natural*, while their
own they call *revealed*. In this they pay to pagans an unintended
compliment. The opposite of the *natural* is not the revealed, but the
*artificial*, and there is something artificial about the Christian
religion. A natural religion means that it is about things inherent and
intrinsic; that it is about a seeking of the heart which is innate; that
it is about *man* in his deeper search, and not about a particular
person or a church; that it does not deal with the accidental but with
the universal. Its truths are not adventitious, added from *outside* by
a *sole* leader or institution; on the contrary, these reside in the
"cave of the heart," to put it in the Upanishadic phrase. These truths
are also not fortuitous, happening by a lucky chance consisting in the
appearance of a particular individual, or in the crusading labours of a
church burdened with a self-assumed role. On the contrary, these truths
happen because man in his innermost being, by *nature*, is a child of
divine light. Man grows from *within*, by an inherent law of his being,
responding to *That* which he already is secretly. The *purusha* or
*person* within responds to the *purusha* without. *Tat tvam asi; tat
aham asmi; sah tadasti*. (You are That; I am That; he is That.)

Christianity has two pillars: a narrow piety and a word-juggling
theology. What is true in it is also found in other religions which it
supplanted in the past and which it continues to do in the present as
well; what it claims to be unique to it is merely intellectual bluff.

Christian theology, as it has developed, is not a product of a tranquil
and purified heart; rather, it derives from a mind prejudiced,
self-centered and self-righteous, a mind contentious and cantankerous,
out to prove the other fellow in the wrong. It is an artificial mental
construct with very little spirituality in it. Above all, like Islam, it
is inwoven with bigotry and fanaticism and lacks charity, understanding
and the deeper vision of the spirit.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) First published in a New Delhi quarterly, *Manthan*, Volume 4.
No. 3 (May 1982), and subsequently reprinted as a chapter in Hinduism
*vis-a-vis Christianity and Islam*, Voice of India, New Delhi,
1982,1984, and 1992.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
