+++
title = "06 CHAPTER VI THE NATURE OF NATIONAL FRONTIERS"

+++
**CHAPTER VI**

**THE NATURE OF NATIONAL FRONTIERS**

At times and in certain situations, the frontiers of a nation are not
merely physical; they are also ideological. We shall never be able to
overcome our predicament vis-a-vis Pakistan unless we understand her
ideological frontiers and define our own.

Compared to us Pakistan is much smaller in size and population. She is
much poorer in industrial infrastructure and other resources. Yet she
has attacked us not once but three times in the short span of 24 years.
And she is preparing feverishly to attack us again as soon as she feels
that the time is opportune. This is not the normal behaviour of a normal
nation. This is evidence enough that the basic motive of her behaviour
lies elsewhere than in the cold-blooded calculations of military
balance, strategic or tactical.  
 

PAKISTAN: SPEARHEAD OF AN ISLAMIC BLOC

The mullahs, military generals and the mass media in Pakistan have all
along harked back to the “glorious deeds” of Mahmud Ghaznavi and
Muhammad Ghuri when “the accursed Hindu kafirs had a true taste of the
Islamic sword.” They have always looked at us with contempt as “cowardly
banias” who are bound to surrender in course of time. We on our part
have always dismissed this strain in her stance as mere poetry which may
entertain her own people but which we should not take seriously. We have
never tried to pin down this strain as an ideological strain which goes
beyond Pakistan’s physical frontiers, and makes her a member of the
larger Islamic world sprawling away from both sides of our borders.

Medieval Muslim historians tell us that Mahmud Ghaznavi used to be
highly praised and heartily congratulated by all Islamic countries of
that time, whenever he returned from India with plunder and prisoners of
war, and with idols of Hindu Gods which were placed on the doorsteps to
mosque in Ghazni, Baghdad, Mecca and Medina for being trampled upon by
the faithful. Whatever their own differences with Mahmud Ghaznavi, in
this context they were all agreed that he was doing the work of Allah
and had the blessings of the Prophet to support him. The Islamic state
of Pakistan has not been able to repeat the exploits of Mahmud Ghaznavi
so far. But whenever she has attacked us she has been applauded by the
rest of the Islamic world, and has received all round support in her
role of a *mujãhid* (holy warrior) in spite of the fact that we have
been espousing all Islamic causes abroad with a fervour and consistency
which puts to shame the Islamic states themselves.

Till the end of the ‘sixties, the support which Pakistan received from
the Islamic countries was mostly moral support because the latter were
in no position to extend much material aid. But since the early
‘seventies, the oil-rich Islamic countries have been providing the
massive finances which enable Pakistan to build and maintain her huge
military machine including her nuclear establishment. The United States
may be selling the sophisticated hardware which Pakistan has been piling
up with frantic speed. But the bill is being footed largely by the
oil-rich Islamic states of West Asia and North Africa. This should be
sufficient to prove that Pakistan is not an individual state. On the
contrary, it has become the spearhead of an Islamic Bloc which is
increasingly becoming not only more prosperous and better equipped
militarily but also more fundamentalist, more self-righteous, and more
militant for the spread of Islam.

Nor are Pakistan’s ideological frontiers confined to the Islamic
countries alone; they are spread out to a sizeable section of our own
population. We have never faced frankly and honestly the unpleasant fact
that, with some honourable exceptions, our Muslim countrymen, by and
large, are supporters of Pakistan and other Islamic countries as against
us whenever they have to choose between the two. There is a conspiracy
of silence about this stark reality. Admitting it even privately to
ourselves, not to speak of discussing it publicly, will be a serious
slur on our Secularism. But the truth cannot be wished away so easily.
And a price has away to be paid for turning away from truth,
particularly when the security of a nation is involved.  
 

THE CHARACTER OF OUR STATE

It is in this context that Dr. Misra’s book assumes an added importance.
He has emphasised it again and again that the Rajput states of medieval
India fought so tenaciously and for so long in the face of an inveterate
foe not only because they were trying to preserve certain physical
frontiers but also because they were trying to protect a social order
and a cultural complex created and sustained by Sanatana Dharma. These
Rajput states were Hindu states in consciousness as well as character.
They stood firm and spared no sacrifice because they were proud of their
ancient Hindu heritage, and looked down with contempt on the barbarism
represented by Islam. They failed in the final round only because they
could not pursue a forward policy due to their lack of understanding
about the nature of Islamic aggression, and in the absence of a central
state which could have pooled their resources, maintained a standing
army, and updated the art of warfare.

Today we have a central state, a standing army, and some sort of a
central government. We have also proved in the several contests forced
upon us by Pakistan so far that we have not seriously neglected our
armoury or the art of warfare. All that may lull some people into a
belief that we can take care of Pakistan whenever she goes berserk. But
the advantageous factors in our favour are more apparent than real. We
are self-confident vis-a-vis Pakistan only because we have not been able
to see the deeper forces working towards our defeat and ruination in the
long run. And that long run may prove to be not so long this time
because of the changed character of warfare.

The state which we have in India today does not resemble even remotely
the Rajput states of that period. By no stretch of imagination can it be
called a Hindu state. Far from harbouring any Hindu consciousness or
having a Hindu character, it does not even reflect the objective reality
that Hindus constitute an overwhelming majority in this country. And
instead of recognising Islam as a species of barbarism, it patronises
Islam as an integral part of the Indian heritage. Thus, for all
practical purposes, this state is a legacy of the bygone British Raj
rather than a conscious creation of any national spirit or vision. The
constitution which controls and moves the structure of this state is
only a mechanical device for keeping together what it regards as a
conglomeration of contending communities - religious, racial, regional -
rather than an embodiment of any national aspirations, in spite of all
its high-flown verbiage borrowed in bits and parts from several models
in the West. It has singularly failed to touch the heart of the Hindu
masses whom it treats like handicapped children sunk in stupor and
sloth.

On top of it, the mind which has dominated the central government and
evolved its policies since the dawn of independence is infinitely worse
so far as Hindu society and culture are concerned. This mind is not only
self-alienated; it is also self-righteous in the name of what it
describes as Secularism, Socialism and some other slogans borrowed from
abroad and broadcast with intense zeal. It not only repudiates with
repugnance any suggestion (which is often made by the so-called
minorities) that it shares any Hindu sentiments; it also carries within
it a deep-seated anti-Hindu animus. It frowns upon every expression of
Hindu culture in our public life in the name of what it flaunts as
composite culture which most of the time means the culture of Islam
imported into this country by force of arms.  It denounces as Hindu
communalism even the most dignified defence of some perfectly legitimate
Hindu causes while it smiles indulgently or looks the other way when
Muslim hooligans take out violent demonstrations in support of causes
which have not even the slightest relevance to this country. And it
smells Hindu chauvinism in whatever small effort Hindu society manages
to make in order to strengthen itself, while it aids and abets the
consolidation of highly aggressive Islamic forces financed by foreign
powers.  
 

THE TEMPER OF OUR POLITICS

What is still worse is the role of our political parties which are quite
a few in number but which shout the same set of slogans. All these
parties scowl or shy away when Hindus plead that they also have a case.
But all of them incorporate more and more Muslim demands in their
manifestos, and feel fulfilled when mullahs and Muslim politicians
condescend to speak from their platforms. The more malevolent the mullah
and the Muslim politician, the better it is for the secular credentials
of the party concerned. All these political parties corrode the
cohesiveness of Hindu society by fragmenting it into smaller and smaller
vote-banks on the basis of caste, or sect, or language, or some other
secondary differences which no normal society can do without. At the
same time, all of them contribute to the consolidation of a single
Muslim vote-bank which, in turn, blackmails them further, and which has
come to wield an influence and a representation out of all proportion to
its known numerical strength.

The vote-hungry politics which is promoted by these highly sloganised
parties is practically devoid of any public content even of a local
character, not to speak of any national concern. This politics has
increasingly come to revolve round the personal ambitions of wily
politicians rather than round any national policies or programmes. The
more dishonest the politician, the better he fares in public life.
Politics has become a rat - race in which every politician who wants to
survive has to play the game according to certain well-understood but
seldom-spoken rules. Most politicians except those in power have to live
from hand to mouth and be always on the look out for more and more money
to meet the mounting election expenses. This has opened the floodgates
of corruption by foreign money which, in recent years, has come to mean
Muslim money flowing in ever larger volumes from the oil-rich Islamic
countries. One cannot help suspecting that the Secularism sold by
certain political parties, in an all-round atmosphere of cynicism, is
more a matter of financial compulsion than a matter of conviction. The
Islamic countries which pay for the conspicuous consumption and high
lifestyle of some politicians, particularly in the opposition camp, can
always call the tune.

Such a soft-brained government and a short-sighted politics can hardly
be in a position to evolve or employ those forward or long-term policies
which are needed more urgently now than ever before. Such a government
and politics are most likely to fritter away all their strength and
energies, including those of our armed forces, in one frustrating
enterprise after another. What has actually happened after our conflicts
with Pakistan in the past illustrates the point. The conflicts were not
at all of our own seeking and were imposed upon us by a sabre-rattling
Islamic state. Our armed forces carried out creditably the tasks
assigned to them. But every time the politicians allowed the aggressor
to escape without paying any penalty whatsoever for his unprovoked
aggression. The victories won by our armed forces on the field of battle
at the cost of so much blood and sacrifice were bartered away by the
politicians on the tables of diplomacy in exchange for nothing more
substantial than international applause.

Take the much trumpeted triumph in 1971. Our armed forces did everything
that was expected of them, and gave a good account on every front. But
at the diplomatic table in Simla we surrendered every advantage we had
gained in exchange for a set of signatures on some pieces of paper by a
thousand-year-war demagogue, Bhutto, who went back and immediately
launched an ambitious project for making nuclear bombs. We are now
holding seminars and making statements in Parliament about this new
threat from an old adversary. Again, we freed the people of East
Pakistan from the tyranny and terror of their “brothers in faith” from
West Pakistan. But we did precious little to ensure that Bangladesh does
not revert to the old ways of her parent state. The result is there for
everyone to see. Bangladesh has proclaimed that it is an Islamic state,
and has become as hostile to us as Pakistan has always been. She is not
only converting by force or hounding out her Hindu and Buddhist
population but also pouring hundreds of thousands of Muslim infiltrators
through our borders in Assam, Bengal and Bihar. The blood shed by our
jawans and the sacrifices made by our civil population in shouldering
the burdens of war, have gone in vain.  
 

HINDU SOCIETY SHOULD SEIZE THE STATE

Hindu society has to make up its mind that it is no longer going to
tolerate this degenerate politics which has been disintegrating Hindu
society on the one hand, and consolidating the Muslim *millat* on the
other. Only a politics created by Hindu consciousness and guided by
Hindu ideology can retrieve the situation and meet the challenge of
Islamic imperialism.

Hindu society has to stand up unitedly and firmly to seize the central
state while it still functions as a democracy. It may not function as a
democracy for long, looking at the Muslim, Marxist and dynastic
pressures which are deflecting it towards dictatorship, if not in name,
at least in spirit. Hindu society has to see to it that the central
state acquires a Hindu character and gets infused with Hindu
consciousness, and that the central government functions as a Hindu
government in a Hindu homeland.

Dr. Misra’s book will help Hindu society not only in acquiring the
self-confidence that Islamic imperialism can be beaten back by Hindu
heroism but also in evolving and employing a forward policy in the
absence of which Hindu heroism had failed in the past. That policy has
to be two-pronged - one directed against the ideological frontiers of
Pakistan in the world at large and the other against those frontiers at
home.  
 

PURSUIT OF FORWARD POLICIES

The first policy has to aim at destroying the bases of aggression. We
have to push forward our own ideological frontiers and free every land
from the stranglehold of Islam. We have plenty of friends in the forces
of humanism, rationalism and universalism with all of which our own
culture of Sanatana Dharma is in complete accord. We shall find these
friends even in Islamic countries. They are waiting to be mobilised and
made vocal. Let us not confuse these forces with the foreign policy
postures of particular countries. These forces are of a more permanent
and consistent character.

Secondly, we have to liberate our own Muslim masse from the stranglehold
of Mullahs and Muslim politicians. The Muslim masses are our own people
who have been alienated from their ancestral society and culture by the
ideology of Islam. On the other hand, the mullahs and Muslim politicians
are mostly descendants of foreign invaders - Arabs, Turks, Iranians -
who have not yet been cured of the conviction that India is their
patrimony bequeathed to them by the sword of their forefathers. Islam
sits lightly on the Muslim masses who otherwise share a lot with their
other countrymen. On the other hand, Islam is the only stock-in-trade of
mullahs and Muslim politicians without which they will fall headlong
from the prestigious pedestals on which they are perched at present. The
two have to be differentiated and dealt with differently. The Muslim
masses have to be won back to the national mainstream. The mullahs and
Muslim politicians have to be isolated and immobilised.

In recent years, the mullahs and Muslim politicians have been receiving
liberal financial assistance and sustained moral support from the
oil-rich Islamic countries. Their tone has continued to become more and
more aggressive. They have frequently fomented riots in which Muslim
mobs have turned violent not only against their Hindu neighbours but
also against the security forces sent to restore law and order. The
so-called Muslim minority is thus being fast converted into a far-flung
fifth-column which will not hesitate to collaborate with foreign
aggression as soon as that aggression shows some signs of success. This
time the collaboration is not likely to be confined to spying as in the
period surveyed by Dr. Misra. This time it will inevitably develop into
wide-spread sabotage in the rear of our fighting forces.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


