+++
title = "06  FOUR AN INDEFATIGABLE SOVIET ENTHUSIAST"

+++
FOUR  
AN INDEFATIGABLE SOVIET ENTHUSIAST

We have seen in the foregoing chapter that Pandit Nehru held up the
"Soviet experiment" up to 1934 as being of special interest to India
because-in his opinion "conditions in this country \[India\] are very
much the same as in Russia before the Revolution". What were the
similarities? First of all, Russia before the Revolution was a backward
country as India was in 1934. Secondly, Russia before the Revolution had
a huge language and minorities problem, the same as we had in India in
1934. Russia had solved both these problems. India might, he argued,
very well learn a lesson from her.

Now, it is very doubtful if Soviet Russia had solved any of these two
problems which obsessed Pandit Nehru in India in the year 1934. First of
all, as regards economic development, the standard of living of the
broad masses in Soviet Russia is even today, in the year 1961, somewhat
lower than that which obtained there in 1913 so far as consumer goods
are concerned. It was almost at starvation level in 1934. All official
Soviet statistics admit this glaring truth. The Soviet apologists argue
that the Soviet Government had to concentrate overwhelmingly on heavy
industry in order to speedily build up an invulnerable defence system
against what they describe as "the capitalist encirclement". How
"invulnerable" this defence system was became known to the whole world
when it collapsed against the very first onslaught of Hitler's armies.
And the "defensive" purpose it served was revealed when, after the
defeat of Hitler, the Red Army moved into many East European countries
and installed one puppet regime after another.

Secondly, as regards the solution of language and minorities problem
inside the Soviet Union, the way the various linguistic and cultural
groups have been steam-rollered into a predetermined communist pattern
by means of overwhelming force and ceaseless terror, may very well
appeal to certain people, but it can hardly be called a solution. Today,
no nationality in the Soviet Union retains its age-old script. Every
age-old language has been heavily Russianised through a slanted system
of centralised education. The right to religious worship has been
retained in theory but abolished in practice. And even the homelands of
these national minorities have been, over the years, heavily colonised
by an increasing number of Russian settlers. Moreover, all these areas
have been ruthlessly exploited in terms of manpower and raw-materials
etc. so that today they are no better than colonial dependencies of an
imperial metropolis which is Russia proper. That sort of solution is
possible anywhere in the world and at any time. The fact that the
democratic conscience of many countries rules out that sort of solution
is a fact in their favour and not a fact against their capacity, as
people like Pandit Nehru presuppose.

But let us suppose that Soviet Russia has solved her economic and
minorities problems. Does that mean anything to India? For anyone who is
aware of the deep dissimilarities between the two countries, the Soviet
experiment should be of no significance to India. India is several times
smaller in size than the so-called Soviet Union, but has twice that much
population. How can a capital-intensive development such as has been
tried in the Soviet Union achieve anything in India except mass
unemployment and widespread misery such as is already obvious as a
result of the Second Five Year Plan which was largely based on the
Soviet model? The frightful folly involved in recommending the Soviet
model to India should be crystal clear to anyone except such juveniles
as Jawaharlal Nehru.

Nor has India ever had a minorities or language problem like that which
Soviet Russia inherited from the Czarist days. The large number of
smaller nationalities inside the Soviet Union, with the possible
exception of Ukrain and Byelorussia, had nothing in common with Russia
proper or with each other in terms of language, and were more or less
self-contained in respect of religion, culture, and society. Most of
them were specific nations conquered by the Czarist armies. The
Bolsheviks promised them self-determination and the right to secede from
Russia, and thus obtained their help in overthrowing the Czarist regime.
But as soon as the Bolsheviks were in power their claims for
self-determination were denounced as "bourgeois consciousness instigated
by imperialism", their elites were systematically destroyed, and their
revolts drowned in rivers of blood.

The so-called minorities inside India have never been separate nations
in any sense of the term. India might have been divided into so many
separate states several times in her long history. But every linguistic
and cultural group inside India has always claimed a common ancestry
since times immemorial. All of them have always been parts and parcels
of one single nation which is characterised by a genius for unity in
diversity. Even our Muslims and Christians who have been responsible for
creating communal discord have nothing to distinguish them in terms of
language and a large part of their culture. It is only their religion
which stands apart from the religion of the vast majority of India. But
a religion like Hinduism is quite capable of curing these creeds of
their common vice of intolerance, and accommodating them in its vast
mansion of catholic spirituality. What is needed is a revival of the
religious spirit and the true traditions of India's past. It is only
because India's leadership during the last 40 or 50 years has been in
the hands of self-alienated people like Pandit Nehru that this solution
has not been tried and a monstrosity like Pakistan has come into
existence. But that is another story. That does not prove that India has
any minorities or language problem like that of Soviet Russia.

The only explanation for Pandit Nehru's nonsensical admiration of Soviet
Russia is that his mind was rendered imbecile because he refused to read
anything which was not straight-forward communist propaganda. Had he
cared even to glance at an array of highly objective and analystic
studies of the Soviet Union such as had appeared in the West and were
available in India several years before lie compiled his *Glimpses* by
copiously copying from communist handouts, he would not have remained
such a juvenile regarding the Soviet Union as he is even today, in the
middle of 1961. But, perhaps, Pandit Nehru who had been denied fairy
tales in his childhood because Motilalji wanted him to be educated on
the most modern pattern from the West, was in search of a fairyland.
Communist propaganda informed him that such a fairyland existed in
Soviet Russia. And he closed his eyes and went into a trance from which
he has never descended, notwithstanding his sycophants' recurring
reassurance that he has been "maturing of late". To the majority of his
intelligent countrymen, his "mature mind" is revealed in his writings
about Soviet Russia, particularly in the *Glimpses of World History*
which he has not had the decency to disclaim even after reading
Khrushchev's verdict on Stalin's Russia about which he has been most
enthusiastic. We give a few more samples.

The Five Year Plan, according to Pandit Nehru, brought many good results
with it. One such good result was the growth of population which
phenomenon he loathes so much in his own country. Says he: "The
tremendous growth of the Soviet Union was in itself a remarkable sign of
prosperity. It was not due, as in America, to immigration from outside.
It showed that in spite of the privations and hardships of the people
there was, as a general rule, no actual starvation. A severe system of
rationing managed to supply the absolutely necessary articles of food to
the population. *Competent observers tell us that this rapid growth of
population is largely due to a feeling of economic security among the
people*. Children are no longer a burden to the family, as the State is
prepared to look after them, to feed them and educate them. Another
reason is the growth of sanitation and medical facilities, which have
resulted in reducing the infant mortality rate from 27 to 12 percent. In
Moscow the general mortality rate in 1913 was over twenty-three per
thousand; in 1931 it was under thirteen per thousand."[1](#1)

Population experts the world over are unanimous that there is some
universally observable correlation between increasing poverty and
rapidly expanding population. We are observing this phenomenon in India
before our own eyes. But for Pandit Nehru, all laws of Nature had
changed in Soviet Russia simply because she had a communist regime.

Another good result, according to him, was spiritual solace: "Work
remains, and must remain, though in the future it is likely to be
pleasanter and lighter than in the trying early years of planning.
Indeed, the maxim of the Soviet Union is: 'He that will not work,
neither shall he eat.' But the Bolsheviks have added a new motive for
work: the motive to work for social betterment. In the past, idealists
and stray individuals have been moved to activity by this incentive, but
there is no previous instance of society as a whole accepting and
reacting to this motive. The very basis of capitalism was competition
and individual profit, always at the expense of others. This profit
motive is giving place to the social motive in the Soviet Union and, as
an American writer says, workers in Russia are learning that, 'from the
acceptance of mutual dependence comes independence from want or fear'.
This elimination of the terrible fear of poverty and insecurity, which
bears down upon the masses everywhere, is a great achievement. *It is
said that this relief has almost put an end to mental diseases in the
Soviet Union*."[2](#2)

At this point, even he felt that he had waxed too eloquent about Soviet
achievements. He wrote: "I feel tempted to tell you about the progress
in education and science and culture generally in the USSR, but I must
restrain myself."[3](#3) His enthusiasm, however, refused to accept any
restraints. And he went on: "I shall tell you just a few odd facts which
might interest you. *The educational system in Russia is supposed by
many competent judges to be the best and most up-to-date in existence*.
Illiteracy has almost been ended, and the most surprising advances have
been made in backward areas like Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan in Central
Asia."[4](#4) The Soviet system of brain-washing and regimentation was
never noticed by him.

The Soviet children could not have possibly missed this paradise. Pandit
Nehru wrote: "The old palaces of the Tsars and the nobility have now
become museums and rest-houses and sanatoria for the people... I suppose
the old palaces now serve the purpose of children and young people.
Children and the young are the favoured persons in Soviet land today,
and they get the best of everything, even though others might suffer
lack. It is for them that the present generation labours, for it is they
who will inherit the socialised and scientific State, if that finally
comes into existence in their time."[5](#5) He never heard of those more
than a million orphaned children who wandered all over Soviet Russia
after Stalin's forced collectivization had either killed off their
parents or sent them to forced labour camps. Quite a large number of
these children were later on physically destroyed by Stalin's orders
because they were "spreading disease". Nor did he ever learn about those
"child heroes" who were acclaimed in the Soviet press and by the Soviet
Government because they betrayed their parents to the Soviet secret
police.

So, all in all, "The Soviet Union is an exciting land with all these
changes taking place from day to day and hour to hour. But no part of it
is so exciting and fascinating as the desert steppes of Siberia and the
old-world valleys of Central Asia, both cut off for generations from the
drift of human change and advance, and now bounding ahead at a
tremendous pace."[6](#6) He said all this without ever visiting these
areas, though it is a safe bet that such a visit would have hardly
helped him to descend from his trance. He would not have noticed the
slave labour camps with which Siberia stood dotted, or he would have
found some high-sounding explanation for them also, as he did for so
many other Soviet crimes.

Finally, he returned to the eternal communist chorus of the "peaceful"
intentions of his ideal land. Soviet Russia had been fomenting treason
and trouble in every country of the world with the help of her communist
fifth-columns. But he could not see it. He said: "Soviet Russia has been
behaving internationally very much as a satisfied Power, avoiding all
trouble, and trying to keep peace at all costs. This is the opposite of
a revolutionary policy which would aim at fomenting revolution in other
countries. It is a national policy of building up socialism in a single
country and avoiding all complications outside. Necessarily, this
results in compromises with imperialist and capitalist Powers. But the
essential socialist basis of Soviet economy continues, and the success
of this is itself the most powerful argument in favour of
socialism."[7](#7)

But on his own saying the Soviet Union did not have to bother itself
about the outside world. The capitalist system, according to him, was
involved in a crisis from which it could never salvage itself. He wrote:
"The conflict between capitalism and democracy is inherent and
continuous; it is often hidden by misleading propaganda and by the
outward forms of democracy, such as parliaments, and the sops that the
owning classes throw to the other classes to keep them more or less
contented. A time comes when there are no more sops left to be thrown,
and then the conflict between the two groups comes to a head, for now
the struggle is for the real thing, economic power in the State. When
that stage comes, all the supporters of capitalism, who had so far
played with different parties, band themselves together to face the
danger to their vested interests. Liberals and such-like groups
disappear, and the forms of democracy are put aside. *This stage bas now
arrived in Europe and America, and fascism, which is dominant in some
form or other in mast countries, represents that stage*. Labour is
everywhere on the defensive, not strong enough to face this new and
powerful consolidation of the forces of capitalism. And yet, strangely
enough, the capitalist system itself totters and cannot adjust itself to
the new world. It seems certain that even if it succeeds in surviving,
it will be but another stage in the long conflict. For modern industry
and modern life itself, under any form of capitalism, are battlefields
where armies are continually clashing against each other."[8](#8) He
could not foresee this very "fascism" in Europe and America coming to
Stalin's rescue when Stalin and his Soviet experiment were almost
destroyed by the Nazi hordes.

He was under the spell of communist theories about the "capitalist"
world, and went on: "The Soviet Union in Europe and Asia stands today a
continuing challenge to the tottering capitalism of the western world.
While trade depression and slump and unemployment and repeated crises
paralyse capitalism, and the old order gasps for breath, the Soviet
Union is a land full of hope and energy and enthusiasm, feverishly
building away and establishing the socialist order. And this abounding
youth and life, and the success the Soviet Union has already achieved,
are impressing and attracting thinking people all over the
world."[9](#9) Naturally, he imagined that he and his type represented
"thinking people all over the world". But what he represented at that
time or, for that matter, even today is a band of self-alienated
Soviet-addicts whom materialistic education from the West is multiplying
fast in every corner of the globe.

He added a Postscript to this book on November 14, 1938. It carried his
comments on many countries of the world. Coming to the Soviet Union, he
admitted: "The First Five Year Plan met with general success though it
failed in particulars, especially in regard to the quality of the goods
produced. There were untrained mechanics, and transport also largely
failed. The concentration on heavy industry led to shortage of goods for
consumption and to a lowering of standards."[10](#10)

But the very next moment he burst out with hope: "But this plan laid the
foundations of future progress by rapidly industrialising Russia and
collectivizing her agriculture. The Second Five Year Plan (1933-37)
changed the emphasis from heavy to light industry, and aimed at getting
rid of the deficiencies of the first plan and at producing consumer's
goods. *Great progress was made and the standards of life went up, and
are continually going up. Culturally and educationally, and in many
other ways, the advance all over the Soviet Union has been remarkable*.
Anxious to continue this advance and to consolidate its socialist
economy, Russia consistently followed a peace policy in international
affairs. In the League of Nations it stood for substantial disarmament,
collective security, and corporate action against aggression. It tried
to accommodate itself to the capitalist Great Powers and, in
consequence, Communist Parties sought to build up 'popular fronts' or
'joint fronts' with other progressive parties."[11](#11)

He himself sounded a jarring note. He wrote: "In spite of this general
progress and development, the Soviet Union passed throught a severe
internal crisis during this period. I have already told you of the
conflict between Stalin and Trotsky. *Various people, dissatisfied with
the existing regime, gradually drew together and it is said that some of
them even conspired with the fascist Powers*. Even Yagoda, the chief of
the Soviet intelligence (the G.P.U.), is stated to have been associated
with these people. In December 1934, Kirov, a leading member of the
Soviet Government, was murdered. The Government took stern action
against its opponents, and from 1937 there were a series of trials which
provoked great controversy all over the world, as many famous and
prominent individuals were involved in them. Among those tried and
sentenced were those who were called Trotskyites, and rightist leaders
(Rykov, Tomsky, Bukharin), and some high army officers, the chief of
whom was Marshal Tuchachevsky."[12](#12)

Had he been really objective he would have suspended his judgement on
these trials. But objectivity vis-a-vis the Soviet Union has never been
possible for him. He theorised: "It is difficult for me to express a
definite opinion about these trials or the events that led up to them,
as the facts are complicated and not clear. But it is undoubted that the
trials disturbed large numbers of people, including many friends of
Russia, and added to the prejudice against the Soviet Union. *Close
observers are of opinion that there was a big conspiracy against the
Stalinist regime and that the trials were bonafide*. It also seems to be
established that there was no mass support behind the conspiracy, and
that the reaction of the people was definitely against the opponents of
Stalin. Nevertheless, the extent of the repression, which may have hit
many innocent persons also, was a sign of ill-health, and injured the
Soviet's position internationally."[13](#13)

Now we know and on no less an authority than that of Comrade Khrushchev
that these trials in the Soviet Union were monstrous frame-ups staged by
Stalin to establish his totalitarian dictatorship. Even at that time,
Pandit Nehru had only to read a small pamphlet by Trotsky, *I Stake My
Life*, to realise that every case so carefully built up by Stalin had
been conclusively proved to be a framework of filthy lies. But he had no
time for "traitors" like Trotsky. For him, Stalin was the "driver of the
locomotive of history", as Soviet propaganda at that time presented that
fiend. And even today these shameful passages appear in every reprint of
his book. Anyone else would have at least added a foot-note. But Pandit
Nehru is Pandit Nehru. He cannot admit that he ever made a mistake.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Ibid., p. 859. Italics added. Now we know, that the population
in Stalin's Russia had declined steeply. (Footnote added in 1993)  

[2](#2a) Ibid., p. 861. Italics added.

[3](#3a) Ibid.

[4](#4a) Ibid., Italics added.

[5](#5a) Ibid., p. 862.

[6](#6a) Ibid.

[7](#7a) Ibid., pp. 864-65.  

[8](#8a) Ibid., p. 935. Italics added.  

[9](#9a) Ibid., pp. 939-40.  

[10](#10a) Ibid., pp . 965-66.

[11](#11a) Ibid., Italics added.  

[12](#12a) Ibid., Italics added.

[13](#13a) Ibid., Italics added.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
