+++
title = "16  FOURTEEN A FELLOW-TRAVELLER OF SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY-6"

+++
FOURTEEN  
A FELLOW-TRAVELLER OF SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY-6

The main plank of Congress propaganda after independence has been that
it drove out the British by means of non-violent non-cooperation and
brought freedom to the country. The Congress refers with particular
pride to the policies it pursued during the Second World War period,
particularly after the Quit India Resolution was passed in Bombay in
August 1942. To put it simply, we are asked to believe that British
imperialism in India got frightened because some Congressmen in some
parts of the country pulled down some telephone poles and broke a number
of letter-boxes before they were herded into British jails.

But this is one of the big lies known to human history. And deep down in
his own mind every Congressman knows that he is telling a lie. For,
whatever might have been the merit or demerit of Congress policies
before the Second World War broke out, the policies which the Congress
pursued during the War period were singularly barren and bankrupt. If
these policies succeeded in achieving anything, it was the partition of
the country and the planting of the communist Trojan horse squarely in
our midst.

As regards independence, it came because the War reduced Britain to a
bankrupt power, because the morale of the British Indian Army was broken
by Subhas Bose's Azad Hind Fauj, and because the British Labour Party,
in spite of Pandit Nehru's malicious insinuations against it in all his
books, really believed in the slogans it had raised. It is quite another
matter that the Congress inherited the power which the British were in a
hurry to part with. That does not prove that power came to the Congress
as a result of its own efforts, or that the Congress was qualified to
use that power in terms of its inner cohesion or intrinsic character.
The only thing it proves is that the departing British had retained a
sufficient measure of confidence in the Congress organisation. The
British believed that the Congress would be able to prolong the life of
that political system which they had imposed on India, and which they
regarded as the *sine qua non* of civilized life.

Let us look into this matter a little more closely, Even a novice in
politics comes to know pretty soon that every politics is ultimately a
balance between the moral merits of a case and the disposition of power
in support of that case. Projection of pure power without any moral
merit in the case concerned is bound to be defeated in the long run. And
mere moral merit without any disposition of power to back it up is never
able to convince the adversary. It is only when the two are combined
that a politics becomes operative and capable of achieving something in
the end.

Now, the cause of Indian freedom had become an excellent moral case by
the time the Second World War broke out. The sacrifices of several
generations in the service of that cause had created an atmosphere in
which the justice of that cause had come to be conceded by everybody
except the die-hard imperialists. Even the British establishment in
India was committed to India's freedom, at least in its public
pronouncements. That was a commitment which Britain's democratic
conscience or, if you please, pretensions could not refuse to make.

And the Indian National Congress, which represented India's aspiration
for freedom above every other organisation in the country, had also
become a power to be reckoned with. A series of struggles since the
Swadeshi Movement of 1905-09 had awakened the broad masses of India, and
the main current of power produced by that awakening had got channelled
into the Congress organisation. The fact that the British conceded to
the Congress the control of a considerable part of public administration
in seven or eight of the eleven Provinces during 1937-39, was proof
positive that the British were quite conscious of the scale of Congress
power.

But as soon as the Second World War broke out, the Congress started
frittering away the moral merits of its case as well as the unparalleled
power it had accumulated over the years. The nation at large expected
the Congress to play some courageous and concrete role in the midst of
that unprecedented opportunity. But the Congress did absolutely nothing
beyond passing one routine resolution after another. And when, in due
course, the country had become fully frustrated, the Congress led it
into a most inopportune adventure - the Quit India Movement of 1942. The
British broke the back of Congress hooliganism in less than a month and
extended all its patronage to the Muslim League and the Communist Party
of India. These two organisations monopolised the political field for
three long years and emerged at the end as powers to be reckoned with.

When the War broke out, the Congress had two courses of action open
before it. One course of action was that which had been pointed out by
Subhas Bose, namely to use Britain's difficulty as India's opportunity.
The situation in the country as well as in the world at large was quite
favourable for that course of action. The support which Bose had
received in two successive contests for Congress presidentship had
revealed a radical mood in the nation. And the British power was very
soon shown to be utterly bankrupt by the severe reverses it suffered in
Europe. Had the Congress gone in for an all-out offensive during
1939-40, the chances were that the British would have surrendered
virtual control of the country to the Congress. The Muslim League was as
yet too weak and diffident to have come in the way of such a
revolutionary seizure of power. The Communist Party of India was nowhere
on the scene except in the slogans of the Congress Left led by Pandit
Nehru.

But this course of action did not square with Mahatma Gandhi's moral
principles. And, fortunately or unfortunately, the Mahatma meant the
Congress in those days. Nor did this course of action square with past
Congress declarations vis-a-vis the international situation. The
Congress had pronounced its opposition to Fascism in so many of its
foreign policy resolutions. It had accused the Chamberlain Government of
appeasing Fascism and plotting war against the Soviet Union. The foreign
policy resolution which Pandit Nehru had presented to the Tripuri
session of the Congress after Bose had been worsted by Mahatma Gandhi
and deserted by his leftist supporters, had the most unmistakable
anti-fascist ring.

That resolution, which was passed unanimously, had said: "The Congress
records its entire disapproval of British Foreign Policy culminating in
the Munich Pact, the Anglo-Italian Agreement and the recognition of
rebel Spain. This policy has been one of deliberate betrayal of
democracy, repeated breach of pledges, the ending of the system of
collective security and cooperation with governments which are avowed
enemies of democracy and freedom. As a result of this policy, the world
is being reduced to a state of international anarchy where brutal
violence triumphs and flourishes unchecked and decides the fate of
nations, and in the name of peace stupendous preparations are being made
for the most terrible of wars. International morality has sunk so low in
Central and South-Western Europe that the world has witnessed with
horror the organised terrorism of the Nazi Government against people of
the Jewish race and the continuous bombing from the air by rebel forces
of cities and civilian inhabitants and helpless refugees in Spain. The
Congress dissociates itself entirely from British foreign policy which
has consistently aided the Fascist Powers and helped in the destruction
of democratic countries. The Congress is opposed to imperialism and
fascism alike and is convinced that world peace and progress require the
ending of both these. **In the opinion of the Congress, it is urgently
necessary for India to direct her own foreign policy as an independent
nation, thereby keeping aloof from both imperialism and fascism, and
pursuing her path of peace and freedom."[1](#1)

This resolution did not have a word to say about India's status
vis-a-vis a very serious world situation. it had merely paraphrased the
Comintern pronouncements current in those days. Providing the background
of this resolution, Pandit Nehru wrote the following words just after
Tripuri: "Our problems fill our minds. Yet the problem of problems
today, overshadowing all else, is the growth of gangsterism in
international affairs. The lights go out in Europe and elsewhere, the
shadows increase, and in the darkness freedom is butchered and brutal
violence reigns... Spain of the Republic and freedom is no more, only
the bright and imperishable memory of her glorious struggle remains.
Czechoslovakia used to be on the map of Europe; it is no more, and Herr
Hider's minions trample on her brave children, betrayed so shamefully by
England and France. From day to day we await in suspense what this
dictator or that says, anxiously we wonder what the next aggression will
be. How does all this affect India? Dare we ignore these tremendous
happenings in Europe? India's freedom will not be worth many days'
purchase if Fascism and Nazism dominate the world. **Our own existence
is bound up with the fate of freedom and democracy in the world. *Only a
union of freedom-loving peoples and their mutual cooperation can avert
the common peril. For that union India must stand*."[2](#2)

It could, therefore, be logically expected that once Britain and France
made up their mind to fight the Fascist Powers, the Congress would be
prepared to cooperate with them. In fact, Mahatma Gandhi drew this
conclusion when, immediately after the Second World War broke out in
Europe, he advised the Congress to give unconditional moral support to
the British Government of India. Writes Dr. Pattabhi Sitarammaya:
"Gandhi was of the view that we must offer our moral support, allow the
ministries to function and he had the confidence that through the
ministries, he could manoeuvre a declaration of Poorna Swaraja or
Dominion Status."[3](#3)

But Mahatma Gandhi was not aware that Pandit Nehru had committed the
Congress to an anti-fascist faith not because he linked prospects of
India's freedom with that faith but because his Soviet mentors had at
that time laid the line that way. Had the Soviet Union joined the
and-fascist war against the Fascist Powers, he would have felt no
difficulty in advocating cooperation with her British ally, as he did at
a later date. But the Soviet Union was now an ally of Nazi Germany, and
the Comintern apparatus everywhere had characterised the War as an
"Imperialist War". The Comintern had also invited the "people" in
Western countries as well as in the colonies of those countries to
convert the "imperialist war" into a "civil war" or a "war of
liberation" on the pattern advocated by Lenin in 1914-18. It was,
therefore, not at all possible for Pandit Nehru to advocate cooperation
with the British Government of India.

Pandit Nehru, however, could not straight-away ask the Congress to give
up its anti-fascist stand without at the same time exposing the
character of his own brand of anti-fascism. There was, therefore, an
acute impasse. Such an impasse is created for every "bourgeois"
organisation which permits its own inborn attitudes to be supplanted by
a communist clique working inside it. It is easy for a communist party
to stage an overnight somersault simply because a communist party is
indoctrinated from the beginning to place the interests of the Soviet
Union above every other interest. But a "bourgeois" organisation cannot
stage such a somersault without losing credibility. Nor can the
communist clique inside the "bourgeois" organisation push it beyond a
certain point without exposing itself. The next best thing is to
paralyse the "bourgeois" organisation and prevent it from following any
of its own characteristic courses of action.

And that is exactly what Pandit Nehru, aided by his communist clique in
the Congress, did in September 1939 when the Congress was called upon to
define its attitude towards the war crisis in Europe. The Congress Right
including Mahatma Gandhi was in favour of continuing in the Provincial
Ministries and bargaining for more power by means of cooperation and in
a constitutional manner. But that course was contrary to Pandit Nehru's
communist commitment. And he was by now a power to be reckoned with
inside the Congress High Command. The Mahatma could resist everyone
else, but he never liked to counter Jawaharlal. So Pandit Nehru had his
way and the Working Committee at Wardha came out with the clumsiest
resolution on Congress record till that date.

To start with, the resolution repeated its earlier slogans against
Fascism. "The Congress," it said, "has repeatedly declared its entire
disapproval of the ideology and practice of Fascism and Nazism and their
glorification of war and violence and the suppression of the human
spirit. It has condemned the aggression in which they have repeatedly
indulged and their sweeping away of well-established principles and
recognised standards of civilized behaviour. It has seen in Fascism and
Nazism the intensification of the principles of imperialism against
which the Indian people have struggled for many years. The Working
Committee must therefore unhesitatingly condemn the latest aggression of
the Nazi Government in Germany against Poland and sympathise with those
who resist it."[4](#4)

Next, the resolution expressed its hostility towards Britain and France
in the current communist fashion. That hostility could not be hinged
upon the current policies of these nations because they had at last come
out against Fascist aggression. So the resolution denounced these
nations for their past failures, and said: "The Committee are aware that
the Governments of Great Britain and France have declared that they are
fighting for democracy and freedom and to put an end to aggression. But
the history of the recent past is full of examples showing the constant
divergence between the spoken word, the ideals proclaimed and the real
motives and objectives. During the war of 1914-18, the declared war aims
were preservation of democracy, self-determination and the freedom of
small nations, and yet the very Governments which solemnly proclaimed
these aims entered into secret treaties embodying imperialist designs
for the carving up of the Ottomon Empire. While stating that they did
not want any acquisition of territory, the victorious Powers added
largely to their colonial domains. The present European war itself
signifies the abject failure of the Treaty of Versailles and of its
makers who broke their pledged word and imposed an imperialist peace on
the defeated nations. The one hopeful outcome of that Treaty, the League
of Nations, was muzzled and strangled at the outset and later killed by
its parent States. Subsequent history has demonstrated afresh how even a
seemingly fervent declaration of faith may be followed by an ignoble
desertion. In Manchuria the British Government connived at aggression,
in Abyssinia they acquiesced in it. In Czechoslovakia and Spain
democracy was in peril and it was deliberately betrayed, and the whole
system of collective security was sabotaged by the very powers who had
previously declared their firm faith in it."[5](#5) It may be mentioned
that when the Soviet Union was invaded by Nazi Germany at a later stage,
and Pandit Nehru proclaimed that the conflict had become a "People's
War", the sin of the Soviet Union in signing the Stalin-Hitler Pact in
1939, was never mentioned by him.

Then the resolution characterised the War as an "imperialist war" in the
current communist terminology. It said: "As the Working Committee view
past events in Europe, Africa and Asia, and more particularly past and
present occurrences in India, they fail to find any attempt to advance
the cause of democracy or self-determination or any evidence that the
present war declarations of the British Government are being, or are
going to be, acted upon. The true measure of democracy is the ending of
imperialism and fascism alike and the aggression that has accompanied
them in the past and the present. Only on that basis can a new order be
built up. In the struggle for that new world order, the Committee are
eager and desirous to help in every way. *But the Committee cannot
associate themselves or offer any cooperation in a war which is
conducted on imperialist lines and which is meant to consolidate
imperialism in India and elsewhere*."[6](#6)

The rest of the resolution extended an invitation to the British
Government to declare its war aims and to implement its defence of
democracy etc. in India. But in its sum total the resolution was a
bundle of contradictions. Pandit Nehru was himself quite conscious of
these contradictions contained in his resolution. He was to write later
on: "Thus the Congress laid down and frequently repeated a dual policy
in regard to War. There was, on the one hand, opposition to fascism,
nazism and Japanese militarism both because of their internal policies
and their aggression in other countries... On the other hand, there was
emphasis on the freedom of India, not only because that was our
fundamental objective for which we have continuously laboured but also
especially in relation to a possible War... *The two parts of this dual
policy did not automatically fit into each other; there was an element
of mutual contradiction in them*. But that contradiction was not of our
creation; it was inherent in the circumstances and was inevitably
mirrored in any policy that arose from circumstances."[7](#7)

The imbecility exhibited in this statement can hardly find a match in
normal political pronouncements. Politics is never and in no sense a
passive portrait of existing circumstances. It is, on the contrary, an
active exercise of will to overcome the circumstances and change them.
The powerful Congress organisation in 1939 was not expected to merely
register a pathetic protest against a world that had gone out of joint
and thus humbug a whole nation. The nation had put its faith in the
Congress. It was, therefore, the duty of the Congress to give a clear
call for action, whatever the path the logic of that action pointed out.

But the Congress had promoted an incurable Soviet-addict to positions of
power in its highest organs, and had permitted him to become its sole
spokesman on foreign policy as well as its second best mass leader. The
Congress had to pay the price. It had to remain in a state of paralysis
from September 1939 to August 1942. The only action taken by the
Congress during this period was the resignation of its Provincial
Ministries under direction from another resolution drafted by Pandit
Nehru and passed by the Congress Working Committee in October 1939. All
its other attempts at political action, whether it was an attempt at
cooperation with the British Government under the lead given by Rajaji
in early 1940 or an attempt at direct action through individual civil
disobedience, were half-hearted hazards devoid of all sense of
self-confidence.

And the Congress frittered away its moral reputation as an organisation
of fighters for human freedom when it refused to say even a single word
of protest against the Stalin-Hitler Pact, against the invasion of
Poland and Finland by the Soviet Red Army, and against the incorporation
of half of Poland and three independent Baltic States - Latvia,
Lithuania, Estonia - in the Soviet Slave Empire. The foreign policy
resolutions of the Congress subsequent to the lead given by Pandit Nehru
in September 1939 and till November 1940 when he was sent to jail, were
only full of sound and fury but devoid of any significant political
content.

P.C. Joshi, General Secretary of the Communist Party of India till 1947,
was to identify the inspiration behind these resolutions passed by the
Congress during what he called the "Imperialist Phase of the War", when
he reviewed them in November 1945. He observed:

"Among the national organisations of suppressed colonial peoples, the
Indian National Congress is not only the oldest but also the greatest.
It is the pride of our ancient and freedom-loving people. *On the
initiative of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and supported by younger
progressive elements within it all its declarations of international
policy have been based on and have popularised the following ideas:*

*"World Imperialism as a whole is one oppressive system of enslavers and
aggressors.*

*"World peoples form another camp of peace, freedom and democracy. The
Congress has always identified its ideas with this camp and also
recognised and welcomed the existence of the Socialist Soviet
Union*."[8](#8)

Here was a testimonial, if a testimonial was at all needed, in
appreciation of Pandit Nehru's services to the Soviet brand of Western
imperialism.[9](#9) His stand in the subsequent period, when the Soviet
Union got involved in the Second World War, supplied further evidence as
to where his real loyalties lay at that time.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) *The Background of India's Foreign Policy*, p. 58.  

[2](#2a) *The Unity of India*, pp. 148-50. Italics added.

[3](#3a) *The History of the Indian National Congress*, Vol. II, p. 130.

[4](#4a) *The Background of India's Foreign Policy*, p. 62.

[5](#5a) Ibid., p. 63.

[6](#6a) Ibid., p. 65. Italics added.

[7](#7a) *Discovery of India*, pp. 509-10. Italics added.  

[8](#8a) Cited in *Communist Reply to Congress Working Committee
Charges*, People's Publishing House, Bombay, 1945, pp. 22-23. Italics
added.  

[9](#9a) In a letter dated January 24, 1940 which Pandit Nehru wrote to
Mahatma Gandhi, he justified the Stalin-Hitler Pact and characterised
the war as an imperialist war (*A Bunch of Old Letters*, OUP, 1990, pp.
424-25). Footnote added in 1993.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
