+++
title = "10 CHAPTER X THE SEPARATIST SEWER POLLUTES THE NATIONAL MAINSTREAM"

+++
**CHAPTER X**  
**THE SEPARATIST SEWER POLLUTES THE NATIONAL MAINSTREAM**

There is one chapter in the history of our freedom movement against
British imperialism which has caused considerable confusion. This
chapter opened with the signing of the Lucknow Pact in December 1916,
and closed with the withdrawal of the first Non-Cooperation Movement by
Mahatma Gandhi in February 1922. Many politicians and historians have
looked back wistfully to those ‘wonderful days of Hindu-Muslim unity’
when the Indian National Congress and the All-India Muslim League held
their annual sessions in the same city and at the same time, passed
similar anti-imperialist resolutions, and raised similar slogans. Few
political scientists have cared to interpret correctly and consistently
the detailed documentation which has been available for quite some time
regarding the motives of the Muslim League and, later on, of the Mullahs
in making a common cause with the Congress. It looks like a wilful
refusal to face facts which sound unsavoury.

Shri H.V. Seshadri also seems to share this confusion when he refers to
‘A New Breeze Among Muslims’.^([1](#1)) He disapproves of the Lucknow
Pact which he very aptly describes as a ‘Sanction to
Separatism’.^([2](#2)) He also rejects the Khilafat agitation as ‘A
Himalayan Error’, which is a very sound summing up of a suicidal step
which was taken by the national movement under the leadership of Mahatma
Gandhi.^([3](#3)) Yet he seems to welcome the ‘New Breeze’ which brought
the Muslim League and the Mullas close to the Congress and led to an
ignominious surrender of cherished principles on the part of the latter.
It is obvious that there is some contradiction somewhere.  
 

**THERE WAS NO NEW BREEZE AMONG MUSLIMS**

Shri Seshadri would not have landed himself in this contradiction if he
had gone a little farther afield, and probed a little deeper into the
Muslim mind as it was working after the passing of the so-called Hindi
Resolution by the U.P. Government in April 1900. In that case, he could
not have avoided the conclusion that there was no ‘New Breeze’, and that
what was still blowing among the Muslims was the old and stale wind of
separatism. The residues of Islamic imperialism had not moved a jot from
placing Islamic causes above the freedom and welfare of the Indian
people as a whole. Their goals were still the same as in the earlier
phase when Sir Syed Ahmed Khan had presided over their perfidy. It was
only their strategy for securing those goals which had undergone a
shift.

It is true that the residues of Islamic imperialism were now writhing
with bitterness against the British. But this bitterness was not caused
because the British had enslaved India and were exploiting the Indian
people.  On the contrary, this bitterness was born because of being
brought down to earth at a time when they had got used to riding a high
horse. They were feeling outraged that their British patrons should have
thought it fit to ‘betray’ them in spite of so many services rendered by
them for so many years. The psychology of the residues of Islamic
imperialism at that time will become clear as soon as we examine the
causes in the context of which they had developed the sense of complaint
against the British.  
 

**CAUSES OF MUSLIM BITTERNESS AGAINST THE BRITISH**

The primary cause which excited bitterness against the British among a
certain section of Muslims in India was Pan-Islamic. This bitterness had
been growing since the Russio-Turkish War of 1876-78 when this section
expected Britain to side with Turkey. But Britain had ‘failed’ them, and
they had invited “the Sultan of Turkey to forge an alliance with the
Mahdi of Sudan and invade India”.^([4](#4)) There was an interval of
rejoicing when Turkey defeated Greece in 1897. “The custom of mentioning
the name of the Sultan of Turkey with titles in the *Khutbah* started at
this time… He was the Caliph and as such the Commander of all the
Faithful wherever they lived.”^([5](#5)) But the rejoicing proved
short-lived. The Muslim countries were increasingly getting into trouble
everywhere, and the Caliph, far from being in a position to help them,
was himself sinking into deep waters. The British had occupied Egypt;
the French and the British had reached an agreement with regard to
Morocco; the Russians and the British had signed a Convention with
regard to Persia; the Italians had invaded Tripoli (present-day Libya)
without any opposition from the British; Greece, Bulgaria, Serbia and
Montenegro had fought a war against Turkey and defeated their old
imperialist enemy while Britain kept looking at it all as a sympathetic
spectator. The residues of Islamic imperialism started shrieking that
the Government of Great Britain had become ‘an enemy of Islam’, and that
it was the duty of all Muslims in India not only to hate but also to
destroy that government.

They were not angry with the Government of Great Britain because that
Government had enslaved their own motherland; they were angry because
that Government was playing a neutral or partisan role regarding the
fate of some far off Muslim countries. They had not only no objection to
Turkey being an imperialist power which had forcibly occupied many
foreign lands in Africa, Asia and Europe including those of the Arabs;
they also admired Turkey for being the bastion of Islamic power and the
seat of the Caliph (*amir-ul-mu‘minîn*). And they were denouncing Great
Britain for not aiding and abetting Turkey to retain its hold over its
prison-house of nationalities. On the other hand, they had no sympathy
to spare for many other nations all over the world that were groaning
under the yoke of Belgian, Dutch, French and British imperialism. The
only fault of these other nations was that they were not Muslim.

Next, the Muslim in India had found a few causes for complaint against
the British Government in India.  The first cause was the annulment of
the Partition of Bengal in 1911. The residues of Islamic imperialism
were stunned into silence when this British decision was announced at
the imperial *durbãr* in Delhi. The next moment, they started shrieking
that the British had betrayed their best and most faithful allies, and
that the Muslims had been thrown into the gutter after being led up the
garden path. There was not a single statement from any Muslim leader
that a great wrong had been undone, and that the rights of which their
fellow countrymen had been wrongfully deprived had been restored.

The second cause was a refusal by the British Government to concede that
the Anglo-Oriental Mohammedan College at Aligarh should be converted
into a university which could affiliate Muslim educational institutions
from all over India. The Government was prepared to help them build
either a residential campus or a regional university which would
affiliate all colleges, Muslim or otherwise, spread over a certain area.
This was fully in keeping with the prevailing law and practice governing
the constitution of all universities in what was then known as British
India. But the residues of all Islamic imperialism had become incurably
addicted to enjoying unequal privileges. They had been pressing the
Government to grant them a special charter for their proposed leviathan.
This the Government refused to do for fear of raising a hornet’s nest
among other communities. And the residues of Islamic imperialism started
shrieking again that they had been betrayed.  
 

**MUSLIMS STAGE AN ANTI-CLIMAX**

There were some other developments, major and minor, such as that of the
mosque at Kanpur. We need not go into all of them here. What matters is
that, taken together, they provide a key to an understanding of the
anti-climax staged by the residues of Islamic imperialism not long after
they had circulated the *Lal Ishtahãr* (Red Pamphlet) all over Bengal in
the wake of the first Muslim League meeting at Dacca in December 1906.
The *Ishtahãr* was a handiwork of Samiullah, the Nawab of Dacca, and his
henchmen who had hosted the delegates to the meeting of delegates from
all over India. It was obvious that the anti-Congress crusade launched
by Sir Syed Ahmed in the closing years of the 19th century was being
converted quite fast into an all-out anti-Hindu *jihãd*. The *Ishtahãr*
had proclaimed in wringing tones: “Ye Musalmans, arise, awake! Do not
read in the same schools with the Hindus. Do not touch any article
manufactured by the Hindus. Do not give any employment to the Hindus. Do
not accept any degrading office under a Hindu. You are ignorant, but if
you acquire knowledge you can send all Hindus to *Jahannum* (Hell). You
form the majority of the population in this province. The Hindu has no
wealth of his own and has made himself rich only by despoiling you of
your wealth. If you become sufficiently enlightened, the Hindus will
starve and soon become Mohammedans.”^([6](#6))

Early in 1907, Muslim hooligans had let loose a reign of terror against
defenceless Hindus in the countryside of East Bengal. H.W. Nevison who
visited India as a representative of *The Manchester Guardian* had
reported: “Priestly Mullahs went through the country preaching the
revival of Islam and proclaiming to the villagers that the British
Government was on the Mohammedan side, that the Law Courts had been
specially suspended for three months and no penalty would be exacted for
violence done to the Hindus, or for the loot of Hindu shops or the
abduction of Hindu widows. A Red Pamphlet was everywhere circulated
maintaining the same wild doctrine… In Comilla, Jamalpur and a few other
places, rather serious riots occurred. A few lives were lost, temples
desecrated, images broken, shops plundered, and many widows carried
off. Some of the towns were deserted, the Hindu population took refuge
in any *pukka* houses, women spent nights hidden in tanks, the crime
known as ‘group-rape’ increased and throughout the country districts,
there reigned a general terror, which still prevailed at the time of my
visit.”^([7](#7))

This was the atmosphere in most of the Muslim majority areas when the
anti-climax came all of a sudden. The anti-climax was staged by the
residues of Islamic imperialism not because they had renounced their
separatist game; it was staged in order to play that game in a new
manner amidst a new configuration of forces. The British Government in
India was no longer in a position to pamper them any further because of
the rising tide of national resistance. The British government in Great
Britain was not in a position to support Pan-Islamic causes because of
its own international interests and alignments. But the residues of
Islamic imperialism were incapable of understanding the difficulties of
their patron. They could not get over the obsession that the causes
espoused by them were the only causes worth espousing by everybody else.

Even so, Muslims in India were hesitating in making a decision, and were
debating among themselves whether they should join hands with the Hindu
*kãfirs*. What decided the issue for them was the advice they received
from their mentors abroad. “Both the Afghans and the Turks,” records
Ishtiaq Husain Qureshi, “had impressed upon their leaders the stark
necessity of gaining the cooperation of the Hindus… It had been
impressed upon them that the citadel of British power in Asia was India,
which made all the Muslim countries in Asia vulnerable to attack and
encroachment… Therefore, whatever the cost involved, the British power
must be dislodged from that citadel. They, like the Hindus, wanted
freedom, but if the Hindus were to play false after the departure of the
British, at least the Muslim countries will be able to breathe
freely. The Muslims of the Subcontinent wanted to be partners in the
freedom of their habitat as well as in the liberty of the rest of the
Muslim world, but if the glory of Islam and prosperity of other Muslim
lands could be built only upon their own misery and deprivation, they
thought the price was not high to pay…”^([8](#8))

That is how there was something dramatic about the anti-climax when it
came. The very same people who had so far frowned upon even the idea of
an agitation against the British Government, were now advocating that
anti-government agitation was the only way. The most fanatic
anti-Congress elements had suddenly launched a campaign for a common
front between the Indian National Congress and the Muslim League against
what they described as British imperialism for the first time. The most
persistent preachers of hatred against Hindus were now pleading for
Hindu-Muslim unity. This was an altogether new language in the mouths of
Muslim leaders.  
 

**NATIONAL LEADERSHIP WALKS INTO THE TRAP**

This new language in the Muslim press and from the Muslim political
platforms was hailed heartily by the Indian National Congress. Nobody in
the Congress noticed the motives which were moving the residues of
Islamic imperialism towards the national mainstream. Nobody among the
Congress stalwarts studied the psychology at the back of new slogans
which the residues of Islamic imperialism were now raising from the
housetops. Nobody in the Nationalist ranks bothered to find out whether
the ‘race of conquerors’ had shed any of its hauteur, and whether their
new anti-imperialist stance had any positive content. On the contrary,
the Indian National Congress rushed headlong, first into the Lucknow
Pact and then into the Khilafat agitation.

The Lucknow Pact signed by Lokmanya Tilak on behalf of the Congress and
by M.A. Jinnah on behalf of the Muslim League, put a seal of approval on
all the illegitimate gains made by the residues of Islamic imperialism
during an earlier period when they were basking in the sunshine of
British patronage. The most notable of these gains was separate
electorates which had been conferred upon them by the Minto-Morley
Reforms in 1909. The Congress had been resisting separate electorates so
far. Now, all of a sudden, it conceded them not only in practice but
also in principle. And what was worse, the Congress also conceded
weightages to the Muslims in all those provinces where they were in a
minority. This was a very vicious principle which even the British
Government had refused to recognise in spite of being pressurised for
long by the residues of Islamic imperialism.

The Khilafat agitation in which the Congress agreed to participate
compromised very seriously the principle according to which the
achievement of self-government for India was the primary aim of the
national movement. The Congress, particularly Mahatma Gandhi, was now
prepared to give primacy to the preservation of the Caliphate at
Constantinople, and thus placed the national movement at the disposal of
Pan-Islamism. The continuation or otherwise of the Caliphate was not
even remotely related to any national interest or objective.  
 

**A NEW STAGE IN THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT**

And these surrenders were made by the Congress at a time when the
national movement had attained a new stage, and had forced the British
Government to annul the Partition of Bengal. The Congress was no longer
a congregation of some outstanding personalities passing some pious
resolutions at annual conferences and then retiring to their private
pursuits. It had become a mass movement, particularly in Bengal,
Maharashtra and the Punjab, and had acquired a potential for developing
along the same lines in other provinces. This becomes clear as soon as
we cast a glance at the Swadeshi Movement.

The Swadeshi Movement which had sprung up spontaneously in response to
the Partition of Bengal in 1905, was not only a new stage in the fight
for freedom from British imperialism but also a radical departure from
the beaten track along which the freedom movement had travelled so far.
The freedom movement now had not only attained a new high but also
acquired a truly national temper. The new direction towards which the
nation was now headed was symbolized by the battle-cry of *Vande
Mãtaram*.

This was not a negative slogan like boycott and non-cooperation. Nor was
it a purely political platform like passive resistance. It was much
more. It was a mighty *mantra* pulsating with positive aspirations of an
ancient people whose primary pursuit had been the perfection of human
life in accordance with a vast spiritual vision. Swadeshi and National
Education were only the first manifestations of this *mantra*. Many more
manifestations were maturing in the national mind, which had now
awakened to its own native powers and potentialities.

What was more significant, the Swadeshi Movement had soon spread from
Bengal to several other parts of India. It had thrown up a new type of
leaders such as Bipin Chandra Pal in Bengal, Lokmanya Tilak in
Maharashtra, and Lala Lajpat Rai in the Punjab, to name only the most
notable. It had inspired revolutionary activities in India as well as
abroad. It had drawn its inspiration from a mighty scripture like the
Gita. Its foremost exponent was Sri Aurobindo whose clarion call in the
columns of the *Bande Mataram* and the *Karmayogin* had raised politics
to the level of spiritual *sãdhanã*.

The Swadeshi Movement had also found a mighty minstrel in Rabindranath
who sang his epic songs in homage to Shivaji and Banda Bairagi at this
time. In his soul-stirring poetry, the battles fought against Islamic
imperialism by the Rajputs, the Marathas, the Jats, the Sikhs, and
several other communities in the national complex, had become a backdrop
for battles being fought against British imperialism. The hoary history
of Hindu society and culture had now started acquiring a new meaning -
it had become the history of an immortal nation which had made great
contributions in all fields of human creativity; which had fashioned
some splendid social, political, economic and cultural institutions from
out of its innermost soul; which had fought and frustrated several
foreign invaders; and which was now rising again to hold its head high
in the comity of nations and to play its characteristic role in world
affairs. Such a nation could surely look at it past with a lot of
legitimate pride. Such a nation could surely look towards its future
with some measure of self-confidence.

Shri Seshadri provides an explanation of the surrenders made by the
Congress, starting in 1916. He has laid his probing finger squarely on
that soft spot in the Congress psychology which had made the Congress
prone to suffering such a paralytic stroke. He writes: “The Congress,
befitting its name of Indian National Congress, had declared itself a
representative body of all groups, religious or otherwise, in the
country. It was, therefore, its pre-eminent duty to stand steadfast by
its commitment to the interests and integrity of the nation as a whole
and never succumb to the pressure tactics of any particular section of
whatever denomination. However, to the nation’s misfortune, the Congress
was trapped in the coils of the theories of ‘composite nation’ and
‘composite culture’ and infected with an inferiority complex that unless
all communities came to its platform it could not become a national
organization. It became nervous at the prospect of being dubbed
‘communal’ if Hindus alone participated in its activities.”^([9](#9))

He quotes Surendernath Banerjee to reveal the ridiculous extent to which
the Congress could go in order to attract some Muslims to its platform.
Banerjee had written in 1926: “Our critics regarded the National
Congress as a Hindu Congress, and the opposition papers described it as
such. We were straining every nerve to secure the co-operation of our
Mohammedan fellow countrymen… We sometime paid the fares of Muhammedan
delegates and offered them some other facilities.”^([10](#10))

Shri Seshadri also cites the eyewitness account of Swami Shraddhananda
regarding ‘some other facilities’ which were provided at the Congress
session in 1899 at Lucknow. Swamiji also wrote as follows in 1926:
“Tickets were issued to every Muslim Waiz delegate free of charge.
Messing charges of Rs.10 per head, too, were not charged to the Muslim
delegates while they were served with all the delicacies of
*Dastarkhan*. And these *Waiz* delegates stopped in the pandal only a
few minutes in the beginning and were to be found enjoying creature
comforts under the refreshment *shamianah* outside the pandal for the
rest of the sitting… The majority of Muslim delegates had donned gold,
silver or silk-embroidered *chogas* (flowing robes) over their ordinary
coarse suits of wearing apparel. It was rumoured that these *chogas* had
been lent by Hindu moneyed men for Congress *tamasha*.”^([11](#11))

That was how the sewer of Muslim separatism was permitted, almost
invited, to pollute the national mainstream. Surdas, the saint-poet of
the 16th century, had envisaged the purification of a sewer (*nãro*) as
soon as it poured itself into a stream (*nadî*). But what happened in
the case of the Congress was a contamination of the stream by the sewer.
The sewer gave some of its own colour and chemistry to the stream. The
national mainstream not only lost its own purity; it also became putrid
by its contact with Muslim separatism. Ever since, the national
mainstream has continued to breed whole colonies of anti-national
parasites. The infection has by now become a creeping cancer, so much so
that the very mention of native nationalism now stinks as ‘Hindu
communalism’ in the nostrils of the Indian National Congress.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) *The Tragic Story of Partition*, p.47

[²](#2a) Ibid., p.54

[³](#3a) Ibid., Chapter 8.

[⁴](#4a) Ishtiaq Husain Qureshi, *Ulema in Politics*, Delhi reprint,
1985, p. 242.

[⁵](#5a) Ibid.

[⁶](#6a) Cited in R.C. Majumdar (ed.), *History and Culture of the
Indian People*, Volume XI, Bombay, 1978, p.54.

[⁷](#7a) H.W. Nevison, *The New Spirit in India*, London, 1908, p. 192
and 193.

[⁸](#8a) Ishtiq Husain Qureshi, *Ulema in Politics*, pp. 259-60.

[⁹](#9a) *The Tragic Story of Partition*, p. 51.

[¹⁰](#10a) Ibid.

[¹¹](#11a) Ibid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


