+++
title = "06  V         Expenditure of the State"

+++
V  
Expenditure of the State

The income of the state was expended on various branches of government
and administration, on the harems of kings and nobles, and on forts,
palaces, mosques and tombs. Large amounts were sent abroad to Muslim
holy places like Mecca and Medina and for the Caliphs. At home, men of
letters and men of religion were given handsome awards and grants,
pensions and lump sum amounts. Salaries and scholarships were given to
students and mendicants. Dowries were distributed among the indigent for
marriage of their daughters and free kitchens established for
distribution of food among the poor. The most important and recurring
item of expenditure was on the army and construction of buildings. All
this information is provided by medieval chroniclers. What is not
mentioned is the actual amount of money spent on them. These, if ever,
are given sparingly. We shall, therefore, mention the actual amounts
wherever given; about other items of expenditure a sort of probable
assessment alone would be surmised. Expenditure was incurred on all the
above mentioned items simultaneously. But we can assess the expenditure
only item-wise. Architectural activity of the state may be taken up
first. it was a major activity of the Muslim government. While the
armies, the palaces and the harems have all disappeared with the
disappearance of Muslim rule, the one thing that strikes the eye in
Delhi and Agra and many other towns and cities is the buildings of the
Muslim period called monuments today.

  
5.1. MONUMENTS

The first thing the Muslim Sultanate of Delhi started on was
construction of impressive buildings. The first sultan Qutbuddin Aibak
had to establish Muslim power in India and to raise buildings "as
quickly as possible, so that no time might be lost in making an
impression on their newly-conquered subjects".[1](#1) Architecture was
considered as the visual symbol of Muslim political power. It denoted
victory with authority. The first two buildings of the early period in
Delhi are the Qutb Minar and the congregational mosque named
purposefully as the Quwwat-ul-Islam (might of Islam) Masjid. This mosque
was commenced by Aibak in 592/1195. It was built with materials and gold
obtained by destroying 27 Hindu and Jain temples in Delhi and its
neighborhood. A Persian inscription in the mosque testifies to
this.[2](#2) The Qutb Minar, planned and commenced by Aibak sometime in
or before 1199 and completed by Iltutmish,[3](#3) was also constructed
with similar materials, "the sculptured figures on the stones being
either defaced or concealed by turning them upside down". A century and
a quarter later Ibn Battutah describes the congregational mosque and the
Qutb Minar. "About the latter he says that its staircase is so wide that
elephants can go up there." About the former his observations are
interesting. "Near the eastern gate of the mosque their lie two very big
idols of copper connected together by stones. Every one who comes in and
goes out of the mosque treads over them. On the site of this mosque was
*a bud khana*, that is an idol house. After the conquest of Delhi it was
turned into a mosque."[4](#4) The cost of these edifices in terms of
money cannot be known. A look at the gigantic Qutb Minar and the strong
screen wall of the mosque shows that no amount of money alone could have
created such awe-inspiring edifices. They were products of the age of
Islamic slavery. People were captured in thousands in war; they were
made slaves and drafted on such majestic works.

How many slaves were needed to accomplish the task on these two and the
other buildings of Qutbuddin Aibak and Iltutmish such as mosques,
*madrasas*, mausoleums, qasrs and tanks (e.g..Hauz-i-Shamsi) in and
outside Delhi? It is difficult to determine but easy to conjecture their
numbers, for these two sultans had embarked on constructional activity
on a very large scale.

It is known that Alauddin Khalji, another great builder, had 70,000
slaves working on his buildings, as attested to by the contemporary
chronicler Ziyauddin Barani.[5](#5) Alauddin built "masjids, minars,
citadels and tanks". But his (incompleted) Qutb Minar alone was an
edifice more than equal to all his undertakings. Thus the men working on
the buildings of the first two sultans were probably not less than those
of Alauddin Khalji; they may have been probably more. These slaves were
to dismantle standing temples, very carefully, stone by stone, carry the
carved columns, shafts and pillars to the new sites of construction, and
raise the new structures. Hasan Nizami says that temples were demolished
with the help of elephants and one elephant could haul stones for which
500 men were needed;[6](#6) yet it has to be recognised that not many
mechanical devices were available. Most of the work was done by human
hands and muscles. Furthermore, Hindu architects, masons and labourers
turned slaves under the new dispensation had to do the work in record
time. Barani in his enthusiasm says hyperbolically that during
Alauddin's reign a palace could be built in 2-3 days and a citadel in
two weeks.[7](#7)

In the Sultanate of Delhi, it was considered a matter of pride for a
newly crowned king to build a new city of his own to give name and fame
to himself and his dynasty. The old city of Iltutmish was abandoned by
Balban who built the Qasr-i-Lal or the red palace, and Kaiqubad built
the city of Kilughari. Jalaluddin Khalji constructed Shahr-i-Nau,
Alauddin Khalji founded the fort-city of Siri, and his successor,
Tughlaq Shah, founded Tughlaqabad. "It is their custom," writes Ibn
Battutah, "that the king's palace is deserted on his death... and his
successor builds a new palace for himself."[8](#8)

The buildings of Alauddin Khalji in Delhi alone would have cost millions
of *tankahs*,[9](#9) but no figure of specific buildings have been given
by any medieval Muslim chronicler. Constructional enterprises are money
consuming. His expeditions in south India and severe revenue regulations
had brought him immense wealth. His best architectural works were
accomplished after 1311 by which time the Mongol invaders had been
completely pushed back and lot of wealth had been brought from the
Deccan. It is no mere guess that he spent quite a treasure on his
buildings.

Similar is the case with the Tughlaqs. Firoz Tughlaq founded several
cities, dug a few canals, constructed forts, palaces, *bands*, mosques,
tombs, warehouses, sarais and khanqahs. He built eight large mosques in
Delhi each of which could accommodate 10,000 devotees.[10](#10) He
repaired the Qutb Minar as well as all the tombs and mausoleum of former
sultans and saints. He built khanqahs for travellers who stayed in them
as guests of the state for three days. "In 120 khanqahs Muslims
(*bandgan-i-khuda*) could thus stay for 360 days (or almost the year
round) as a guest of the government." His contemporary chronicler Shams
Siraj Afif, says that "in the reign of Firoz Shah, Malik Bukhari was the
Shahnah (superintendent) of the Buildings. (In appreciation of his work)
the king had bestowed on him a gold baton. (His deputy?) Abdul Haqq,
alias Jahir Sondhar, was given a golden mace. Under Firoz Tughlaq
expenditure on building was colossal. The Diwan-i-Arz examined the plan
of every proposed building and made provision for necessary money from
the royal treasury. Such a magnificent Buildings Department, which had
been set up during the reign of Firoz Shah, had not been established
during the reign of any other king as lakhs (of *tankahs*) were spent on
this department. indeed it would not be an exaggeration to say that
countless wealth was spent on it."[11](#11) This of course does not
include the free labour of slaves as well as the loss of merchants who
were forced to carry free of charge stones on their pack-animals from
old Delhi to the site of Kotla Firoz Shah when it was under
construction. Firoz was a kind-hearted sultan and so it may be presumed
that he paid something to his slave labour also. For, even the shifting
of the two Ashokan pillars to Delhi required the services of a few
thousand men (*chandin hazar admi*).

Besides the Sultanate, new independent Muslim states sprang up all over
the country throughout the fifteenth century. In all of them feverish
architectural activity was carried on with the help of local slaves and
elephants and money acquired in expeditions. At the centre, Sultan
Sikandar Lodi who took keen interest in the welfare of the Musalmans,
founded masjids throughout his dominions, and appointed a preacher, a
reader and a sweeper to each.[12](#12) Thus he turned masjids almost
into government institutions and made foundations of Islam
strong.[13](#13)

Similar is the language of Persian historians for Sher Shah's endeavours
in this field. Needless to say that all Muslim rulers constructed pious
edifices at great cost with great enthusiasm - edifice like mosques,
idgahs, dargahs, ziaratgahs (shrines), mazars (tombs), sarais, madrasas
and maktabs. From Gaur to the confines of his dominions, Sher Shah built
sarais and halting places at every *kos*. At every sarai a masjid, a
royal chamber and a well were constructed. To every mosque a muazzin, an
imam, and a manager were appointed. There was a road built from Bengal
to Avadh, another from Agra to Burhanpur, another from Agra to Jodhpur
and Chittor, and another from Bayana to Jaunpur. On the sides of every
road were planted fruit trees and gardens. Sher Shah built a total of
1700 sarais. These were maintained by lands and villages allotted at the
place for their support.[14](#14) The cost of all these public works was
enormous.

The cost of buildings of Sher Shah and Islam Shah particularly their
forts, has not been given by contemporary writers. Figures given by
later writers are confusing. According to the *Tarikh-i-Daudi*, Patna
fort was ordered to be built by Sher Shah Suri in 1540. It was completed
in record time of two years at a cost of five lakh *rupiyas*. The
Salimgarh fort built by his son Islam Shah in 1546 cost four lakh
*rupiyas*. It was not completed at the time of his death in 1552 and so
a lakh or two more would have been spent. But Sher Shah's fort at Rohtas
in Punjab cost 35 to 40 lakh rupees, according to Jahangir "4,025,000
rupees, according to the currency of Iran to 120,000 *tuman*, and in the
currency of Turan to 1 *arb*, 21 lakhs and 75,000 *khami* (*khami* was
equal to one third of a rupee), that is now current". In a footnote
Rogers and Beveridge, the translators of *Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri*, rightly
say that "the figures seem wrong, and the MSS differ..." Apparently the
correct sum in rupees is 3.4 lakhs, 25,000.[15](#15) Even this sum is at
great variance from the cost of other forts of the Afghans and is about
equal to Akbar's magnificent fort built at Agra in fifteen years' time.
And the cost of the network of roads of Sher Shah is difficult to
estimate. This must have been enormous. However, much of the expense and
labour was shared by local people just as the cost of maintaining his
sarais was borne by villages in the vicinity.

With the coming of the Mughals more artistic buildings came into being.
More information is also available about the expenditure on some of
them. Those who built them had unbounded command of both money and
slaves. Babur writes that "680 men worked daily on my buildings in
Agra... only; while 1491 stone-cutters worked daily on my buildings in
Agra, Sikri, Biana, Dulpur (Dholpur), Gwalior and Kuil (Aligarh). In the
same way there are numberless artisans and workmen of every sort in
Hindustan." Some workers were wage-earners, for says he at another
place, "Gifts were made to the stone-cutters, and labourers and the
whole body of workmen in the way customary for master-workmen and
wage-earners of Agra."[16](#16) Akbar and Jahangir expended large sums
in construction work in Agra and Lahore. Akbar's fort at Agra took
fifteen years to build and cost 35 lakh rupees.[17](#17) He is credited
by Abul Fazl with building in Agra five hundred edifices. Officers and
troops used to be stationed in forts built at strategic points from
Kashmir to the Deccan. Repair of old and construction of new forts was
an ever ongoing activity of the Muslim state. Repair of a fort once cost
20,000 rupees.[18](#18) According to De Laet emperor Akbar had erected
many women's apartments at every few miles from Agra, each of which
could accommodate sixteen ladies with servants[19](#19) besides the
forts of Allahabad and Fatehpur Sikri. "After the death of Akbar,
Jahangir tried to rehabilitate towns and *qasbas* which had fallen to
ruin." He directed the Jagirdars and administrators of the Khalisa
estates that towns should be built, mosques erected, sarais constructed
and wells dug, of course all at government cost.[20](#20) He also
demolished old buildings to be replaced by new ones.[21](#21)

Akbar had begun to build his own mausoleum. Jahangir took much interest
in rebuilding from its foundations this mausoleum at Sikandara. He
caused fresh designs to be prepared for it and expended large sums on
its construction and decoration, "and work went on for three or four
years," writes Jahangir in his memoirs. "On the whole they told me the
cost of this lofty edifice was 1,500,000 (fifteen lakh) rupees,
equivalent to 50,000 current *tumans* of Persia and 4,500,000 *khamis*,
according to the currency of Turan."[22](#22) Muhammad Taqi was the
Diwan of buildings under Jahangir. Writing on the later years of
Jahangir's[23](#23) reign, Francisco Pelsaert mentions that the tomb of
Itmad-ud-daula at Agra had cost three and half lakh rupees up to the
year 1626, and that ten lakhs more were required for its completion. He
speaks also of the numerous sarais and palaces built by the empress Nur
Jahan. Jahangir spent large sums in Agra and Lahore, but it was under
Shahjahan that the most remarkable developments occurred. "Contemporary
writers give figures for the cost of some of his buildings - 10 lakhs
for the mosque at Daulatabad, 60 lakhs for the palace at Delhi, 917
lakhs for the Taj Mahal at Agra; and, while these may be inaccurate,
they are comparable with the estimate of the Lahore canal, which comes
from a similar source." These figures are completely inaccurate. For,
while the repair of a mansion sometimes cost one lakh rupees,[24](#24) a
canal also cost the same amount. "In 1639 Ali Mardan Khan proposed a
canal taking off from the river Ravi, which was sanctioned *at an
estimated cost of a lakh of rupees* (emphasis added). Some years later
the existing canal from the Jamna to Delhi was reconstructed under his
supervision. It was probably comparable in amount with the former and
much less than what was being spent on buildings of an ornamental
nature."[25](#25)

Despite the discrepancies and inaccuracies in the expenditure on
construction of individual edifices from the times of Babur to those of
Shahjahan during whose "august reign, when... lovely things reached the
zenith of perfection," money in millions and slaves in thousands were
employed on erecting the hundreds of huge Mughal buildings still
extant.[26](#26) The Taj Mahal is the loveliest of all these building;
it also stands as a monument of exploitation of poor labourers.
Tavernier says that it was completed in twenty-two years for three crore
rupees and 20,000 persons worked on it all the time. Three crores in 22
years comes to 13 lakhs per year and 65 rupees per person per year if he
was actually paid the amount. The lower class workmen may have been paid
only a rupee or so per month. Another "effect of such undertakings,"
writes W.H. Moreland, "was inevitably to hinder ordinary commercial
activities. Thus all the carts at Agra were impressed for the works in
progress at Delhi, and on one occasion goods in transit for the coast
had to lie on the way for some months, after they had been by the king's
officers cast down in the fields, and the carts taken for his use." But
impressment was an ordinary occurrence of the period (Firoz Tughlaq had
done it earlier). There appears to be no evidence on what is a matter of
much greater interest - the treatment and remuneration of the large
number of labourers employed on these buildings.

The example of kings was universally imitated by their principal
nobles.[27](#27) The opulent grandees in the provinces esteemed it an
honour and obligation to adorn towns and cities of the regions under
their control with magnificent buildings. The law of escheat encouraged
them to spend lavishly. Pelsaert perhaps has the last word on it. "I
have often ventured to ask great lords," says he, "what is their true
object in being so eager to amass their treasures, when what they have
gathered is of no use to them or to their family (because of escheat)...
I have urged they would share it with the poor, who in this country are
hundreds of thousands, or indeed innumerable... Their answers have been
based on the emptiest worldly vanity..." Buildings they constructed with
great zest - gardens, tombs, and palaces - "they build them with so many
hundreds of thousands...[28](#28) Once the builder is dead, no one will
care for his buildings, but every one tries to erect building of his
own, and establish his own reputation alongside that of his ancestors.
If all these edifices were attended to and kept in repair, the lands of
every city, and even village, would be adorned (covered)[29](#29) with
monuments; but as a matter of fact the roads leading to the cities are
strewn with fallen columns of stone."[30](#30)

In short, the Turkish and Mughal sultans and nobles were ever busy on a
building spree without any thought of preserving the edifices.
Preservation may have been uneconomical. Ibn Battutah and Babur affirm
that all was destroyed because of moisture. But economy was not a
weakness of Muslim royalty and nobility. With them ceaseless
construction was a craze.

5.2. THE ARMY

Muslim rule in India was not only established but throughout sustained
by its army. In other words, Muslim rule in India was army rule. The
state resembled the organisation of an army; its civil functions were
meant to support this organisation. Medieval historians and political
thinkers like Fakhr-i-Mudabbir, Ziyauddin Barani and Shams Siraj Afif
asserted that kingship was the army and the army kingship.[31](#31) On
the army was spent the largest chunk of the state income obtained
through conquest and loot. Sultan Ghiyasuddin Balban used to say, "I
have devoted all the revenue of my kingdom to equip my army." His
contemporary chronicler Ziyauddin Barani writing for the early hundred
years of Muslim rule (c. 1250-1350) specifically mentions that "all
income from Khalisa lands throughout the empire was earmarked to be
spent on the soldiers and the Karkhanas (workshops) which manufactured
weapons and equipment for the army".[32](#32) So, the agrarian sector,
which was the greatest source of revenue of the Sultanate largely paid
for the upkeep of the army. We have seen how this sector was fleeced and
sponged. It was done to keep the army in good health and shape.

An idea of the expenditure on the army can be had from the computation
of salary of soldiers, the pay of officers, maintenance of the various
corps like elephant, horse and camel, the cost of building and
maintaining forts where army contingents were stationed, and expenditure
on the karkhanas (workshops) which turned out weapons and other
materials required for war. We shall try to estimate the expenses
incurred on these items under the Sultanate and the Mughal empire. This
will give an idea of the burden borne by the people mainly
agriculturists, for maintaining the Muslim army.

*Mercenaries*

The army of the Sultanate comprised of the soldiers in the permanent
employment of the ruler and special recruits enrolled on the eve of an
expedition or for performing a specific task. The Ghaznavid tradition of
enrolling mercenaries was continued by the Turkish sultans in India.
Writing early in the reign of Iltutmish, Fakhr-i-Muddabir mentions a
body of troopers "who have voluntarily joined the forces". Balban
employed 3,000 Afghan horse and foot in his campaign against the
Mewatis,[33](#33) and appointed thousands of Afghan officers and men in
the forts of Gopalgir, Kampil, Patiali, Bhojpur and Jalali to contain
the restive elements there.[34](#34) On his way to Lakhnauti Balban
enrolled about 2,00,000 horsemen and infantry.[35](#35) So also used to
do Sultan Raziyah. Throughout the medieval period, mercenaries (Muslims,
says Afif for Sultan Firoz's times) used to be enrolled in the army.
Recorded instances imply that such recruitment was an established
practice.[36](#36) "It is perhaps safe to guess that such recruitments
(with the object of fighting against the infidels) were confined to
Muslims only", says Habibullah.[37](#37) Enrolment of fresh levies was a
continuous process. It was necessary to replenish the troops, for losses
used to be great. in his campaigns against the Mewatis alone Balban is
said to have lost one hundred thousand men in the course of one year.
Rebels like Tughril Beg of Bengal took two years to subdue only after
great losses had been inflicted on the royal troops on two earlier
occasions.

The cost of emergency recruitment was high. In the fourteenth century
the cost of emergency recruitment and equipping 1000 horsemen in a short
time came to three lakh *tankahs*.[38](#38) Prince Alauddin Khalji was
the *muqta* of Kara. He was permitted by his uncle Sultan Jalaluddin
Khalji to recruit extra troops to lead an expedition into central
Hindustan. He enrolled three to four thousand horsemen and two thousand
infantry in a short time for leading an expedition to Chanderi en route
to Devagiri. The cost of recruiting them can be estimated from the
statement of Barani quoted above.

*Regular Troops*

The soldiers in the permanent employment were paid a regular salary.
Since war (Jihad) was a permanent and ever expanding activity of the
Muslim regime, most sultans maintained a large standing army on a
permanent basis, and did not disband troops after a conquest was
accomplished or a foreign invasion repulsed. According to Farishtah
Alauddin Khalji's regular army consisted of 4,75,000 horsemen well
equipped and accoutered. There were two separate forces. One was meant
to repulse Mongol invaders while the other was sent out on the conquest
of newer regions.[39](#39) The annual salary paid to a cavalrymen by the
Sultan was 234 *tankahs*. In addition 78 *tankahs* were paid to a *do
aspa* or to one who possessed an additional horse because maintenance of
an extra mount added to the soldier's efficiency.

The salary bill of 4,75,000 horsemen at the rate of 234 *tankahs* alone
would have come to 111 million or eleven crore *tankahs* annually. This
was high by any standards, more so when it did not include the allowance
to *do aspas*, payment to the infantry and expenses on the large staff
of officials involved with the upkeep of such a large army. The salary
paid to soldiers under the Khaljis was high. Besides there was
unrestrained plunder in every campaign. it was probably because of this
reason that Alauddin changed the rule regarding Khams. He took away 4/5
of the booty (*ghanimah*) and distributed 1/5 to the participating
soldiers. Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq maintained his army on the pattern and
regulations of Alauddin Khalji.[40](#40) Muhammad Tughlaq's cavalry is
said to have consisted of 900,000 horsemen,[41](#41) double the size of
that of Alauddin Khalji. Alauddin had freezed the prices of articles of
daily use by soldiers through his Market Control. So, he paid a fixed
salary to them. Under Muhammad Tughlaq there was no market control and
the salary of troops would probably have gone up. Even at the rates
fixed by Alauddin, the salary bill would have come to twenty-two to
twenty-five crores annually. Muhammad Tughlaq's empire was vast and
revenue from far-off regions of Dwarsamudra to Satgaon and Telingana to
Malwa and Gujarat used to be collected without much problem (before the
spate of rebellions started). Firoz Tughlaq's army was not that
large.[42](#42) Nevertheless as will be seen presently, the expenditure
on his army establishment was no less large. There were Arab and Persian
contingents in Firoz Tughlaq's army. Sure enough, the size of the army
varied from time to time. The Saiyyads were weak and the Lodis not so
strong. But even in the newly created Muslim kingdoms of the fifteenth
century like Gujarat, Malwa, Jaunpur etc., war remained the most
prominent activity and 'the army consumed most of the revenue.

*Salary of the Mughal Soldiers*

The salary of soldiers under the Mughals is given in Abul Fazl's
*Ain-i-Akbari*. There were several classes of foot soldiers who
performed various kinds of duties. The first class infantry man got 500
*dams*; the second, 400 *dams*; the third, 300 *dams*,, the fourth, 240
*dams* per month. As a rupia was equal to 40 *dams* the pay of the best
foot soldier was about 12 rupia and of the lowest 6 rupia per month. The
cavalry was better paid. A cavalryman with an Iraqi horse got 30 rupia
per mensem, with a Turki horse 20 rupia, with a Tazi 15 rupia, with a
*jangla* (local breed) 12 rupia. Their salary was equal to the (civil)
collectors of revenue. "The revenue collectors of domain lands got
formerly 25 rupia, but now only 15 rupia."

The pay of Banduqchis or Matchlock bearers, who were (non-commissioned)
officers of four grades got 300, 280, 270 and 260 *dams*. The common
Banduqchis divided into five classes received 250 to 110 *dams*. The
best paid were the Ahadis, "the immediate servants of His Majesty".
These "worthy persons whom His Majesty does not appoint to a Mansab, but
whom he frees from being under the orders of any one", got as much as
500 rupia per mensem.[43](#43) These are specimens of salaries paid.
There were hundreds of types of troops, wrestlers, slaves and chelas and
hundreds of grades of pay for them and their administrative officers.
The remuneration money spent on the troops was, on the whole, not much.
This is the conclusion one arrives at by certain statements of Jahangir.
"On the day on which the royal troops were ordered to pursue (the rebel
prince) Khusrau, 15,000 rupees were given to Mahabat Khan and 20,000 to
the Ahadis, and 10,000 more were sent with the army to be given to whom
it might be necessary to give it on the way." On another occasion a body
of 3,000 (superior kind of) cavalry was despatched under Shah Beg. For
the expenses of this force 200,000 rupees were given.[44](#44) These
amounts for overall expenses were not much, when to an officer Taj Khan
who had been nominated to beat the Afghans of Bangarh, he gave,
obviously as a reward, 50,000 rupees.[45](#45)

*Pay of Officers*

As against the troops and according to all contemporary chroniclers, the
army officers were highly paid throughout Muslim rule. Shihabuddin
al-Umri says that a Khan received 200,000 *tankahs*, each being worth
eight dirhams (silver coin). "This sum belongs to him personally, and he
is not expected to disburse any part of it to his soldiers." Every Malik
received from 50 to 60 thousand *tankahs* and every Amir 40 to 50
thousand *tankahs*.[46](#46) This amount was paid sometimes in the form
of cash salary, at others by the grant of a revenue assignment called
*iqta*. There were officers with other ranks as well.

The nobles or Umara were graded as Khans, Maliks, Amirs, Sipehsalars in
the Sultanate period and as Mansabdars under the Mughals. According to
Barani, a Sarkhail commanded ten horsemen; a Sipehsalar ten Sarkhails;
an Amir ten Sipehsalars; a Malik ten Amirs; and a Khan ten
Maliks.[47](#47) According to the author of the *Masalik-ul-Absar* a
Khan commanded more or less 100,000 troops, an Amir 10,000, a Malik a
thousand and so on.[48](#48) The term Amir was normally used in a
generic sense to denote a high officer. In Akbar's time and after, all
the great men of the Mughal empire were graded and appointed to a Mansab
(rank) in the imperial service. From the lowest rank, that of the
commander of ten, upto the rank of 400 an officer was known as
Mansabdar. From 500 onwards a noble was known as Amir, or Khan, or
Khan-i-Azam. They were all generally spoken of as Umara.

The salaries of the Mughal officers and grandees were equally high. W.H.
Moreland, the economic historian of the Mughal Empire, computes that a
commander of 5000 could count on at least Rs. 18,000 a month under Akbar
and his successor. A commander of 1000 could similarly count on
receiving Rs. 5000 a month, while a commander of 500 would have received
the equivalent of Rs. 500 to 600 "at the present day" (1914). Certainly
there was at the time no other career in India which could offer such
prospects and prizes. It is therefore no wonder that the most
enterprising men from a large portion of Western Asia should have been
attracted to the Mughal court.[49](#49) The government both civil and
military was conducted by means of officials entered in the army list
and graded in successive ranks or Mansabs. According to Jadunath Sarkar,
"of these, all those who held any grade from 3 *hazari* upwards were
called grandees (*umara-i-azam* or grand commanders), and those below
the command of 3000 horse (nominal) were styled simply *mansabdars* or
officers". The total number of officials including both Umara and
Mansabdars were 1,803 under Akbar (c. 1596), 2,945 under Jahangir (c.
1620), 8,000 under Shahjahan (c. 1647) and 14,449 under Aurangzeb (c.
1690). There was enormous inflation of the army list under Aurangzeb.
Under him the annual salary and allowances of the Mansabdars, including
the pay of their troops were as follows for the first classes in each
grade - 3.5 lakhs of rupees for a 7-*hazari*, 2.5 lakhs for a
5-*hazari*, 50,000 for a *hazari* and 1,000 for a commander of
twenty.[50](#50)

*Strength of the Mughal Army*

V.A. Smith says that Akbar did not maintain a large standing army.
According to him the strength of Akbar's army "equipped by the State and
paid directly from the Treasury", could not have exceeded 25,000 men.
However, on the testimony of Monserrate he himself writes that at the
time of his expedition to Kabul (1581), Akbar had 45,000 cavalry,
besides 5000 elephants and an unnumbered host on foot.[51](#51) The
military character of the Mughal government of Akbar is vouched by all,
and yet the estimates of the standing army of the Mughal emperors from
Akbar to Aurangzeb have wide variations. Had it been so large as has
been made out by some scholars, "we should arrive at so huge an army
that it should have been impossible for the country, however heavily
taxed, to meet such an expense".[52](#52) The standing army was not
large because, according to Abul Fazl, "the zamindars of the country
furnish more than four million, four hundred thousand men, as shall be
detailed below".[53](#53) These details are given in the Third Book of
the *Ain-i-Akbari*. From the detailed Tables provided - a laborious work
only a scholar like Abul Fazl could produce - it appears that a quota of
troops to be provided to the Mughal emperor on demand by every Raja or
Zamindar was fixed in the same manner as was the revenue amount. The
Rajput forces were thus completely merged with the Mughal army. Or, it
was like the Subsidiary Alliance of the Raj days. Jahangir writes that
from "this Subah (of Ajmer) in time of war 86,000 horses and 304,000
Rajput foot are provided".[54](#54) From Malwa, "when needful there are
obtained from it about 9,300 horse and 4,70,300, footsoldiers, with 100
elephants".[55](#55) This system continued under Jahangir and Shahjahan
making the Mughal empire the strongest empire in the world till
Aurangzeb's bigotry alienated the Rajputs and weakened the Mughal army
and the empire.

The actual armed strength of the empire at the close of Shahjahan's
reign (1647) was 2 lakhs of troopers brought to the muster and branding,
8 thousand Mansabdars, 7 thousand Ahadis and Barqandaz, 1,85,000 Tabinan
or additional troopers of the princes, Umara and Mansabdars, and 40,000
foot musketeers, gunners, and rocket-men. These numbers underwent a
still further increase with Aurangzeb's fresh warfare in the
Deccan,[56](#56) for "the total amount of pay claims generated by grant
of mansabs pressed directly upon the empire's revenue
resources".[57](#57)

*Army Corps*

The army of the Sultanate comprised both cavalry and infantry. It had an
elephant corps also. Elephants were not generally purchased. They were
captured from jungles or taken as tribute from defeated rulers. Camels
and ponies and other animals were also used for commissariat service.
The most important wing of the army was the cavalry. And horses were
costly. In India, good horses were found only in some regions like the
eastern Punjab and the Salt Range, but they were inferior to the horses
of the West Asian breed. This made the importation of war horses from
abroad a matter of necessity for the sultans of Delhi. Medieval
chronicles speak of Yamani, Shami, Bahri and Qipchaqi horses as being in
use by soldiers in India, and there was large-scale importation of
horses into India from Arabia, Afghanistan and even the steppe lands of
southern Russia known as Tatars. According to Ibn Battutah and Wassaf
their cost was high. "The good horses are worth 500 (silver) *dinars* or
more." Besides making direct purchases from abroad, the sultans of Delhi
replenished their *paigahs* with horses of foreign breed obtained from
defeated Indian princes, particularly those with access to the sea as
they imported such horses in large numbers. Gujarat and the South
provided war horses in particular when, for example, the rulers of
Warangal, Dwarsamudra and the Pandya kingdoms surrendered thousands of
horses to Malik Kafur in the fourteenth century. The Hindu rulers of the
South had imported foreign breed horses through the sea route. Wassaf
says that 10,000 horses were imported annually into Mabar, Kambayat and
other western Indian ports at the cost of 220 gold *dinars* each. But
many times horses obtained in tribute had to be given to Muslim soldiers
when their mounts got disabled in battle. Al-Umri mentions that Sultan
Muhammad Tughlaq distributed to his army 10,000 Arab horses and
countless others. The two great kings of the Sultanate period, Alauddin
Khalji and Muhammad Tughlaq, had under their command 475,000 and 900,000
horsemen. Even Firoz Tughlaq who is said to have neglected his army,
maintained extensive *paigahs*.[58](#58) The size of the cavalry varied
from time to time. The Saiyyads were weak, the Lodis not so strong, but
even in the provincial kingdoms of Gujarat, Malwa and Jaunpur the
cavalry wing was maintained at high cost. The expenditure on Sher Shah's
army too was large. He had 150,000 cavalry and the same numbers were
maintained in cantonments. The infantry was 25,000 and 50,000 in
garrisoning the forts. He had 5,000 elephants. "It was known that a
suitable garrison was maintained in every fort in the country."[59](#59)

Under the Mughals, according to Abul Fazl, "Merchants used to bring to
court good horses from Iraq-i-Arab and Iraq-i Ajam, from Turkey,
Turkestan, Badakhshan, Shirwan, Qirghis, Thibet, Kashmir and other
countries." But unlike the Sultanate period cross-breeding was now
freely done in India. In "the breeding of this sensible animal... after
a short time Hindustan ranked higher in this respect than Arabia...
There are fine horses bred in every part of the country; but horses of
Cachh excel, being equal to Arabs", writes Abul Fazl. So, by Akbar's
time good quality horses were available in many parts of the country.
There were 12,000 horses in Akbar's stables. Their prices were fixed by
experts. Khasa horses, meant for the personal use of the king, cost 10
to 20 *mohurs*. Their officers, servants, harness and food all were
fixed, and cost not a little. For, Akbar was a man of details and his
officers also became so.[60](#60)

The *Ain-i-Akbari* gives a detailed description of the elephant stables
under Akbar. The Emperor possessed 5,000 of them. The price of an
elephant in his reign varied from one lakh to one hundred rupees. During
the reign of Jahangir the price of a well trained war elephant rose much
higher. Some elephants were imported from Ceylon (as by Firoz Tughlaq)
and some others from Africa (as under Jahangir) and Burma (as by
Shahjahan). But they were mostly available in all parts of India. The
classification of the imperial elephants, the food allowed to them, the
money spent on their harness and their five attendants were all fixed
and settled. His Majesty's Khasa (personal) elephants had their personal
names. The elephant was a costly corps of the Mughal army.[61](#61)
Jahangir gives the unmistakable impression that the Mughals loved their
elephants and gave them endearing names. Some of these are Hawai, Ran
Bhaga, Bansi Badan, Rup Sundar, Ran Rawat, Panchi Gaj, Fauj Singar,
Surat Gaj, Mahipati, Durjansal, Giranbar. One was called Nur Bakht after
Jahangir's own name. There are many reasons for this phenomenon. Unlike
camels and horses, elephants were bred in India and were found in almost
all parts of the country like Agra, Bayana, Narwar, Bastar, modern
Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Bengal, Orissa and elsewhere. Abul Fazl says
that Panna elephants were the best. Hence the tradition of giving them
Hindu names. Moreover, elephant fights provided good entertainment. It
was a sagacious animal. The beginning of muster review was with the
elephants.[63](#63)

No less important was the camel corps. As in the case of horses, the
quality of the camels of the country breed improved with time, and
according to Abul Fazl, Indian camels soon surpassed those of Iran and
Turan. Camels were numerous in Rajputana, as is the case even today.
They were also found in large numbers in Kutch, Gujarat and Bhatinda in
Punjab. During the Mughal period their greatest abundance was found in
Sindh. Details regarding their food, furniture, servants, expenses have
been mentioned in the *Ain-i-Akbari*.[64](#64) The mules were pack
animals preferred for transport of men and goods. They were mostly bred
in North Punjab and Kashmir.[65](#65)

As in any organisation, there were some good points and some weaknesses
in the Muslim army. We cannot go into all these. One point each of the
two may receive our attention. On the positive side there was constant
vigil and inspection of the forces leading to savings; on the negative
side there was corruption which led to loss of revenue. in the Sultanate
period there were regular inspections of troops and their horses. There
was the system of branding horses and keeping an account of the
credentials of soldiers. Sometimes it used to take a fortnight to
inspect all the contingents which set out on a campaign. Periodical
reviews of the army, whether in headquarters or in camp, kept the
soldiers on their toes and their mounts in good shape. The system of
*dagh wa chehra* (cauterization and descriptive roll) was introduced by
Alauddin Khalji; it was revived by Sikandar Lodi and reintroduced by
Sher Shah. It ensured that at the time of review no soldier could send a
substitute and no horse could be presented twice, or replaced by an
inferior one after the review.[66](#66)

Still better was the position under the Mughals. Akbar was an
administrative genius. Most of the important appointments were made and
promotions effected by him personally. The muster of men and horses and
other animals was often inspected by him. There were regulations about
the branding of horses and keeping full complements of the
mounts.[67](#67) Even the highest officers' contingents were inspected.

*Army Reviews*

Emperor Jahangir writes, "On the 25th (March 1617) the contingent of
Itimad-ud-daulah passed before me in review on the plain under the
*jharokha*. There were 2,000 cavalry well-horsed, most of whom were
Moghuls, 500 foot armed with bows and guns, and fourteen elephants. The
bakhshis reckoned them up and reported that this force was fully
equipped and according to rule."[68](#68) This paragraph in the *Tuzuk*
is very important for it brings into prominence three characteristics
which made the Mughal army efficient. It shows that even in the reign of
the pleasure loving Jahangir, the contingents of the Mansabdars were
thoroughly checked by bakhshis and regularly reviewed by the emperor.
Secondly, even a high dignitary and close relative of the king like
Itimad-ud-daulah was not exempt from equipping and accoutering his
troops except "according to rule". Thirdly, the mention of the fact that
most of the cavalry was foreign, confirms the observation of Bernier
that the Mogul (emperor) is considered a foreigner in India and he ruled
with the terror of the foreign army rather than love or respect of the
people at large.

At another place he writes that after receiving Prince Khurram on the
completion of his Deccan mission, "The bakhshis were ordered to arrange
according to their mansabs the Amirs who had come with my son to pay
their respects. The first Khan-i-Jahan. After this Abdullah Khan, then
Mahabat Khan..."[69](#69) it shows that protocol was maintained and
noblemen were positioned in the *darbar* in conformity with their
status. This was a positive aspect.

*Corruption in the Army*

On the negative side, corruption among officers of the army was rampant.
From the very beginning of Turkish rule the conquered land used to be
distributed by the king among army officers, nobles, government
officials and even soldiers as rewards and also in lieu of personal
salary, and for paying their soldiers. These grants were not hereditary,
and were given as pay for military service. But many a time the
land-holders continued in possession of their land without rendering any
military service. This is what Sultan Balban found about 2,000 of his
cavalry officers. Over and above this, corruption was galore in the
Diwan-i-Arz. Horses of little value were brought to the Diwan and were
passed as serviceable, obviously by greasing the palms of the clerks.
This was the situation in the Sultanate period. During Mughal times
Abdul Qadir Badaoni writes that "the whole country, with the exception
of the *khalisa* lands, was held by the Amirs as *jagir*, and as they
were wicked and rebellious, and spent large sums on other stores and
workshops, and amassed wealth, they had no leisure to look after the
troops or take interest in the people". In case of emergency they came
with bedraggled slaves and attendants to the scene of war, "but really
useful soldiers there were none".[70](#70) Under Akbar, Shahbaz Khan,
the Mir Bakhshi, introduced the custom and rule of *dagh/mahalli* of the
times of Alauddin Khalji and Sher Shah, but cheating continued. Akbar
divided the Ahadis into *do aspa*, yak aspa and even *nim aspa* (having
half a share in a horse)", in which latter case two troopers kept one
horse together, and shared the stipulated salary, which amounted to six
rupees.[71](#71)

The salary of the soldiers and expenditure on their horses usually
formed part of the pay of the Umara or Mansabdars who were expected to
spend it on them. But this system gave the nobleman an opportunity to
retain some money from every man's pay and prepare false returns of the
horses he was supposed to provide. "Many of the lords who hold the rank
of 5000 horse, do not keep even 1000 in their employ."[72](#72) This
practice was universal throughout the medieval period. Niccolao
Manucci's comment on the situation is quotable as there was corruption
in payment of salaries to the soldiers from the very beginning of Muslim
rule in India.[73](#73)

"Throughout the world the vice is rampant of being ambitious for the
acquisition of wealth. But in no part of the world is this so much the
case as in the Mogul Empire and the rest of India. There our Italian
proverb applies: 'The big fish eat the little ones.' Particularly is it
true at the court and in the army of the Mogul, where the captains and
generals observe no fixed rules in paying their soldiers, conforming
neither to the rank they have granted them nor to the men's merit. The
rank the soldiers receive is high in name, but as for the pay, it is
never more than half what the rank indicates.

"The soldiers accept anything and everything, being forced by necessity;
for if they cannot obtain military service they have no means of living.
Speaking generally, all these soldiers are badly paid and ill-satisfied,
for what should be given them in eight months they do not receive in a
year. What is worst of all, they are never paid the exact amount due,
but little by little. Then they always have to take in the course of a
year's service two months pay in second hand goods. In many cases they
are kept two and three years in arrears. This forces the soldiers to
borrow money at interest from the traders in the camp; these lend it
with the consent of the men's own captains and generals."[74](#74)

To conclude. A brief description of the various wings of the army cannot
give an idea of the heavy expenditure incurred on them. For example,
many army contingents were stationed in forts spread all over the
country. An estimate of the cost of some forts has been given in the
section on monuments. The estimates of expenditure on the maintenance of
soldiers and artillery stationed there is not possible because of
paucity of information available. But it was enormous. In fact Muslim
rule in India was military rule so that "the order of the household, the
efficiency of the army, and the welfare of the country, are intimately
connected with the state of this (Arsenal) department". Akbar took great
interest in watching the practice of mechanical arts, and often worked
at them, himself. He paid special attention to the founding of new
cannon and the manufacture of matchlock guns. He was inventor of good
armour, bullet-proof breast-plates and other weapons. "His Majesty has
made several inventions... He made a gun which, on marches, can easily
be taken to pieces, and properly put together again when required. By
another invention, His Majesty joins seventeen guns in such a manner as
to be able to fire them simultaneously with one match."[75](#75) There
were many kinds of swords. As usual there were Khasa swords and
guns.[76](#76) All this and much more was manufactured in the royal
karkhanas or workshops. Naturally much of the royal revenue, both during
the Sultanate and Mughal period, was expended on these karkhanas.

5.3. ROYAL KARKHANAS

During the Sultanate period, royal karkhanas were established to cater
to the needs of the king and his army. Their numbers and items of
production went on multiplying with time, side by side with the
production in private workshops. The domestic needs of the ruling class
were vast enough, but the political and military requirements were
vaster. Huge standing armies had to be equipped and maintained. Arsenals
and store houses of every kind had to be kept full. Artisans worked
separately at home or jointly in karkhanas. In the royal karkhanas
worked the tent-makers and the saddlers, the upholsters and
cloth-makers, the metal workers and armourers and producers of dozens of
sundry articles.

Skilful engineers in karkhanas manufactured *minjiniqs* and *arradas*
and other engines of war and swords and other arms of every kind for the
army. When Balban marched against the rebel Tughril Beg of Bengal, the
karkhanas overworked to equip the army till the day of the
expedition.[77](#77) When Muhammad Tughlaq was in Gujarat preparing for
leading an effective expedition to Sindh, arms and other articles were
despatched to the king from Delhi . "Weapons alone cost seven lakh
*tankahs*," writes Shams Siraj Afif and adds that "on this basis the
cost of other items from other *karkhanas* can be calculated".[78](#78)
Ibn Battutah gives a list of the presents which he carried on behalf of
Muhammad Tughlaq to Toghan Timur or Shunti, the Mogol emperor of Cathay.
These were all stored or manufactured in the karkhanas. Besides men and
women slaves, the gifts included 100 pieces of cotton fabric called
*bairami* priced at 100 *dinars* per piece, 100 pieces of silk called
*juzz* of variegated tints, 104 pieces of *salahiya*, 100 pieces of
*shirinbaf*, 100 pieces of *shanbaf*, 500 pieces of *muraz*, a kind of
woollen fabric of various colours, 100 pieces of *katan-i-Rumi*, 100
gowns without sleeves, a tent with six pavilions, four golden
candlesticks and four embroidered with silver, four gold basins and six
silver. There were ten dresses of honour, ten caps one of which was
embroidered with jewels, ten quivers one of which was studded with
pearls, 10 swords the scabbard of one of which was inlaid with pearls
and jewels, 10 gloves embroidered with pearls.[79](#79) All these were
prepared in the royal karkhanas. Thus all kinds of civil and military
goods were produced in the karkhanas. According to Shahabuddin al-Umri
"every year the Sultan (Muhammad Tughlaq) distributes 200,000 complete
dresses: 100,000 in spring and 100,000 in autumn (among nobles)...
Dresses are also distributed to the monasteries and hermitages
(*khanqahs* and *dargahs*). The Sultan keeps in his service 500
manufacturers of golden tissues, who weave the gold brocades worn by the
wives of the Sultan, and given away as presents to the amirs and their
wives." Shams Siraj Afif writes that there were thirty-six karkhanas in
the reign of Firoz Tughlaq and the expenditure on one karkhana was not
less than the expense on the city of Multan.[80](#80) The recurring and
non-recurring (*rabti wa ghair rabti*) expenditure on one karkhana in a
month came to one lakh sixty thousand and six lakh *tankahs* each
respectively.[81](#81) Each karkhana was placed under the supervision of
an important noble. Khwaja Abul Hasan was the overall administrator and
superintendent of all these karkhanas. There were karkhanas of gold,
silver and brass and other metals. There was a manufactory each of
wines, perfumes armours. Weapons were all prepared in the karkhanas.
There were *paigahs* of horses, camels and dogs. There was pil khana,
shukra khana, salah khana and tashdar khana. Some figures of expenditure
on karkhanas were like this: alam khana, 80,000 *tankahs* per year,
farrash khana 2 lakhs. In jamdar khana six lakh *tankahs* per year were
expended on obtaining raw materials per year. 12000 slaves worked in the
karkhanas of Firoz Tughlaq and were given a salary of from 100 to 10
*tankahs* according to each one's competence. these workers formed some
sort of guilds and produced excellent articles. There was no occupation
in which the slaves trained as artisans, handicraftsmen and mechanics
did not work. Despite some repetition and confusion in the figures
mentioned by Afif, the expenditure on the karkhanas was enormous.

With the passing of time and the expansion of Muslim rule the items
produced in the karkhanas and the expenditure incurred on them went on
increasing. The karkhanas in the Mughal period produced articles for the
king and the ruling class. There were karkhanas set up in the capital
cities of Delhi and Agra, and many other provincial and industrial towns
like Ahmadabad and Burhanpur. The working conditions and wages in the
royal karkhanas were better than those in the private sector.[82](#82)
Good and confident artisans, therefore, tried to seek employment in the
state workshops where they were sure of getting good remuneration. On
the other hand the king also tried to get the best workmen from within
the country and abroad to work in the royal karkhanas. So that "the
imperial workshops (in) the towns of Lahore, Agra, Fatehpur, Ahmadabad,
Gujarat, turn out many masterpieces of workmanship".[83](#83) Often the
Mughal emperor Akbar used to personally select and appoint men in the
workshops and fix their salaries. These karkhanas set the standard and
provided models for the private craftsmen also. Artisans worked
separately at home or jointly in karkhanas. It was a localized
industrial system, localized in the sense that the craftsmen were
organized differently according to the different social strata they
served and also whether they worked individually or in groups in private
workshops or in the government karkhanas. But organized they were in
"guilds". Guilds regulated various matters of common concern. They
served as mutual aid societies, they stood surety for their members, and
they entered into collective contracts with local authorities and
institutions. This led to diffusion of skill throughout the country, a
skill that passed from generation to generation in the caste-oriented,
vocation-oriented Indian society. The system ensured employment to all
skilled and unskilled workers, in state manufactories or private
production units. The Mughal state was the largest manufacturer, or
rather the only manufacturer on a large scale in respect of several
commodities.[85](#85) But it catered only for the elite and not for the
commoners.

The karkhanas produced articles for civil and military use; they also
served as warehouses. "All articles which have been bought," writes Abul
Fazl, "or woven to order or received as tribute or presents, are
carefully preserved."[86](#86) Two major items of manufacture were arms
and clothes. "His Majesty also ordered that people of certain ranks
should wear certain articles; and this was done in order to regulate the
demand."

Francois Bernier who witnessed the working of the karkhanas in the
capital observes that there were "karkhanas in large halls seen in many
places. In one hall embroiderers are busily employed, superintended by a
master. In another you see goldsmiths; in the third painters; in the
fourth, varnishers with lacquer-work; in a fifth joiners, turners,
tailors, and shoe makers; in a sixth manufacturers of silk, brocade and
those fine muslins of which are made turbans, girdles with golden
flowers and drawers beautifully embroidered with needle work. The
artisans repair every morning to their respective workshops, where they
remain employed the whole day; and in the evening return to their
homes."[87](#87)

Of men's wear produced in the karkhanas, mention may be made of robes of
honour or khilats distributed by the emperor on festive occasions, such
as the coronation anniversary, the two Ids, the Lunar and Solar
weighments etc. Such items were needed in thousands right from the
fourteenth century as detailed earlier. Al-Umri gives details of men's
khilats but in the Mughal period we get description of the items of
luxury-wear also. "His Majesty (Akbar)," writes Abul Fazl, "pays much
attention to various stuffs; hence Irani, European, and Mongol articles
of wear are in abundance. Skilful masters and workmen have settled in
this country to teach people an improved system of manufacture... His
Majesty himself acquired in a short time a theoretical and practical
knowledge of the whole trade; and on account of the care bestowed upon
them the intelligent workmen of this country soon improved. All kinds of
hair-weaving and silk-spinning were brought to perfection; and the
imperial workshops furnish all those stuffs which are made in other
countries." The list of cloths, shawls, clothes, khilats given by Abul
Fazl shows that millions and millions of rupees would have been spent in
the karkhanas on the manufacture and import of these items.[88](#88)

As always, the expenditure on women's wardrobe was much more than that
on men's. Harem ladies dressed in the best and costliest clothes,
whether of cotton, silk or wool. Every day they changed their clothes
several times. "Ordinarily," writes Manucci, "they wear two or even
three garments, each weighing not more than one ounce, and worth from
forty to fifty rupees each. This is without counting the (gold) lace
they are in the habit of adding."[89](#89) Some drawers worn by them
were so delicately fine as to wear out in one night. They covered their
heads with a sheet of cloth of gold spangled with stars of different
makes or wore turbans with an aigrette with ostrich feathers and a ruby
plum which too would have been very costly.[90](#90) Manucci and Bernier
talk in general terms, but Abul Fazl gives specific names of cotton,
silk and woollen fabrics, Indian as well as those imported from "Turkey,
Europe and Portugal".[91](#91) The well known fabrics were Satin, Atlas,
Kimkhab, Katan, Tafta, Ambari, Tasser, Pashmina etc. Plain and brocaded
velvet (*makhmal*) was imported from Europe, Sashan, Yazd, Mashad, Herat
and many other places. By the time of Shahjahan more and more foreign
stuffs had begun to be imported.[92](#92) Internal and external trade,
royal workshops and private manufactories, provided the requirements of
the *haramsara*. Silk was imported from many foreign countries like
China and Persia as well as produced indigenously. Bernier says that the
consumption of fine cloths of gold, brocades, silks, embroideries,
pearls, musk, amber and sweet essences in the seraglio "is greater than
can be conceived". All their clothes were perfumed with essence of rose
and other flowers. Abul Fazl's catalogue of perfumes and the method of
their preparation shows how much Mughal ladies and lords loved perfumes
and how costly they were.[93](#93) Even their shoes used to be splendid,
some with gold and silver spangles, some indeed were studded with
precious stones.

Clothes, embroideries, carpets, shoes, vanity boxes, items of furniture
and scores of other nick-nack were prepared in the royal karkhanas or
imported from abroad. Quilts and coverlets, bedsheets and pillows, were
made at home. Silk quilts of Satgaon were famous. These were also
prepared at Patna, Qasim Bazar, Murshidabad and Orissa.[94](#94) Banaras
silks and embroidered silk fabrics were rightly renowned. Terry says
that the country, "yields good store of silk which they weave curiously,
sometimes mingled with silver or gold. They make velvets and satin
taffetos...".[95](#95) Fine cotton cloth was manufactured at Delhi,
Lahore, Agra, Patna, Banaras, Burhanpur, Dacca and many other
places.[96](#96) "Dacca produced prodigious quantity of fine white cloth
and silken stuffs (*malmal*)."[97](#97)

European ambassadors, traders and visitors were happy to provide large
and small looking glasses, gold and silver laces, fine scarlet and green
broad cloths and several articles of Chinese and Japanese workmanship.
The Royal manufactories or karkhanas were spread all over the country
from Kashmir, Lahore and Agra to Ahmedabad, Fatehpur and Burhanpur. The
workmanship of Kashmir was renowned. Its palkis, bedsheets, trunks,
inkstands, boxes, and spoons, were used all over India. But its shawls
were superb. "Great pains have been taken to manufacture similar shawls
in Patna, Agra, and Lahore, but notwithstanding every possible care,
they never have the delicate texture and softness of the Kashmir
shawls." Kashmir, Fatehpur and Jaunpur carpets were also famous. Woollen
carpets or *qalins* were imported from Iran and Central Asia. Thick
carpets were called *pari* while *shatranji* carpets were both woollen
and cotton.[98](#98)

Jewellery and ornaments were the costliest items. These were worn by
harem ladies in profusion. Ornaments the harem inmates wore from early
childhood, and they remained "the very joy of their hearts" throughout
their lives. Abul Fazl gives a list of the then popular ornaments.
Manucci describes them: "They (the princesses) wore on their arms, above
the elbow, rich armlets two inches wide, enriched on the surface with
stones, and having small bunches of pearls depending from them. At their
wrists are very rich bracelets, or bands of pearls, which usually go
round nine or twelve times. On their fingers are rich rings, and on the
right thumb there is always a ring, where in place of stones, there is
mounted a little round mirror, having pearls around it. This mirror
(*arsi*) they use to look at themselves, an act of which they are very
fond at any and every moment. In addition, they are girded with great
stones; at the end of the strings which tie up their drawers there are
bunches of pearls made up of fifteen strings, five fingers in length.
Round the bottom of their legs are valuable metal rings or strings of
costly pearls... There hangs from the middle of their head in the centre
of their forehead a bunch of pearls or precious ornaments in the shape
of star, sun or moon or flower beset with glittering jewels." He
continues, "All these princesses own six to eight sets of jewels",
besides other sets. No wonder "goldsmiths (both Indian and European) are
almost continuously busy making ornaments. The best and the most costly
of their productions are for the king's person, the queens and the
princesses... ".[99](#99) The karkhanas were located; in many important
towns and cities of the empire. They were thus spread all over the
country. They manufactured everything the Mughals needed. From delicate
stuffs worn inside the palace to arms, annours and ammunition used by
soldiers and nobles on the battlefield, the karkhanas manufactured and
stored all royal requirements. There was no item of delicate
craftsmanship or heavy construction which was not the responsibility of
the karkhanas to produce. So that the karkhanas, in one way or the
other, were concerned with the manufacturing of, say, not only palace
furniture but also associated with constructing palaces, mosques, roads,
canals, and forts. The expenditure incurred on some items finds a stray
reference here and there in the chronicles, but the overall expenditure
on karkhanas cannot be calculated. All that can be said is that it was
colossal.

5.4. ROYAL BENEVOLENCE

Royal largesses knew no bounds after a victory, on coronation, during
festivals (like id, and Nauroz) and on the days of weighments of kings
and princes (under the Mughals). The beneficiaries of the king's bounty
were Muslims of all classes from rich nobles to poor artisans and
labourers and many more. Muslim state in India was meant to serve the
cause of Islam. Therefore, Muslims were provided with all kinds of
facilities like land grants, pensions and rewards. Foreign Muslim
scholars and sufis, adventurers and nobles were invited in large numbers
from abroad and liberally provided for. Muslims at home were given
similar benefits.

In the medieval Muslim state, the enrichment of the courtiers was the
first duty of the ruler, and the Muslim *darbar* specialized in
rewarding its partners in conquest and governance. The nobles on their
part were determined to milk the system. But in all this the generosity
of the king played a significant role. Sultan Shamsuddin Iltutmish
appreciated talent and rewarded it well. Minhaj Siraj says that people
from Persia (and adjoining countries) came to India in "various
capacities".[100](#100) A great scholar of Iltutmish's reign was Amir
Ruhani; he had come from Bukhara to Delhi during Chingiz's upheaval.
Qazi Hamid-ud-din Nagori had also come from abroad.[101](#101)
Fakhr-ul-Mulk Isami, who had been Wazir at Baghdad for thirty years but
then had suffered some disappointment, arrived in India and was
appointed Wazir by Iltutmish. Sultan Iltutmish gave to Khwaja Taj-ud-din
Bukhari and his brother two villages and one lakh *tankahs* in cash for
writing a book titled the *Adab-us-Salatin* or rules for the
rulers.[102](#102) Nuruddin Muhammad Ufi, the author of
*Jama-ul-Hikayat*, had also come to Delhi during Iltutmish's reign. They
all held important positions in India. Because of the Mongol upheaval,
in the court of Iltutmish there arrived twenty-five princes with their
retinues from Iraq, Khurasan and Mawaraun Nahr. During the reign of
Sultan Balban fifteen more refugee princes arrived from Turkistan,
Mawaraun Nahr, Khurasan, Iraq, Azarbaijan, Persia, Rum and Sham. It
appears that each one came with a large number of followers because
Balban allotted for their residence a locality (*mohalla*)
each.[103](#103) Their followers comprised masters of pen and of sword,
scholars and mashaikh.

On his accession Jalaludin Khalji gave ministries and assignments to his
nobles with a free hand. So did Alauddin Khalji. For deserting the cause
of Jalaluddin and siding with Alauddin many nobles had received 20,30,
and even 50 man of gold from the latter. Their soldiers also got 100
*tankahs* each. During the twenty years of his reign, Muhammad Tughlaq
had squandered his wealth on his nobles so that the treasury was in a
bad shape when Firoz Tughlaq ascended the throne. Under Muhammad
Tughlaq, the Chief Qazi enjoyed a salary of 60,000 *tankahs* a year. The
Qazi of the Capital was subordinate to him. Ibn Battutah was appointed
on this post on a salary of 12,000 *tankahs* a year. A Mir Dad was
appointed by the king on 50,000 *tankahs*.[104](#104) After Firoz
Tughlaq came to the throne, during the forty years of his reign he
devoted himself to generosity and "the benefit of the Musalmans", by
distributing villages and lands among his followers. He made all posts
and all allotments hereditary. "if an officer of the army died, he was
to be succeeded by his son; if he had no son, by his son-in-law; if he
had no son-in law, by his slave (*ghulam*); if he had no slave, by his
nearest relation; and if he had no relation, by his wives."[105](#105)
Qiwan-ul-Mulk was a high dignitary in the reign of Muhammad Tughlaq. His
mansion was 'golden' in some parts. He was appointed the Chief Wazir
(Wazir-i-Kul) by Firoz on his arrival in Delhi from Thatta. Khan-i-Jahan
Maqbul attained to high dignity. He had a great number of children. When
a son was born to him Sultan Firoz gave 11,000 *tankahs* for his
maintenance. To a daughter was given 15,000 *tankahs* at the time of
marriage."[106](#106) Firoz Tughlaq gave to many nobles and scholars,
reciters of the Quran and Saiyyads *wazifas* of ten, five and two
thousand *tankahs* each.[107](#107)

During Muslim rule in India, foreign and Indian Muslims were freely
bestowed jobs and gifts. Foreign Muslims were most welcome here. They
came in large numbers and were well provided for. Muhammad Tughlaq was
specially kind to them, as averred by Ibn Battutah. He writes that "the
countries contiguous to India like Yemen, Khurasan and Fars are filled
with anecdotes about... his generosity to the foreigners in so far as he
prefers them to the Indians, honours them, confers on them great favours
and makes them rich presents and appoints them to high offices and
awards them great benefits". He calls them aziz or dear ones and has
instructed his courtiers not to address them as foreigners. 'The sultan
ordered for me," writes Ibn Battutah, "a sum of six thousand *tankahs*,
and ordered a sum of ten thousand for Ibn Qazi Misr. Similarly, he
ordered sums to be given to all foreigners (*a'izza*) who were to stay
at Delhi, but nothing was given to the metropolitans."[108](#108) He
gave robes of honour to all, including Ibn Battutah and Shihabuddin, a
merchant of Kazarun, a town in Iran. When Shihabuddin fell ill, Muhammad
Tughlaq sent him one lakh of gold *tankahs*, "so that his heart be
cheered up". Shihabuddin later sailed to Hormuz, but he was deprived of
all his possessions in the "civil war that broke out between the ruler
of Hormuz and his two nephews...". Shihabuddin was not the only victim
of violence in the Islamic lands of turbulence. Ziyauddin Barani, like
Ibn Battutah, knew that the fear of robbers in Muslim lands had
restricted Muhammad Tughlaq's generosity to the foreigners.

There are scores of instances of Muhammad Tughlaq's generosity to
foreigners. The sultan had sent a present to Caliph Abul Abbas in Egypt
soliciting a letter of investiture. The Caliph sent the desired letter
through Ruknuddin, the grand Shaikh of Egypt. The envoy was sent back to
his country with many rich gifts, including horseshoes made of gold.
Ruknuddin lost the gifts in a conflict and Sultan Muhammad replaced
them. Similarly, Nasiruddin, the preacher of Egypt, came to wait on the
sultan and remained with him for one year enjoying his favours. The
sultan granted Nasiruddin a gilded robe of honour embellished with
precious stones, a tent enclosure made entirely of silk of different
colours, some gold utensils, several pitchers, a flask, a jug, a
four-legged table and a stand for books - all made of gold. On his
arrival the sultan had given Nasiruddin money amounting to a hundred
thousand *tankahs* with two hundred slaves, some of whom he manumitted
while others he took away. Abdul Aziz was a jurist, well versed in
Hadis. He had studied at Damascus and came on a visit to India. One day
he incidentally related to the sultan a few of the Prophet's sayings.
The sultan was so impressed by the recital that he kissed the jurist's
feet and ordered a gold tray to be brought containing two thousand
*tankahs*. He poured the tray with his own hands over the jurist saying,
"This as well as the tray is for you." To the jurist and poet Shamsuddin
Andkani of Khurasan, who had presented an ode containing twenty-seven
verses praising the sultan, Muhammad Tughlaq awarded a sum of one
thousand dinars for each verse. To many other accomplished Muslims like
Azuddin the jurist, Qazi Majduddin a man of great parts, and Burhanuddin
the renowned preacher, handsome amounts of money were sent in their home
towns - they did not visit India.

The story of Haji Kaun may be mentioned as the last case. Haji Kaun was
a cousin of Sultan Abu Said, the king of Iraq. His brother Musa was also
a ruler in some parts of Iraq. Haji Kaun waited on Muhammad Tughlaq and
was honoured with rich gifts. One day the Wazir Khwaja Jahan sent to the
sultan a present including three trays - the first filled with rubies,
the second with emeralds, and the third with pearls. Haji Kaun being
present the sultan gave him a considerable portion out of these. Later
he again gave him enormous wealth. Haji Kaun left for Iraq. His brother
had died and he reclaimed the throne. But he behaved cruelly towards his
nobles and was killed by them, and all the wealth he had carried from
India was lost.[109](#109) Muhammad Tughlaq's generous gifts to
Ghiyasuddin, a scion of the Caliph, would be listed later on. The point
to note here is that under Sultan Muhammad so much wealth was awarded to
so many deserving and undeserving foreign Muslims that at the close of
his reign the Delhi treasury had become bankrupt. There was also the
loss of popularity because "the people of India hate the foreigners
(Persians, Turks, Khurasanis) because of the favour the sultan shows
them,"[110](#110) and they hated the sultan for the same reason.

The Saiyyad rulers, because of their unpopularity as Timur's nominees in
India, needed outside help for sustaining their position and power.
During their rule therefore many Afghans arrived in India at their
invitation. Afghans had earlier been employed by Mahmud of Ghazni,
Iltutmish and Balban to fight Hindu Rajas and Zamindars. From the time
of Khizr Khan they came in large groups. They were assigned important
*iqtas*. Afghan colonization was a costly affair. The Afghan nobility,
devoid of discipline and greedy of gathering wealth, added to the
expenditure of the Sultanate. To add to the expenditure many nobles, who
had lost their positions during the invasion of Timur, were reallotted
their old offices, parganas and *iqtas*.[111](#111) The ascendancy of
the Afghans during the Saiyyad rule paved the way for their ascension to
the throne of Delhi. During the Lodi regime (1451-1526), Afghan tribal
leaders became a still more privileged class in the polity of the
Sultanate. All the best lands were distributed among them. Similarly, in
the Sharqi kingdom, the court of Sultan Ibrahim, according to Farishtah,
rivalled that of Iran, and the capital Jaunpur came to be known as
second Shiraz.[112](#112) in other Muslim kingdoms, like Gujarat and
Malwa also, the kings spent equally lavishly on rewarding their nobles,
scholars, and men of religion. According to the *Akhbar-ul-Akhiyar*,
Sikandar Lodi invited learned men from Arabia, Iran and Central Asia and
many of them adopted Hindustan as their home. For example, Shaikh Husain
Tahir, who lived during the reigns of Bahlul and Sikandar, was known as
a walking encyclopaedia.[113](#113) It is said that Sultan Sikandar
bestowed lands and gifts upon the learned and the religious to the
extent that had never been done in former reigns.[114](#114)

The Sur Afghans were no different from their Lodi compatriots. "Sher
Shah gave to many of his kindred who came from Roh money and property
far exceeding their expectations." This statement of Abbas Sarwani is
repeated and elaborated still later on. He says: "To every pious Afghan
who came into his presence from Afghanistan, Sher Shah used to give
money to an amount exceeding his expectations, and he would say, 'This
is your share of the kingdom of Hind, which has fallen into my hands,
this is assigned to you, come every year to receive it.'" And to his own
tribe and family of Sur, who dwelt in the land of Roh, he sent an annual
stipend of money, in proportion to the members of his family and
retainers; and during the period of his dominion no Afghan, whether in
Hind or Roh was in want, but all became men of substance. It was the
custom of the Afghans during the time of sultans Bahlul and Sikandar,
and as long as the dominions of the Afghans lasted, that if any Afghan
received a sum of money or a dress of honour, "that sum of money or
dress of honour was regularly apportioned to him, and he received it
every year". Sher Shah Suri too said, "It is incumbent upon kings to
give grants to *imams*; for the prosperity and populousment of the
cities of Hind are dependent on the *imams* and holy men... whoever
wishes that God Almighty should make him great, should cherish *Ulama*
and pious persons, that he may obtain honour in this world and felicity
in the next."[115](#115)

Zahiruddin Muhammad Babur, after his victory over Ibrahim Lodi liberally
distributed gold and gifts among his people. "To some Begs 10 lakhs were
given, 8, 7 or 6 to others. Erksine estimated these sums as very large
sums for the age. Suitable money gifts were bestowed from the Treasury
on the whole army, to every tribe there was, Afghan, Hazara, Arab,
Biluch *etc*. to each according to its position. Every trader and
student, indeed every man who had come with the army, took ample portion
and share of bounteous gift and largess. Many gifts went to the begs and
soldiery on that side (Tramontana)", i.e. homeland. Largesses were also
distributed on festivals like Id.[116](#116) The awards to officers who
had done good work in the battle against Rana Sanga were generous. The
government of Mewat with its chief town Tijara was bestowed on Chin
Timur "together with an allowance of 50 *lakhs* for his support". Alwar
and an allowance of 15 *lakhs* was bestowed on Tardi yakka. The contents
of the Alwar treasury were bestowed on Humayun.[117](#117)

If this could be given to the nobles and army officers, princes and
ladies of the royalty of course were most lavishly rewarded. The first
Mughal emperor Babur's bounty in this regard earned him the sobriquet of
*qalandar*, that is, he gave away with both hands and was left with
nothing for himself. Babur distributed the wealth on 11th or 12th of
May, 1526. This is what we find noted in his memoirs about the
distribution of treasure in Agra: "To Humayun were given 70 lakhs from
the treasury, and, over and above this, a treasure house was bestowed on
him just as it was... 17 lakhs were given to Kamran, 15 lakhs to
Muhammad Zaman Mirza, while to Askari and Hindal and other relations and
younger children went masses of gold and silver, of 'plenishing jewels
and slaves'."

"Valuable gifts (*saughat*) were sent for the various relations in
Samarkand, Khurasan, Kashgar and Iraq." Details about these are given by
Babur's daughter Gulbadan Begum. Khwaja Kilan Beg carried them to Kabul
to be distributed among the Begums and other relatives as per the
conqueror's instructions. "To each Begum is to be delivered as follows:
one special dancing girl of the dancing girls of sultan Ibrahim, with
one gold plate full of jewels - ruby and pearl, cornelian and diamond,
emerald and turquoise, topaz and cat's-eye - and two small
mother-of-pearl trays full of *asharfis*, and two other trays of
*shahrukhis*." Similar gifts were to be given to other inmates of the
harems and kinsmen (of officers serving in India under Babur) and Aghas
or guardians of the harems. An *asharfi* weighing fifteen sirs of Hind,
the only one of its kind, was sent for the Asas or the night-guard. When
all the begums and khanums arrived in India, ninety-six persons in all,
they all received houses and lands and gifts to their hearts'
desire.[118](#118)

Let us continue with the distribution of gifts to royal ladies into the
later Mughal times. Nur Jahan Begum received from her royal husband
Jahangir, grants of land, gifts of gold and jewels, and countless
treasures. She also got gifts and presents from Indian Rajas and foreign
merchants. The jagirs she held spread all over the country, and "would
have conferred on her the title of a commander of 30,000". Her large
jagir of Ramsar was situated about 30 kilometres south-east of Ajmer. In
1617, on the happy occasion of Shahjahan's victory in the Deccan, Nur
Jahan was given the pargana of Toda as jagir. It lay 80 kilometres
south-east of Ajmer on the medieval trade route from Surat to Agra and
brought her an annual income of two lakhs of rupees.[119](#119) Besides
she had received the right of collecting octroi duty at
Sikandarabad[120](#120) on the merchandise coming from Purab or the
eastern country of Allahabad, Bihar and Orissa as well as Bengal and
Bhutan.[121](#121) Obviously Nur Jahan Begum's income from cesses and
octroi duties was substantial. To this may be added her income from
trade and commerce in which she was keenly interested. Indian ships
carried from India textiles, spices, ginger, pepper, dyes, opium and
various other drugs to West Asian countries like Arabia, Persia, North
Africa, and brought back wines, perfumes, brocades, China goods, gold,
silver, ivory, amber, pearls, horses etc. Nur Jahan maintained a number
of ships and carried on foreign trade mainly in indigo and embroidered
cloth.[122](#122) Her commercial enterprises brought her immense
profits.[123](#123) She had to compromise with the fact that the
Emperor, his mother and many other members of the royal family were also
trading on their own account, and Nur Jahan could not monopolize any
item of trade. Many European trading companies like the Portuguese,
Dutch and English were at this time busy in commercial activity in
India. Nur Jahan's relations with the English were good. She sent her
goods in English ships, preferring them to those of the Portuguese with
whom the Mughal relations were not good.

The English profited by her favours. She managed *farmans* for them
conferring concessions.[124](#124) In these transactions Nur Jahan's
brother Asaf Khan was the chief agent and intermediary. Gifts and
presents were exchanged between the English and the royal family. She
also received valuable and costly curios, gifts, *nazars* and bribes
from foreigners and Indians.[125](#125)

Similarly, Jahan Ara Begum possessed enormous wealth. On his accession
Shahjahan had given her one hundred thousand *asharfis* and four hundred
thousand rupees and fixed her an allowance at six hundred thousand
rupees.[126](#126) In the case of royal ladies whose allowances were
large, usually one half of the amount was paid to them in cash and the
other half was given in the form of assignments of land or customs
revenue. Jahan Ara received many such assignments. The jagirs assigned
to her included, among others, Achhbal and Vernag in Kashmir,
Doraha[127](#127) and Panipat in Punjab, Bachhpur or Machalpur in
Central India and Shafipur in U.P. The revenue of the sarkar of Doraha
was given to her for the upkeep of her gardens and that of the
flourishing port city of Surat for her expenditure on betel.[128](#128)
That is how the poor of the country were fleeced to keep the princes and
princesses rich. In 1648-49, on the inaugural of the twenty-third year
of his reign, Shahjahan granted her the pargana of Panipat, the annual
revenue of which was one crore *dams*. "She had in addition many
precious stones and jewels that had been given to her by her father." It
was customary in the harem to reciprocate such gestures and she also
gave presents to her father and brothers. Once on the occasion of the
weighing ceremony of Shahjahan, she gave him a pearl of great value and
distributed gold and silver in *nisar*. On the accession of Aurangzeb
she presented precious jewels to the new emperor and again sent presents
to him on the occasion of his weighing ceremony. On another occasion
when Shahjahan recovered from illness the princess along with some other
ladies distributed fifty thousand rupees to the poor.

"This princess," writes Bernier, "accumulated great riches by means of
her large allowances and of the costly presents which flowed in from all
quarters, in consideration of numberless negotiations intrusted to her
sole management." As in the case of Nur Jahan, these came from both
Indian and foreign channels. The Dutch sought her favours to resolve
their problems. She also received presents from the English consisting
of perfumed oils, broad cloth, embroidered cloth, mirrors and cabinets.
Tavernier, who came to India in 1641, presented rich gifts to her. In
1654 Raja Prithvichand of Srinagar in Garhwal sought the pardon of
emperor Shahjahan through Jahan Ara Begum to whom he naturally presented
with gifts. In the same year Qutb Shah of Golkunda, who had been
troubled by Aurangzeb, appealed to Jahan Ara and she secured his pardon
against payment of indemnity. There are many more such instances when
her intercession brought her gifts and gold. Jahan Ara Begum's finances
were also augmented by her commercial enterprise. She owned a number of
ships and used to carry on trade on her own account. She contracted
friendly commercial relations with the Dutch and the English and with
their co-operation carried on extensive commercial activities and made
enormous profits. According to Manucci, her income was thirty lakhs of
rupees a year besides precious stones and jewels.[129](#129)

Nur Jahan and Jahan Ara are big names. All princes and princesses were
given allowances and gifts of cash and jewels. Jahangir describes the
gifts he bestowed on Shahzada Khurram on many occasions and on Prince
Parwez at the time of his marriage. On one occasion when Roshan Ara
Begum was given seven lakh fifty thousand rupees by Aurangzeb,
Zaib-un-nisa Begum got four lakhs, Zinat-un-nisa two lakhs, Badr-un-nisa
one lakh seventy thousand, and Zabt-un-nisa one lakh fifty
thousand.[130](#130) High and mighty begums maintained their own
establishments but others lived in the harem and their expenses were
borne by the state exchequer. When it is recollected that Akbar's harem
had 5,000 women and Prince Shah Alam's 2,000, the expenditure on the
harem can well be visualized. Since the harem ladies had little work to
do - work was considered a degrading activity among the Mughal elite -
they spent their time in make-up and gossip. All their hobbies and
necessities were expensive but provided for.

Like nobles, princes and princesses men of learning and religion too
were awarded presents and granted pensions liberally. Nor were the poor
ignored. Muslim state in India was a welfare state for the
Muslims,[131](#131) as desired by the Islamic religion and its
scriptures. From the very beginning of Muslim rule lands and gardens,
orchards and villages and cash awards were granted as scholarships and
pensions to Ulama, Mutalaqin, Sufis, Hafiz, Saadat, Mashaikah,
Arbab-i-Masjid, Khanqah-dwellers, Astanadars, Qalandars, Faqirs, the
deprived, the widows, the old, orphaned, blind, deformed, spastic,
physically handicapped, teachers, Muftis, Khatibs, students, poets etc.,
etc.[132](#132) For example, Firoz Tughlaq sanctioned thirty-six lakh
*tankahs* for ulema and *mashaikh* and one crore *tankahs* yearly for
the needy and the helpless (*faqir wa miskin*), besides allotting
*qasbas* for Saadats.[133](#133) 34,200 persons received these monthly
allowances. All Muslim kings were exceedingly benevolent to men of
religion - including the secular Akbar and Jahangir. Jahangir writes:
"During the reign of my father, the ministers of religion and students
of law and literature, to the number of two and three thousand, in the
principal cities of the empire, were already allowed pensions from the
state; and to these, in conformity with the regulations established by
my father, I directed Miran Sadr Jahan (spelling normalised) one of the
noblest among the Seyeds of Herat, to allot a subsistence corresponding
with their situation; and this is not only to the subjects of my own
realms, but to foreigners - to natives of Persia, Roum, Bokhara, and
Azerbaijan, with strict charge that this class of men should not be
permitted either want or inconvenience of any type."[134](#134) Jahangir
also directed Miran Sadr "that he should every day produce before me
deserving people (worthy of charity)."[135](#135)

But let us begin with the beginning. From Minhaj Siraj to Farishtah, all
Muslim chroniclers bestow lavish praise upon Muhammad Ghauri for his
munificence and patronage of the learned. Qutbuddin Aibak's generosity
is praised by all writers who style him as *lakhbakhsh* or giver of
lakhs. Balhan used to visit the houses of the men of religion and
learning and bestow gifts on them. So also were treated the poor and the
weak. Scattering of coins among the poor was a common practice.
Sometimes ingenuous methods were devised to reward people to make them
happy. During his march from Kara to Delhi to occupy the throne Alauddin
Khalji used a *manjaniq* or catapult engine to hurl at every halt five
man of gold coins among the people and thereby gained their goodwill.
Emperor Jahangir used to scatter rupees, half-rupees and quarter rupees
to faqirs and indigent persons on both sides of the road during
excursions.[136](#136) On Alauddin's accession liberal gifts were
bestowed upon the people at large, and for some time wine and beauty and
music became the order of the day. Pavilions were erected in the bazars
and wine, soft drinks and *pan* were distributed free. The army was
given six months salary as a reward, the shaikhs and ulema were awarded
gratuities, and all high and low partook of the royal bounty.[137](#137)
Similarly, when Firoz Tughlaq arrived in Delhi after his coronation,
"pavilions (*kaba*) were raised and decorated *according to the times of
former kings*". There were six such pavilions. One lakh *tankahs* was
expended on each pavilion in food and sherbet for twenty-one days and no
one was excluded.

*Diwan-i-Khairat*

The *Tarikh-i-Firoz Shahi* of Shams Siraj Afif contains a fairly good
account of the social life of the Sultanate period. While Ziyauddin
Barani's *Tarikh* and most other chronicles are primarily political
histories, Afif's work has a social bias. It gives in detail the
measures Firoz Tughlaq took for the benefit of the poor, but it was a
continuation of a tradition, and things were done "according to the
times of former kings". In brief, measures such as his were taken
throughout the medieval period. Sultan Firoz founded an establishment by
the name of Diwan-i-Khairat. It was meant to help promotion of marriages
of daughters of needy Musalmans. Those who could not provide a marriage
portion for their daughters were given fifty *tankahs*, thirty *tankahs*
and twenty-five tankahs as per their social standing.[138](#138)

Similarly, according to Motamid Khan, Nur Jahan Begum in the seventeenth
century, "if ever she learnt that any orphan girl was destitute, she
would bring about her marriage, and give her a wedding portion". She was
an asylum for all sufferers, and helpless girls were married at the
expense of her private purse. She must have portioned about 500 girls
and thousands were grateful for her generosity.[139](#139) Muslim rulers
and nobles throughout the medieval period tried to earn merit by doing
this work of *sawab*.

Sultan Firoz established a government hospital for he relief of the
sick. Able physicians and doctors were appointed to treat the patients
and provision was made for the supply of medicines. The sultan settled
some rich villages to provide for the expenses of this hospital, so that
medicines, food, drinks and other expenses of the patients were borne by
the state treasury. Al-Umari speaks of many private hospitals in the
reign of Muhammad Tughlaq. But Firoz's was a government hospital.
Jahangir also takes credit for doing the same. He gave orders that the
Jagirdars "should found hospitals in the great cities, and appoint
physicians for the healing of the sick; whatever the expenditure might
be, should be given from the *khalisa* establishment".[140](#140) After
recovery the patient was discharged after being provided with a
"sufficient sum of money for his exigencies".[141](#141)

Sultan Firoz Tughlaq also saw to it that no workman remained unemployed.
Sometimes respectable people, out of shame, would not make their
necessities known. But once they were brought before the Sultan, he
provided them with some employment. Men of pen and intelligent men of
business were sent to government karkhanas, others to other suitable
jobs. Slaves were also assigned to nobles or absorbed in the king's
establishment. He himself had about 2 lakhs of them.

Like Firoz Shah Tughlaq, Sultan Sikandar Lodi was specially kind towards
his co-religionists. Every six months he got prepared a list of the
indigent and the meritorious and fixed suitable allowances for each one
of them. Every winter he distributed clothes and covering to the needy.
Cooked and uncooked food was distributed free at various places every
day. On certain days like Id, Barawafat, the anniversary of the
Prophet's death, and in the month of Ramzan, charities were freely
distributed. Following upon the example of the king, the nobles also
vied with one another in giving charities.[142](#142) What has been said
about Firoz Tughlaq or Sikandar Lodi stands true for all Muslim kings
and references of such benevolences lie scattered in most Persian
histories. Government expenditure on helping the poor was high.

Sikandar Lodi encouraged learning among his clansmen. Education was
mostly imparted in schools attached to mosques. Schools and colleges at
Agra, Sambhal, Mathura, Narwar and many other places flourished under
the royal patronage, and Muslim learning "spread in the
countryside".[143](#143) Its cost was borne by the Muslim state. It need
hardly be added that "these Madrasas were strongholds of orthodoxy and
were subsidised by the state."[144](#144)

Sikandar Lodi was an orthodox ruler while Sher Shah is considered to be
a secular king. But so far as looking after the interests and welfare of
the Muslims is concerned, all sultans and badshahs were alike. Religious
considerations prompted their actions. Sher Shah often said, "It behoves
kings to inscribe the pages of their history with the characters of
religion. It behoves kings not to disobey the commands of
God."[145](#145) Two institutions, says Rizquilah, "were kept up during
his reign without any interruption: one, the religious establishments
(*imarat khana*) and the other the houses for the poor... He himself
used to take his meals with the learned and the *Shaikhs*.[146](#146)
His private kitchen was very extensive, for several thousand people fed
there every day. There was a general order, that if any soldier or
religious personage, or any cultivator, should be in need of food, he
should feed at the kings's kitchen..." The daily cost of these meals,
and of these places for the distribution of food, was 500 gold pieces
(*asharfis*) or rupees 2,37,25,000 per year.[147](#147) "Destitute
people, who were unable to provide for their own subsistence, like the
blind, the old, the weak in body, widows, and the sick, etc., to such he
gave stipends from the treasury of the town in which they were
resident..." All Muslim rulers as a rule, and without exception,
provided free food to the poor. Even the stingy Aurangzeb was keen on
setting up free kitchens. Distribution of free meals benefited the
destitute but such generosity would also have encouraged laziness and
beggary among the Muslims. As Jadunath Sarkar writes, "The vast sums
spent by the State in maintaining pauper houses and in scattering alms
during Ramzan and other holy days and joyous ceremonies, were a direct
premium on laziness. Thus a lazy and pampered class was created in the
empire, who was the first to suffer when its prosperity was
arrested."[148](#148) Sher Shah noted that distribution of stipends to
the sick and old through religious officials encouraged the imams to
embezzle money. In medieval times wherever there was money there was
corruption. And free kitchens involved lot of money. Sher Shah took
steps to curb imams' dishonesty.

Charities were distributed among the poor and the needy on occasions
both happy and sad. Money was spent like water at the birth of a prince,
his marriage, accession of the king, or at the time of sickness or of
death in the royal family. Happy occasions were many. And Jahangir's
memoirs are full of accounts of these. For example, when early in his
reign, Jahangir was at Kabul, he ordered that so long as he was there,
12,000 rupees were to be distributed every Thursday among the poor. Or,
he gave 9,000 rupees to be distributed in aims to faqirs and other poor
people on the occasion of Prince Parwez's marriage. When princess
Jahanara was badly burnt Shahjahan distributed 5000 rupees daily in alms
totalling seven lakhs. On her recovery he gave 5 lakhs more in charity.
The slave Arif who had prepared the ointment which healed her burns was
weighed against gold and given 7,000 coins in cash. On Shahjahan's death
Jahanara distributed two thousand gold coins among the poor.

One practice of the Mughals, namely *tuladan*, which was borrowed from
the Hindus provided many occasions in the course of the year for
distributing charity among the poor. It was started by Akbar and it
continued till the twelfth year of Aurangzeb's reign. Even after that
many princes continued celebrating their birthday by
*tuladan*.[149](#149) Kings and princes were weighed on both solar and
lunar birthdays and money equal to their weight was distributed among
the faqirs. For instance, on the solar weighing of Prince Parwez, the
whole proceedings were given to the poor. On the fortieth
*wazan-i-qamari* of Jahangir (weighing according to lunar year), he gave
10,000 rupees of the money of the weighing to be distributed among the
deserving and the needy. Prince Khurram was weighed in his sixteenth
lunar year against gold, silver and other materials which were given
away to the faqirs. But the most interesting was the double celebration
of lunar and solar weighments of the late emperor Akbar by his son.
Jahangir writes that "I determined that the value of all the articles
which he (Akbar) used to order for his own-weighing in the solar and
lunar years should be estimated, and that what this came to should be
sent to the large cities for the repose of the soul of that enlightened
one, and be divided amongst the necessitous and the faqirs. The total
came to 100,000 rupees, equal to 300 Iraq *tumans*, and 300,000 of the
currency of the people of Mawaraun-nahr."[150](#150) In this way many
millions of rupees must have gone in charity in the course of a hundred
years.

Artists, poets, scholars and musicians, were of course given liberal
grants, stipends and rewards. Their lists are found in almost all Muslim
chronicles. One example should suffice. In the third volume of W. Haig's
translation of Abdul Qadir Badaoni's *Muntakhab-ut-Tawarikh*, there are
accounts of 38 shaikhs, 69 scholars, 15 philosophers and physicians and
about 167 poets of the time of Akbar. It is said that there were 300
painters in Akbar's court alone. It is not necessary to give many more
lists.

5.5. GIFTS TO CALIPHS, MECCA AND MEDINA

The generosity of Muslim rulers was not confined to Musalmans in India
alone. It extended to Muslims anywhere and everywhere. In the case of
sending presents and wealth to the Caliphs and the holy cities of Mecca
and Medina their liberality was unrestricted.

Lot of wealth was sent to the Caliph by the sultans of Hindustan. The
first four Caliphs were directly related to the Prophet. Muawiyah, the
founder of the Ummayad Caliphate, was a cousin and Abbas (the ancestor
of the Abbasid Caliphate) an uncle of Prophet Muhammad. There was
therefore very great reverence for the Caliphs in the world of Islam.
The Abbasids had built up a large empire with capital at
Baghdad.[151](#151) Its provinces were administered by the Turkish slave
governors and Turkish mercenary troops. These Turkish governors became
independent in course of time but officially they were only slaves. So
they thought it politic to pay tribute to the Khalifa and in return seek
from him recognition of their 'sovereignty'. The Arab invader Muhammad
bin Qasim as well as the later governors of Sindh used to read the
*khutbah* in the name of the Ummayad Caliph and used to send him the
legal one-fifth part of the booty (Khams).[152](#152) For example, when
Muhammad bin Qasim attacked Debal, "700 beautiful females, who were
under the protection of Budh (that is, had taken shelter in the temple)
were all captured with their valuable ornaments..." Muhammad despatched
seventy-five damsels as Khams to Hajjaj. Thereafter, whichever places he
sacked he slew the men and captured the women and children, and batches
of them were despatched to the Caliph at regular intervals. On one
occasion alone 20,000 slaves of both sexes were sent to the
Caliph.[153](#153) The amount of cash and valuables sent to Caliph
counted to 120 million dirhams (120 thousand dirhams according to
Al-Kufi).

Mahmud Ghaznavi's campaigns in India had Caliphal blessings. In return,
Mahmud was always careful to inscribe the Caliph's name on his coins,
and send to Baghdad presents from the plunder of his
campaigns.[154](#154) These consisted of large amounts of all kinds of
wealth including indigo, the valuable dyestuff which was collected as
tribute from India.[155](#155) The accession of Mahmud's successor Masud
was not peaceful and, therefore, soon after coming to the throne he
applied to the Khalifa for recognition of his title to succession. "He
sent an envoy to Qadir Billah, and promising to send him every year a
sum of 2,00,000 *dinars*, 10,000 pieces of cloth, besides other
presents, requested him to recognise his claim. The Khalifa was pleased
to send him a formal investiture..."[156](#156) His successor continued
with the tradition. By such remittances the sultans obtained recognition
and moral support of the Caliph while the latter gained in financial
resources and remained supreme in the Islamic world.

Like the Ghaznavids the Ghaurids were also alive to the importance of
obtaining the confirmation of their sovereignty from the Caliphs of
Baghdad. Ghiyasuddin, the elder brother of Muizzuddin or Muhammad
Ghauri, obtained sanctions from the Abbasid Caliph of Baghdad. The
earliest Muslim rulers of Hindustan were originally slaves, and it was
recognised in all quarters that their position as rulers would be
buttressed if they could receive caliphal recognition. Tajuddin Yilduz,
the ruler of Ghazni, obtained the Caliph's sanction for his authority.
After Yilduz and Qubacha had been destroyed by Iltutmish, the latter
received the investiture from the Abbasid Caliph al-Mustansir Billah as
a legal sanction of his monarchy.[157](#157) The formal patent of
investiture was called *manshur* and the robe of honour, turban, swords,
ensigns and other gifts were called *karamat*. It is not known if
Iltutmish had requested the Khalifa for it, or how much wealth and
presents he sent in return, but he must have sent lot of wealth as that
was but customary.

Muhammad bin Tughlaq probably crossed all limits of generosity in
sending the Caliph enormous wealth. Surely the Sultan must have sent a
substantial amount, because when Ghiyasuddin, who was only a descendent
of the extinct caliphal house of Baghdad, visited India, Muhammad's
bounty knew no bounds. Writing on the basis of Muslim histories,
Wolseley Haig says that "the vessels in his (Ghiyasuddin's) palace were
of gold and silver, the bath being of gold and on the first occasion of
his using it a gift of 400,000 *tangas* was sent to him; he was supplied
with male and female servants, and slaves. He was allowed a daily sum of
300 *tangas*, though much of the food consumed by him and his household
came from the royal kitchen; he received in fee the whole of Alauddin's
city of Siri, one of the four cities (Delhi, Siri, Tughlaqabad, and
Jahanpanah) which composed the capital, with all its buildings, and
adjacent gardens and lands and a hundred villages; he was appointed
governor of the eastern district of the province of Delhi; he received
thirty mules with trappings of gold; and whenever he visited the court
he was entitled too receive the carpet on which the king sat." And all
this wealth was bestowed on a "mean and miserly" wretch who could not
bear to see others eating good food and who did not return a loan he
owed to Ibn Battutah.[158](#158) If this treasure was given to a scion
of a house which had become defunct, how much more was sent to the
living Caliph at Cairo, is difficult to sumrise. No wonder it elicited a
comment from the contemporary chronicler Ziyauddin Barani: "So great was
the faith of the Sultan in the Abbasid Khalifas," says he, "that he
would have sent all his treasures in Delhi to Egypt, had it not been for
the fear of robbers."[159](#159) That is how the wealth of India, milked
from the labours of the poor, was squandered on foreign Muslims. No
wonder that because of the generosity of the Sultan in his time the
Caliphal investitures were. received more than once. Muhammad Tughlaq
included the names of Abbasid al-Mustakfi and his successors al-Wathiq I
and al-Hakim in his *khutbah* and inscribed on his coins their names to
the exclusion of his own.[160](#160) Such an attitude of subservience
combined with munificence encouraged the Caliph to send to Muhammad's
successor Firoz Tughlaq, a patent of investiture entrusting to him the
territories of Hind.

With the fall of the Tughlaq dynasty the name of the Caliph was dropped
from Delhi coins. But the outflow of wealth did not cease. To the
Saiyyad rulers, Timur and his successors played the role of the Caliphs.
It is they who provided moral and material support to Saiyyad sultans.
More than once, role of honour came from Shah Rukh to Delhi for Khizr
Khan and Mubarak Khan. In return annual tribute was sent to Shah
Rukh.[161](#161) Sultan Muhammad Saiyyad also remained loyal to
him.[162](#162) It was not only the sultans of Delhi, but also of
Jaunpur and Bengal who called themselves vice-regents of the Abbasid
Caliphs.[163](#163) The Caliph al-Mustanjid Billah sent to Sultan Mahmud
Khalji of Malwa robes of honour and a letter patent. Mahmud accepted the
gifts of the Khalifa with due honour and gave in return to the envoy
*tashrifat*, and a large amount of gold and silver. Even some rebels of
the Delhi Sultanate received the caliphal investiture[164](#164) in
return for gifts of money and gold and slaves. Needless to add that
money, gifts and presents were sent to Caliphs; not only to Caliphs but
also to Mecca and Medina and to Muslim brethren in their homelands

*Mecca and Medina*

This is borne out by some figures available for the Mughal period.

In war and peace, gifts were regularly sent to Mecca (Makka) and Medina
(Madinah). The Prophet had ensured prosperity of Arabia permanently
through income from Hajj pilgrimage and presents from pious Muslims to
these holy centres of Islam. If the sultans sent treasures to Caliphs,
the Mughals excelled in forwarding gifts and charities, gold and silver,
to the Muslim holy cities of Mecca and Medina. "He made Hajj i.e.,
pilgrimage to the Kaaba, an old pre-Islamic Arab rite, a basic tenet of
his religion to impress upon foreign Muslims the sanctity of Arabia, and
create an ever lasting source of income for the Arabs." This "income
counted as the mainstay of the Arabs before they discovered their oil
wealth".[165](#165)

Some interesting information is available from the west coast, where
Muslim traders had settled, regarding numbers of gifts being sent to the
Muslim holy cities from earliest times. A lengthy bilingual inscription
from Somnath Patan in Arabic and Sanskrit dated 662 H/1264 CE mentions
about Nakhuda Nuruddin Firoz, the ship master. He built a mosque on land
which was either purchased or gifted by Briha Raja Chhada. Provision was
made by Nuruddin for *muallims* and *muazzins*. "Any surplus which
remained was to be sent to Mecca and Medina." The lengthy Sanskrit text
has a shorter Arabic counterpart. Missing in the Sanskrit is the
significant invocation: "... in the city of Somnath, may God make it one
of the cities of Islam and (banish) infidelity and idols." Another
inscription from Junagarh mentions an Arab ship master who was "the prop
of the pilgrims to the holy cities of Mecca and Medina".[166](#166)

With the arrival of Babur information about such gifts abounds. Babur
sent to holy men belonging to Samarqand and Khurasan offerings vowed to
God (*nuzur*); so too to Mecca and Medina. "We gave one *shahrukhi* for
every soul in the country of Kabul and the vale-side of Varsak, man and
woman, bond and free, of age or non-age."[167](#167)

Akbar regularly sent money and gifts to Mecca and Medina. "Though
debarred from leaving Hindustan himself, he helped many others to
fulfill this primary duty of their faith, and opened wide his purse for
their expenses. Each year he named a leader of the caravan and provided
him with gifts and ample funds for the two cities. When Gulbadan Begum,
his paternal aunt, went for Hajj, Sultan Khwaja, Gulbadan's cicerone,
took among other presents, 12,000 dresses of honour."[168](#168) As
mentioned earlier both Akbar and Jahangir sent to the religious men of
Persia, Rum and Azarbaijan subsistence allowance on the principle:
"Wealth is from God... and these are his servants", be they in Hindustan
or any other Muslim country.[169](#169) "Shahjahan despatched to Mecca
an amber candlestick covered with a network of gold and inlaid with gems
and diamonds by his own artisans. It was a most gorgeous piece of work
turned out by the craftsmen, worth two and a half lacs of
rupees."[170](#170)

These are just a few specimens. Kings and nobles and rich Hajis
regularly sent out wealth from India to Mecca and Medina.

5.6. KINGS AND NOBLES

Life of Muslim kings and nobles in India can be termed as fully lived.
It was characterised by the absence of any sense of economy. Those who
could liberally distribute money among the rich and the poor alike -
umara, ulema, saiyyads, sufis, artists, poets and faqirs -, those who
sent abroad millions of rupees to their Muslim brothers and religious
leaders, could not by themselves live a life of austerity. They did not
conquer countries and rule over kingdoms to live parsimoniously. They
lived a full-fledged life full of physical comfort. There was no
difference between the income of the state and the private purse of the
king. Technically, all wealth of the state was spent on and on the
command of the emperor. It is significant that the *Ain-i-Akbari* of
Abul Fazl covering various items of the state's income and expenditure
begins with the chapter on Household, the imperial household and
imperial treasuries. For everything in a Muslim state was directed
towards the person of the king and the order of his household. His
household was his harem. We have already written about the life of the
Mughal harem in a full-size monograph.[171](#171) Therein one can get
details about the expenses incurred on the harems of Muslim royalty and
nobility. We shall therefore be very brief here on the subject of the
expenditure of the Muslim ruling class in India.

The government of the early Turks revolved round the sultan's household
establishment. The public revenue could be spent or squandered in the
pursuit of his pleasure. Sultan Ruknuddin Firoz, son of Iltutmish,
emptied the treasury on the providers of pleasure. Sultan Kaiqubad, the
grandson of Balban, is said to have spent all the surplus revenues, so
assiduously collected by his minister Nizamuddin, on his dancing
girls.[172](#172) Dancing girls were the chief means of diversion. Some
selected girls were trained from young age in the art of dancing, music
and coquetry for the pleasure of the king.[173](#173) As time went on,
these entertainments became, from private amusement, a conventional
court practice. Wine was as indispensable as music. Right through the
medieval period the elite drank with enthusiasm. Even the adolescent
drank, and all princess drank in secret.[174](#174) The king was
imitated by his ministers and nobles who were also his partners through
thick and thin. They all combined to make the court life notoriously
licentious and corrupt, and men of all ranks gave themselves up to the
pursuit of pleasure. This is an old story known to all serious students
of medieval history. But the point to note is that much of the revenue
of the state was spent on the pleasure-seeking activities of kings and
nobles.

To have an idea of the wealth spent by the king and his nobles let us
give some examples, or rather samples, for the range of the study covers
a period of a thousand years, even more. A bejewelled crown of Muhammad
Tughlaq cost one lakh *tankahs*, while another 80,000.[175](#175) A shoe
of the time of Firoz Tughlaq again cost 80,000 *tankahs*.[176](#176)
Muhammad Tughlaq spent so generously during his reign of twenty-seven
years that he exhausted the Delhi treasury.[177](#177) And the luxurious
life of the nobles in the time of Firoz Tughlaq is thus described by the
contemporary chronicler Shams Siraj Afif. "In the store house of every
noble there were good carpets. A group of pretty and sonorous-voiced
dancing girls and concubines were there to remove all traces of anxiety
and sadness. Wherever the Amir halted in the course of a journey all
kinds of food and pleasure were made available to him including intimate
companionship (*lataif-i-wasl*)."[178](#178) Sultan Firoz gave to some
of his nobles eight lakh *tankahs*, to others six lakh and four lakh,
each according to his position and status. The Wazir Khan-i-Jahan Maqbul
received thirteen lakh tankahs as personal pay. It is reported that he
had two thousand women including many of Rum and Chin, in his harem. He
had numerous sons and sons-in-law. The Sultan made a provision that
every son born to him should from his birth receive an allowance of
11,000 tankahs for his maintenance and every daughter on her marriage
15,000 *tankahs*. His munificence reached to such a pitch, that the
Sultan was often heard to say that Khan-i-Jahan was the grand and
magnificent king of Delhi.[179](#179)

This was the position in the Sultanate period. The Mughal emperors lived
still more luxuriously. They maintained a magnificent court and a
splendid harem. Their personal living was of a very high standard. Their
army was large, their nobility prosperous. All this entailed a heavy
expenditure. To meet this expenditure the Mughal emperors taxed the
people to the limit that could be borne by them. The Mughal king wore
jewels all over. Akbar wore gold ornaments, pearls and jewellery.
Jahangir wore more precious stones than his father. So did Shahjahan.
For these three emperors, it was gold and jewels from head to foot. The
crowns were of gold and jewels and pearls. Precious stones served as
buttons of garments. Shoes, made of leather or velvet, were embroidered
in gold and studded with pearls. They wore costly perfumes. Their
personal weapons (*qur*) were also studded with precious stones and
stored in the *Qur khana*. Even the orthodox Aurangzeb could not
completely discard wearing jewels. Needless to add that they were always
soaked in costliest perfumes.

We have referred to weighments of Akbar, his successors and many of the
royal princes on their lunar and solar birthdays. Sir Thomas Roe
describes one such weighment of emperor Jahangir thus: "The king's
birthday and the solemnity of his weighing to which I went... was
carried into a very large and beautiful garden... where was prepared the
scale, being hung in large trestles, and a cross-beam... the seals of
massy gold, the borders set with small stones... the chains of gold
large and massy... Here attended the nobility, all sitting about on
carpets (and the ladies watched from behind the curtains). The king...
appeared clothed, or rather laden with diamonds, rubies, pearls and
other precious vanities, so great, so glorious; he was weighed with gold
and jewels... Then against cloth of gold, silk, stuffs, linen, spices...
Lastly, against meal, butter, corn... and all the rest of the
stuff..."[180](#180) The ladies celebrated the occasion with great
enthusiasm and often received gifts from the king.

When kings dressed like this and wore so much jewellery, the queens and
nobles' ladies could only excel them. This has been mentioned before.
Some instances of such happy occasions and the exchange of gifts may be
mentioned. Emperor Jahangir writes that when "Prince Khurram had
hastened to the capture of the Deccan he had obtained the title of Shah,
and now, in reward for his distinguished service, I gave him a mansab of
30,000 personal and 20,000 horse and bestowed on him the title of Shah
Jahan... A special dress of honour with a gold-embroidered *charqab*,
with collar, the end of the sleeves and the skirt decorated with pearls,
worth 50,000 rupees, a jewelled sword with a jewelled *pardala* (belt),
and a jewelled dagger were bestowed upon him. I myself... poured over
his head a small tray of jewels and a tray of gold (coins)."[181](#181)
What Shahjahan presented to emperor Jahangir is noted by the royal
parent thus: "If the private offerings of my son and those of the rulers
of the Deccan were to be written down in detail, it would be too long a
business. What I accepted of his presents was worth 2,000,000 rupees. In
addition to this he gave his (step-)mother, Nur Jahan Begum, offerings
worth 200,000 rupees, or 75,000 tumans of the currency of Iran or
6,780,000 current Turan-khanis. Such offerings had never been made
during this dynasty."[182](#182) And "Nur Jahan Begum prepared a feast
of victory for my son Shah Jahan and conferred on him dresses of honour
of great price, with a *nadiri* with embroidered flowers, adorned with
rare pearls, a *sarpech* (turban ornament) decorated with rare gems, a
turban with a fringe of pearls, a waistbelt studded with pearls, a sword
with jewelled *pardala* (belt), a *phul katara* (dagger) a *sada* (?) of
pearls, with two horses one of which had a jewelled saddle, and a
special elephant with two females. In the same way she gave his children
and his ladies dresses of honour, *tuquz* (nine pieces) of cloth with
all sorts of gold ornaments, and to his chief servants as presents a
horse, a dress of honour, and jewelled dagger. The cost of this
entertainment was about 300,000 rupees."[183](#183) On another occasion
"I held a meeting in one of the houses of the palace of Nur Jahan Begum,
which was situated in the midst of large tanks, and summoning the Amirs
and courtiers to the feast which had been prepared by the Begum, I
ordered them to give the people cups and all kinds of intoxicating
drinks... All sorts of roast meats, and fruits by way of relish, were
ordered to be placed before everyone. It was a wonderful assembly...
they lighted lanterns and lamps all round the tanks and buildings. A
grand entertainment took place, and the drinkers of cups took more cups
than they could carry."[184](#184)

In a sultan's dinner wine was not an essential part, as for example, in
the banquets of Muhammed bin Tughlaq as described by Ibn Battutah. But
the rich fare speaks for the cost. Al-Umari was informed that in the
royal kitchen of the Sultan thousands of oxen and sheep, fatted horses
and birds of all kinds were slaughtered daily to prepare the meals. The
imperial kitchen, both during the Sultanate and Mughal times, was a
full-fledged. state department with branches like *matbakhi* (kitchen),
*abdar khana* which catered for drinking water and wine, and *mewa
khana* for fruits. Each branch was manned by a hierarchy of officials.
Ganga water was brought for the emperor from long distances. It was
carried to as far away as Daulatabad when Sultan Muhammad Tughlaq
encamped there. Akbar drank only Ganga water. Provision of this water in
the palace would have cost a lot. In matters of food only Akbar was
abstemious. Most other rulers ate to satiation as did members of the
royal household and the nobles. There were two types of dinner. One was
khasa or the special dinner which was attended by the Sultan, and the
other was general. There was an elaborate ritual observed while taking
the meal. At the *khasa* dinner about twenty guests were present, at
others many more. In the middle of the *dastarkhwan* there sat the qazi,
khatib, faqih, sharif (saiyyad) and shaikh (sufi), and then the
relatives of the Sultan and the chief An-ors. The meal started with
sherbet of rose and sugar candy. It was served in bowls of silver, gold
and glass. The meal served consisted of chapatis, roasted meat, sweet
*samosas*, salt *samosas* and rice and chicken. Before everyone present
were placed *roomali* rotis, one-fourth or one-sixth piece of a whole
roasted sheep. Then *puries* were served with *halwa sabuni* stuffed
inside it (it is still sold in large quantities in Aligarh). Next was
served in China plates meat cooked in ghee, onion, and green ginger.
Four or five *samosas*, stuffed with mince meat, almonds, walnuts,
pistachios and various other condiments and fried in ghee were served
before each. Rice cooked in ghee garnished with a roasted fowl placed
over it was the next dish. All this was rounded off with two items of
sweet dish, called *hashimi* and *qahiria*. At the end there was a drink
of barley water to push so much stuff down the system. The dinner was
over after powdered *pan-masala* and fifteen rolled packets of pan tied
with red silken thread were presented to each guest. The royal dinner
was held twice in the day.[185](#185) it appears that all items could
not be eaten to the full even by a glutton, but these were served
because a royal dinner was a royal dinner. Still, a variety of pickles
(achars) were added to the menu to whip up the action of the stomach.
*Aijaz-i-Khusravi* of Amir Khusrau and *Kitab-ur-Rebla* of Ibn Battutah
are full of references to these delicacies without which medieval Indian
royal meals were not complete. Details of a banquet during the Mughal
period may also be given. It was arranged by Asaf Khan, Jahangir's
brother-in-law in honour of Sir Thomas Roe, the ambassador of James I to
the court of emperor Jahangir (1615-18), and has been described by his
chaplain Edward Terry. "The Asaph Chan (Asaf Khan) entertained my Lord
Ambassador in a very spacious and very beautiful tent... That tent was
kept full of very pleasant perfume; in which scents the King and
grandees there take very much delight. The floor of the tent was first
covered all over with very rich and large carpets, which were covered
again in the places where our dinner stood with other good carpets made
of stitched leather... and these were covered again with pure white and
fine calico cloths; and all those covered with very many dishes of
silver... The Ambassador had more dishes by ten, and I less by ten, than
our entertainer had; yet for my part I had fifty dishes. They were all
set before us at once… I tasted of all set before me... Now of the
provision itself… our larger dishes were filled with rice... some of it
white… some of it made yellow with saffron, some of it was made green,
and some of it put into a purple colour... several of our dishes were
furnished with flesh of several kinds, and with hens and other sorts of
fowl cut in pieces... To these we had jellies and culices (meat
jellies), rice ground to flour, then boiled, and sweetened with
sugar-candy and rose-water, to be eaten cold... The flour of rice
mingled with sweet almonds... Many other dishes we had, (were) made up
of cakes of several forms, of the finest of the wheat flour, mingled
with almonds and sugar-candy... To these potatoes excellently well
dressed; and to them diverse salads of the curious fruits of that
country... and for our drink, some of it was brew'd... At this
entertainment we sat long... our feast in that place was better than
Apicius, that famous Epicure of Rome, with all his witty
gluttony..."[186](#186) Manrique describes an equally elaborate banquet
given by Asaf Khan to his imperial son-in-law Shahjahan. It lasted for
four hours."[187](#187) Royal dinners and the dinners of the elites were
of course costly, but how much money was spent on them is difficult to
say because food grains were very cheap and other items of food not very
dear throughout the medieval period. Still, with meals taken many times
during the course of the day, and with the garnishing of endless dishes,
the dinners of royalty and nobility must have been a major item of
expenditure of the Mughal society.

Dinners were accompanied by and ended with 'brew'd' drinks. Most
sultans, Mughal badshahs and their nobles were heavy drinkers. Emperors
from Babur to Jahangir drank freely. When Muslims were promised liberal
allowances of wine in Paradise,[188](#188) they could not be debarred
from drinking in this world. With wine the Mughals took opium and other
drugs. Strong constitution saved some princes from the debilitating
effects of *araq*. However all princes and some princesses also drank.
Detailed description of this activity is provided by Muslim chroniclers
and European visitors. There were regular breweries in palaces of kings
and mansions of nobles.

The remains of their palaces show the grandeur of their times and the
wealth spent on their decoration and illumination. Their gardens and
reservoirs consumed a lot of money and labour. Money on their tents in
camp was as freely spent as on building permanent edifices. Even some
carpets cost 60,000 rupees and more. Mahals of ladies swarmed with
servants. Mistresses and servants consumed lot of wealth on decor,
dresses and ornaments. Feasts and festivals, Khushroz and Mina Bazar
were celebrated with great éclat. All the resources available in India
were fully exploited to provide comforts and luxuries to the Muslim
ruling and religious classes. Muslim chronicles vouch for this fact.
They also vouch for the fact that the enjoyment of the Muslim elite was
provided mainly by the poorest peasants through a crushing tax system.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Gordon Sanderson, 'Archaeology at the Qutb', Archaeological
Survey of India Report, 1912-13, pp. 120, 131.

[2](#2a) It is reproduced in Thomas, *Chronicles of the Pathan Kings of
Delhi*, pp. 22-23.

[3](#3a) Sir John Marshall in C.H.I.III, p. 578 n. 1.

[4](#4a) Ibn Battutah, p. 27; Rizvi *Tughlaq Kalin Bharat*, vol. I, p.
175.

[5](#5a) Barani, p. 341.

[6](#6a) *Taj-ut-Maasir*, E.D. vol. II, p. 222.

[7](#7a) Barani, p. 341.

[8](#8a) Ibn Battutah, p. 77.

[9](#9a) Lal, *Khaljis*, pp. 325-333.

[10](#10a) Afif, p. 135.

[11](#11a) *Ibid*., pp. 330-333.

[12](#12a) NizNizam-ud-din Ahmad, vol. I, p. 336; Niamatullah, fol.
67(a).

[13](#13a) *List of Muhammadan and Hindu Monuments*, vol. III, p. 189.

[14](#14a) Abbas Sarwani, *Tarikh-i-Shar Shahi*, pp. 417-18 and
Rizquilah *Waqiat-i-Mushtaqi*, p. 550, trs. in E.D. vol. IV.

[15](#15a) Tuzuk, vol. I, p. 96 and footnotes 1 and 2.

[16](#16a) *Babur Nama*, vol. II, pp. 520, 634.

[17](#17a) *Tuzuk*, vol. I, p. 3; Wolseley Haig, C.H.I.IV, p. 89.

[18](#18a) *Ibid*., p. 105.

[19](#19a) De Laet, *The Empire of the Great Mogal*, p. 44. Also Finch
in Foster, *Early Travels in India* (1583-161o), p. 149.

[20](#20a) Tuzuk, vol. I, pp. 7-8; *Tarikhi-Salim Shahi*, pp. 8-9.

[21](#21a) *Ibid*., vol. I, p. 118.

[22](#22a) *Ibid*., I, p. 152.

[23](#23a) *Ibid*., p. 258.

[24](#24a) *Ibid*., p. 12.

[25](#25a) Moreland, India from *Akbar to Aurangzeb*, pp. 196-97.

[26](#26a) *Badshah Nama*, vol. I, p. 221. Also C.H.I.IV, p. 554.

[27](#27a) For mansions of nobles see my *The Mughal Harem*, pp. 45-47.

[28](#28a) W.H. Moreland is the translator of Pelsaert's Jahangir's
India and the author of *India from Akbar* to Aurangzeb. He says that
this paragraph of Pelsaert has some problems of translation, Pelsaert,
56n., and hundreds of thousands may be taken as referring to either
money or labourers.

[29](#29a) 'Adorned' in Pelsaert, p. 56, 'covered' in *Akbar to
Aurangzeb*, p. 197. The two words convey very different impressions.

[30](#30a) Pelsaert, pp. 55-56; Moreland, *Akbar to Aurangzeb*, 197.

[31](#31a) Barani, p. 102; *Fatawa-i-Jahandari*, p. 22; Afif, p. 283.

[32](#32a) Barani, pp. 50-51, 60, 141, 303, 323-24.

[33](#33a) Minhaj, Text, p. 315.

[34](#34a) Barani, pp. 57-58.

[35](#35a) Fakhr-i-Mudabbir, *Adab-ul-Harb wa Shujaat*, Hindi trs. by
S.A.A. Rizvi in *Adi Turk Kalin Bharat* from B.M. Ms fol. 109b; Minhaj,
text, p. 317; Barani, p. 80; Afif, p. 289.

[36](#36a) Minhaj, text, pp. 195, 310.

[37](#37a) Habibullah, op. cit., p. 265.

[38](#38a) Barani, p., 508.

[39](#39a) *Ibid*., P. 326.

Lal, *Khaljis*, pp. 193-96.  

[40](#40a) Barani, pp. 438-39.

[41](#41a) Al-Umri, *Masalik-ul-Absar*, E.D. vol. III, p. 576.

Al-Qalqashindi, *Subh-ul-Asha*, p. 66.  

[42](#42a) Afif, pp. 221-222.

[43](#43a) Ain., I, pp. 123, 259-61.

[44](#44a) *Tuzuk*, vol. I, p. 66, 82, also p. 71.

[45](#45a) *Ibid*., p. 111.

[46](#46a) *Masalik*, E.D. vol. III, p. 577; Afif, pp. 296-97 and
437-38; Alqalqashindi, p. 71; Ibn Battutah, p. 129.

[47](#47a) Barani, p. 145.

[48](#48a) Al-Umri, Masalik, E.D. vol. III, p. 577. Also Hajiuddabir,
*Zafar-ul-Walih*, p. 782.  

[49](#49a) Moreland, *India at the Death of Akbar*, pp. 68-69.

[50](#50a) Jadunath Sarkar, *A Short History of Aurangzib*, p. 477.

[51](#51a) Smith, *Akbar the Great Mogul*, pp. 261-62.

[52](#52a) Irvine, *The Army of the Indian Moghuls*, pp. 58, 61-62.

[53](#53a) *Ain*., vol. I, p. 241, also Tables in Ain., Vol. III.

[54](#54a) *Tuzuk*, vol. I, p. 341 and n. *Ain*., Jarret, II, p. 277.

[55](#55a) *Tuzuk*, vol. I, p. 349. Jarret, *Ain*., vol. II, p. 198 has
29, 668, which appears to be correct.

[56](#56a) Athar Ali, *The Apparatus of Empire*, Introduction and also
pp. 36, 90, 345.

[57](#57a) *Ibid*., p. 478.

[58](#58a) Afif, pp. 339-340.

[59](#59a) *Waqiat-i-Mushtaqi*, E.D. vol. IV, p. 551; P. Saran, *Studies
in Medieval Indian History*, p. 101.

[60](#60a) *Ain*., vol. I, Blochmann, pp. 140-150.

[61](#61a) *Ibid*., pp. 131-139.

[62](#62a) *Ibid*.

[63](#63a) *Ain*., vol. I, pp. 129-30, 223; Smith, p. 38; *Tuzuk*, vol.
I, pp. 237, 261, 287-89, 323, 400, 418, 432.

[64](#64a) *Ibid*., pp. 150-156.

[65](#65a) *Ibid*., pp. 160-61.

[66](#66a) Barani, pp. 145, 319; Ibn Battutah, p. 14.

[67](#67a) *Ain*., Blochmann, vol. I, pp. 147-49 169-70.

[68](#68a) *Tuzuk*, I, pp. 374-75.

[69](#69a) *Ibid*., pp. 394-95.

[70](#70a) Badaoni, II, p. 190 as cited in Ain., I, p. 252.

[71](#71a) *Ain*., Blochmann, p. 253.

[72](#72a) Pelsaert, p. 54.

[73](#73a) Habibullah, p. 238.

[74](#74a) Manucci, vol. IV, pp. 409ff.

[75](#75a) *Ain*., vol. I, p. 119.

[76](#76a) *Ibid*., pp. 115-123.

[77](#77a) Barani, pp. 60, 141.

[78](#78a) Afif, pp. 222-223.

[79](#79a) Ibn Battutah, pp. 150-51. Also listed in Ishwari Prasad,
*Qaraunah Turks*, pp. 138-39.

[80](#80a) Afif, p. 339.

[81](#81a) *Ibid*., pp. 337-38, 370.

[82](#82a) Bernier, pp. 255-56.

[83](#83a) Ain., vol. I, pp. 93-94.

[84](#84a) *Ibid*., p. 170.

[85](#85a) Jadunath Sarkar, *Mughal Administration, Calcutta*, 1952, p.
9.

[86](#86a) *Ain*., vol. I, p. 94.

[87](#87a) Bernier, p. 258-59.

[88](#88a) *Ain*., vol. I, pp. 93-94, 95-102.

[89](#89a) Manucci, vol. II, P. 341. Also Bernier, p. 258.

[90](#90a) Abdul Aziz, *Arms and Jewellery of the Indian Mughals*, pp.
212-13.

[91](#91a) *Ain*., I vol. I, pp. 93-102.

[92](#92a) *Ain*., vol. I, pp. 98-100; Lahori, vol. II, Pt 1, pp.
363-64; Manucci, vol. II, p. 340.

[93](#93a) *Ain*., I, pp. 83-93; *Tuzuk*, vol. I, p. 271.

[94](#94a) R.K. Mukerjee, *Economic History of India*, pp. 117-19.

[95](#95a) Terry in Foster's, *Early Travels*, p. 302.

[96](#96a) Manrique, vol. I, p. 56, vol. II pp. 147, 180, 424.

[97](#97a) Manucci, vol. II, p. 430.

[98](#98a) Bernier, pp. 128, 292, 258-59, 402-403.

[99](#99a) *Tuzuk*, vol. II, pp. 80-82; Manucci, vol. II, p. 339.

[100](#100a) Minhaj, pp. 157-60.

[101](#101a) Ferishtah, vol. I, p. 66, 67.

[102](#102a) Barani, p. 145.

[103](#103a) Ferishtah, vol. I, pp. 73, 75.

[104](#104a) *Masalik*, cited by Qureshi, *Administration*, pp. 16o-61.

[105](#105a) Afif, pp. 95, 97. Incidentally, it indicates the lowly
position of wives in the medieval Muslim household.

[106](#106a) *Ibid*., p. 400.

[107](#107a) *Ibid*., p. 94.

[108](#108a) Ibn Battutah, trs. Mahdi Husain, p. 140.

[109](#109a) *Ibid*., pp. 67-72.

[110](#110a) *Ibid*., p. 105-107.

[111](#111a) Minhaj, p. 315; Niamatullah, N.B. Roy trs., pp. 12, 13;
Yahiya, p. 183; Farishtah, vol. I, p. 163; Nizamuddin, vol. I, p. 266.

[112](#112a) Farishtah, vol. II, pp. 305-306.

[113](#113a) Abdul Haqq, *Akhbar-ul-Akhiyar*, pp. 195-96; Abdullah,
Tarikh-i-Daudi, pp. 60-63.

[114](#114a) Ahmad Yadgar, *Tarikh-i-Salatin-i-Afghana*, p. 46. Also
Badaoni, Ranking, vol. I, p. 427.

[115](#115a) Abbas Sarwani, *Tarikh-i-Sher Shahi*, trs. E.D. vol. IV,
pp. 390, 424.

[116](#116a) *Babur Nama*, p. 522, 527.

[117](#117a) *Ibid*., pp. 578-79.

[118](#118a) Gulbadan Begum, *Humayun Nama*, pp. 94-97; *Babur Nama*, p.
522. Erskine puts the Shahrukhi at about one shilling; Steingass the
*ashrafi* equal to 16 rupias. p. 95 n. 3.

[119](#119a) *Tuzuk*, vol. I. p. 380.

[120](#120a) To be distinguished from Sikandara, the place where Akbar's
tomb stands and which lies some distance west of the river, Pelsaert, p.
4n.

[121](#121a) De Laet, p. 41; Pelsaert, pp. 4-5.

[122](#122a) D. Pant, *Commercial Policy of the Mughal Emperors*, pp.
106-079, 164.

[123](#123a) *English Factory Records* (1642-45), p. 148.

[124](#124a) Thomas Roe and John Fryer, *Travels in India in the
Seventeenth Century*, p. 144.

[125](#125a) Lal, *Mughal Harem*, p. 74.

[126](#126a) Saksena, *Shahjahan* pp. 63-64.

[127](#127a) Lahori, vol. I, Pt. II, p. 51; also vol. II, Pt. 1, p. 207.

[128](#128a) Manucci, vol. I, pp. 67, 216.

[129](#129a) *Ibid*., p. 216. For further references see my Mughal
Harem, pp. 94-95, 107.

[130](#130a) *Tuzuk*, vol. I, p. 10, 79; *Alamgir Nama* I, p. 368.

[131](#131a) For repeated references to this fact in one book alone see
Barani, pp. 103, 117, 433-35, 440-42, 538-44.

[132](#132a) Afif, pp. 80, 132-33, 349ff. Also Barani, pp. 145, 203,
291, 360, 426, 558-61, 597.

[133](#133a) Afif, pp. 179ff., 196.

[134](#134a) *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*, p. 16.

[135](#135a) *Tuzuk*, vol. I, p. 10.

[136](#136a) Barani, p. 243; *Tuzuk*, vol. I, p. 105.

[137](#137a) Lal, *Khaljis*, p. 62.

[138](#138a) Afif, p. 349.

[139](#139a) For detailed references see Lal, *The Mughal Harem*, pp.
78, 87-88.

[140](#140a) Afif, pp. 349ff; Tuzuk, vol. I, p. 9.

[141](#141a) *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*, p. 13.

[142](#142a) Niamatullah, *Makhzan-i-Afghani*, fols. 66(b), 68(a); Dorn,
vol. I, p. 66; Rizqullah, *Waqiat-i-Mushtaqi*, fols. 7 a, b.

[143](#143a) Nizamuddhin Ahmad, *Tabqat-i-Akbari*, vol. I, p. 336.

[144](#144a) Yusuf Husain Khan, *Glimpses of Medieval Indian Culture*,
pp. 69, 74.

[145](#145a) Abbas Sarwani, E.D. vol. IV, pp. 410, 424.

[146](#146a) Waqiat-i-Mushtaqi, E.D. vol. IV, p. 549.

[147](#147a) P. Saran, op. cit., p. 101.

[148](#148a) Abbas Sarwani, p. 423; Sarkar, *A Short History of
Aurangzib*, p. 154.  

[149](#149a) Sharma, *Religious Policy of the Mughal Emperor*, p. 107.

[150](#150a) *Tuzuk*, vol. I, pp. 81, 107, 111, 115, pp. 127-28.

[151](#151a) Mu'awiyah founded the line of Umayyad Caliphs at Damascus
(CE 661), the Abbasids became Caliphs at Baghdad (CE 750) and Samarra
(CE 836), and another line of Ummayad Caliphs ruled at Cordova or
Qurtuba (CE 756). The Fatimid Caliphs were rulers in Cairo up to CE 1751
and the Ayyubids up to 1836.

Ruben Levy, *The Baghdad Chronicle*, p. 13.

J.H. Kramer in Sir Thomas Arnold, *The Legacy of Islam*, pp. 79-80.

Ruben Levy, *The Social Structure of Islam* p. 282.  

[152](#152a) Murray Titus, *Islam in India and Pakistan*, p. 55;
Al-Biladuri, E.D. vol. I, p. 201. Also E.D. vol. I, Appendix, p. 462.

Khuda Baksh, *Orient Under the Caliphs*, p. 218.

Istakhri, E.D. vol. I, p. 28.  

[153](#153a) Al-Kufi, *Chachnama*, trs. Kalichbeg, pp. 154, 163; E.D.
vol. I, pp. 172-173,181.

[154](#154a) Al-Biladuri, E.D. vol. I., p. 123. See also Elliot's
Appendix, vol. I, p. 470 and n.

[155](#155a) C.E. Bosworth, *The Ghaznavids*, p. 53-54.

Aziz Ahmad, *Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment*, p.
5.

Hodivala, *Studies in Indo-Muslim History*, p. 176.  

[156](#156a) Baihaqi as cited in R.P. Tripathi, op. cit., pp. 10-11.

[157](#157a) Minhaj Siraj, *Tabqat-i-Nasiri*, Raverty, I, p. 61 and n.
4.

[158](#158a) C.H.I. III, p. 159. Also Ibn Battutah, p. 73.

[159](#159a) Barani, p. 493.

[160](#160a) Thomas, *Chronicles*, pp. 207-16, 249-53, 259-60.

[161](#161a) Yahiya, *Tarikh-i-Mubarak Shahi*, Persian text, p. 218;
Lal, *Twilight*, p. 93 n. 50.

[162](#162a) Muhammad Bihamad Khani, *Tarikh-i-Muhammadi*, trs. M. Zaki,
p. 95.

[163](#163a) Thomas, *Chronicles*, pp. 194, 197, 321-22.

[164](#164a) Aziz Ahmad, *Studies in Islamic Culture*, p. 10; C.H.I.III,
p. 358.

[165](#165a) Anwar Shaikh, Islam, *The Arab National Movement*, p. 24,
also p. 42.

[166](#166a) Z.A. Desai, "*Arabic Inscriptions of the Rajput period from
Gujarat", Epigraphia Indica - Arabic and Persian Supplement, 1961*, pp.
1-24. Also S.C. Misra, *Muslim Communities in Gujarat*, Asia Publishing
House, Bombay, 1964, pp. 5-7.

[167](#167a) *Babur Nama*, pp. 522-23.

[168](#168a) Gulbadan Begum,. *Humayun Nama*, p. 69.

[169](#169a) *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*, pp. 16-17.

[170](#170a) Mukerjee, *Economic History of India*, p. 92.

[171](#171a) K.S. Lal, *The Mughal Harem*, Aditya Prakashan, New Delhi,
1988.

[172](#172a) Barani, p. 164.

[173](#173a) *Ibid*, p. 157.

[174](#174a) Manucci, vol. II, p. 397.

[175](#175a) Afif, pp. 40, 116.

[176](#176a) *Ibid*., p. 401.

[177](#177a) *Ibid*., p. 43.

[178](#178a) *Ibid*., pp. 288-89.

[179](#179a) *Ibid*., pp. 399-400.

[180](#180a) *The Embassy of Sir Thomas Roe*, pp. 411-13.

[181](#181a) *Tuzuk*, vol. I, p. 395.

[182](#182a) *Ibid*., p. 401.

[183](#183a) *Ibid*., p. 397.

[184](#184a) *Ibid*., p. 385.

[185](#185a) Ibn Battutah, pp. 15-16, 65-66, trs. Rizvi, *Tughlaq Kalin
Bharat*, vol. I, pp. 166-67,190-91; Al-Umari, *Masalik*, p. 579;
Alqalqashinidi, *Subh-ul-Asha*, p. 50; Ashraf, *Life and Conditions of
the People of Hindustan*, pp. 282-83; Lat, *Twilight*, pp. 274-75.

[186](#186a) Edward Terry, *A Voyage to Fast India*, pp. 195-98 cited in
Smith, *Akbar the Great Mogul*, pp. 293-94.

[187](#187a) Manrique, *Travels*, vol. II, pp. 113, 120.

[188](#188a) Quran, Surah 52, ayats 17-24; Surah 55, ayats 12-36.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books.html)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
