---
title: Materials
---

## Breathability

It is the weave of the fabric (the size and number of holes) that
determines breathability or resistance to air movement. Any woven or
knit fabric will breathe - even if the weave is made of rubber strands.

If the yarn on the outside of the garment is thinner than the yarn on
the inside of the garment, capillary action will pull water to the
outside. The increased surface area (not hollow fibre cores) of the thin
yarn gives the water more space to spread out. This type of construction
can be used in either Nylon or Polyester fabrics.

## Wool

Wool is a good insulator, even when wet. Expensive, heavier, slow
drying, can be itchy.

### Merino

Merino wool is very fine and does not irritate the skin.

## Polyester

Artificial Fleece, aka polar fleece or microfleece, is a good insulator.
Usually made of PET of the polyester family. Suitable for outer and
middle layers. Can be made breathable: So suitable for physical exertion
involving perspiration.

### Advantages

It is light, soft, comfortable, hydrophobic (holding less than 1% of its
weight in water when fully soaked), highly breathable. Dries fast.

### Disadvantages

It tends to generate very high static electricity charges. This makes it
a magnet for pet hairs and other dust and fluff. Not windproof (although
some more expensive grades are denser and designed to be windproof. Can
be damaged by high-temperature washing and drying. But looses insulation
when wet. The down-side for polyester is odor retention, and lower
durability.

## Cotton

Cotton absorbs water, and does not repel water. heavy.

Denim is cotton. Denim is a good wind breaker.

Material which is a suitable blend of cotton and polyester is desirable
for use as an insulator.

## Goose down

Light, but breaks down with use. Excellent warmth to weight ratio. the
Achilles heel of down is that it loses all insulating properties when
wet; so good in combination with waterproof material.

## Other materials

Silk has good wicking ability.

Lycra/ spandex: like wetsuits, very elastic. When putting a garment with
spandex in the dryer, it tends to dry out and the strands break meaning
the garment loses compression power.

Nylon: light, tough. Easily melts. Hydrophilic.

Nylon / lycra blend.

## Rain proofing

Rainclothes made out of tightly knit nylon are rain and wind proof, and
are breathable.

Material which is water proof under 30000 mm of water is labelled water
proof. Highly water proof material is also highly windproof.
