+++
title = "01 Preface to the Second Edition"

+++
**Preface to the Second Edition**

The first edition of this book, published in 1986, had 16 chapters and
an appendix. This second edition has 25 chapters. The appendix -
Encounter at Pondicherry - has been fitted in the chronology of
encounters and forms Chapter 7 of the new edition. Chapter 14 of the old
edition has been split into two chapters, 15 and 16, separating the
debate on the Fundamental Right to Propagate Religion from the debate in
the Constituent Assembly. Similarly, Chapter 16 of the old edition has
been split into three chapters - 18, 19 and 20 - separating the three
subjects dealt with. Chapter 19 which formed Section II of Chapter 16 in
the old edition has been expanded by incorporation of a dialogue between
Ram Swarup and Bede Griffiths. Five chapters, 21 to 25, are entirely new
and cover Hindu-Christian encounters that have come to my knowledge
since the first edition was compiled.

The old scheme of numbering and naming the encounters serially has been
given up in the new edition. I realized that there might have been
Hindu-Christian encounters which had not come to my notice. The chapters
have now been given headings in keeping with their contents. But the
chronological order has been maintained.

The new edition has been thoroughly revised. Language has been
straightened wherever necessary, and typographical errors have been
removed. Footnotes have been numbered serially for each chapter, and not
for each page as in the earlier edition. Some footnotes of the old
edition have been expanded, and some new ones have been added. Comments
at the end of Chapter 3 have been revised. A critical note regarding the
role of the Ramakrishna Mission has been added to Chapter 13 which deals
with Swami Vivekananda’s encounter with Christianity. Chapter 14 which
deals with Mahatma Gandhi’s encounter with Christianity carries a long
and critical postscript. Criticism of Mahatma Gandhi may sound
startling. But I could not help saying what I have said. His role
vis-a-vis Christianity has to be reassessed.

Finally, the book now carries a subtitle - AD 304 to 1996. This was
suggested by Shri Harish Chandra, a keen reader and evaluator of VOICE
OF INDIA publications.

It is hoped that readers will find this revised and enlarged edition as
informative as the old one. The comments I received on the first edition
were rewarding as well as encouraging. Koenraad Elst came to me in 1989
as soon as he read the book. His cryptic comment was, “Hindus have a
very good case vis-a-vis Christianity and Islam, but at present it is
either not presented at all or presented very badly. This book is a
departure.” It was not long before he became a scholar-writer of the
VOICE OF INDIA family. I look forward to comments from new readers of
this work as a whole, and from the old readers on my critical notes and
the new chapters, particularly the one which advocates rejection of
Jesus as junk.  
 

**II**

History of Hindu-Christian encounters, as surveyed in this book, falls
into five distinct phases. In all of them Christian missionaries stick
to their basic dogma of One True God and the Only Saviour. But they keep
on changing their methods and verbiage. To start with, spokesmen for
Hinduism offer a stiff resistance to the Christian message as well as
missionary methods. But due to a number of factors, Hindu resistance
weakens in later stages and then disappears altogether so that
Christianity forges ahead with a sense of triumph.

In the first-phase, which opens with the coming of the Portuguese
pirates, Christianity presents itself in its true colours. Its language
is as crude as in its homeland in Europe, and its methods as cruel.
Hindus are helpless and suffer any number of atrocities. Fortunately for
them, this phase does not last for long. The Portuguese lose power
except in Goa and some other small territories. The other European
powers that take over have no time to spare for Christianity except the
French for a brief period in Pondicherry.

The second phase opens with the consolidation of the British conquest.
The British do not allow Christian missions to use physical methods. But
missionary language continues to be as crude as ever. Christianity
enjoys a brief period of self-confidence. The phase ends with the rise
of Hindu reform movements, particularly the Arya Samaj. Christianity
suffers a serious set-back.

The third phase starts with the advent of Mahatma Gandhi and his slogan
of *sarva-dharma-samabhAva*. Christianity is thrown on the defensive and
forced to change its language. The foul-mouthed miscreants become
sweet-tongued vipers. Now they are out to “share their spiritual riches”
with Hindus, reminding us of the naked beggar promising to donate his
wardrobe to wealthy persons. The phase ended with the Tambram Conference
of the International Missionary Council in 1938 which decided to
reformulate Christian theology in the Indian context.

The fourth phase which commenced with the coming of independence proved
a boon for Christianity. The Christian right to convert Hindus was
incorporated in the Constitution. Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru who
dominated the scene for 17 long years promoted every anti-Hindu ideology
and movement. The regimes that followed till the rise of P.V. Narasimha
Rao raised the spectre of ‘Hindu communalism’ as the most frightening
phenomenon. Christian missionaries could now denounce as a Hindu
communalist and fascist, even as a Hindu Nazi, any one who raised the
slightest objection to their methods. All sorts of ‘secularists’ came
forward to join the chorus. New theologies of Fulfilment,
Indigenisation, Liberation, and Dialogue were evolved and put into
action. The missionary apparatus multiplied fast and manifold.
Christianity had never had it so good in the whole of its history in
India. It now stood recognized as ‘an ancient Indian religion’ with
every right to extend its fold. The only rift in the lute was K. M.
Panikkar’s book, the Niyogi Committee Report, and Om Prakash Tyagi’s
Bill on Freedom of Religion.

The fifth phase which is continuing now started with Hindu awakening
brought about by conversion of some Harijans to Islam at Meenakshipuram,
renewed Muslim aggression in many ways, and Pakistan-backed terrorism in
Punjab and Kashmir. The Sangh Parivar which had turned cold towards
Hindu causes over the years was startled by the rout of the Bharatiya
Janata Party in the 1984 elections, and decided to renew its Hindu
character. The Ramajanmabhumi Movement was the result. The Movement was
aimed at arresting Islamic aggression. Christianity or its missions were
hardly mentioned. Nevertheless, it was Christianity which showed the
greatest concern at this new Hindu stir, and started crying ‘wolf’. Its
media power in the West raised a storm saying that Hindus were out to
destroy the minorities in India and impose a Nazi regime. The storm is
still raging and no one knows when it will subside, if at all.  
 

**II**

Hindus from seventeenth century Pandits of Tamil Nadu to Mahatma Gandhi
have wasted no end of breath to demolish the dogma of Christianity. But
it has hardly made any difference to the arrogance of Christian
theologians and missionaries. That is because dogma was never meant for
discussion. It is an axiom of logic that that which has not been proved
cannot and need not be disproved. Who has ever proved that the
nondescript Jew who was crucified by a Roman governor of Judaea in 33 AD
atoned for the sins of mankind for all time to come? Who has ever proved
that those who accept that Jew as the only saviour will ascend to a
heaven of everlasting bliss and those who do not will burn for ever in
the blazing fire of hell? Nor can the proclamation or the promise or the
threat be disproved. High-sounding theological blah blah notwithstanding
the fact remains that the dogma is no more than a subterfuge for forging
and wielding an organizational weapon for aggression against other
people. It is high time for Hindus to dismiss the dogma of Christianity
with the contempt it deserves, and pay attention to the Christian
missionary apparatus planted in their midst.

The sole aim of this apparatus is to ruin Hindu society and culture, and
take over the Hindu homeland. It goes on devising strategies for every
situation, favourable and unfavourable. It trains and employs a large
number of intellectual criminals ready to prostitute their talents in
the service of their paymasters, and adept at dressing up dark designs
in high-sounding language. The fact that every design is advertised as a
theology in the Indian context, and every criminal euphemized as an
-Indian theologian should not hoodwink Hindus about the real intentions.

Hindus are committing a great mistake in. regarding the encounter
between Hinduism and Christianity as a dialogue between two religions.
Christianity has never been a religion; it has always been a predatory
imperialism par excellence. The encounter, therefore, should be viewed
as a battle between two totally opposed and mutually exclusive ways of
thought and behaviour. In the language of the Gita (Chapter 16), it is
war between daivI (divine) and AsurI (demonic) sampads (propensities).
In the larger context of history, it can also be described as war
between the Vedic and the Biblical traditions.

This is not the place to go into the premises from which the two
traditions proceed. I have presented them in some detail
elsewhere.^([1](#1)) Here I will indicate briefly the behaviour patterns
they promote.

The Vedic tradition advises people to be busy with themselves, that is,
their own moral and spiritual improvement. Several disciplines have been
evolved for this purpose - *tapas* (austerity), *yoga* (meditation),
*jñAna* (reflection), *bhakti* (devotion), etc. A seeker can take to
whatever discipline suits his *adhAra* (stage of moral-spiritual
preparation). There is no uniform prescription for every body, no
coercion into a belief system, and no regimentation for aggression
against others.

The Biblical tradition, on the other hand, teaches people to be busy
with others. One is supposed to have become a superior human being as
soon as one confesses the ‘only true faith’. Thenceforward one stands
qualified to ‘save’ others. The only training one needs thereafter is
how to man a mission or military expedition, how to convert others by
all available means including force and fraud, and how to kill or ruin
those who refuse to come round.

The Vedic tradition has given to the world schools of Sanatana Dharma
which have practised peace among their own followers as well as towards
the followers of other paths. On the other hand, the Biblical tradition
has spawned cults such as Christianity, Islam, Communism, and Nazism
which have always produced violent conflicts as much within their own
camps as with each other.

New Delhi,  
15 June 1996

<div align="right">

Sita Ram Goel

</div>

  

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Sita Ram Goel, *Defence of Hindu Society,* Third revised
edition, Voice of India, New Delhi, 1994.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
