+++
title = "02 Preface to the First Edition"

+++
**Preface to the First Edition**

Christian historians, in India and abroad, have written many accounts of
how Christian theologians, missionaries and warlords have looked at
Hinduism^([1](#1)) in different phases of Christian aggression against
this ancient religion and culture. But there is no connected account of
how Hindu thinkers, saints and sages have viewed Christianity and its
exclusive claims. The present study is an attempt to fill that gap. It
is far from being exhaustive. it seeks to cover only some of the high
spots in a prolonged encounter starting with the Christian attack on
Hindu temples in the Roman Empire, a few years before Constantine
enthroned Christianity as the state religion of Rome.

The absence of such a study has given rise to misunderstanding as well
as misrepresentation. An ever-increasing section of the Hindu
intelligentsia has been led to believe that it is uncharacteristic of
Hinduism to examine critically the claims advanced by another religion.
This is a complete misunderstanding as this study goes to show in the
context of Christianity. Meanwhile, Christian theologians have been
presenting the leading spokesmen for Hinduism as if they were disciples
of Jesus Christ rather than exponents of Sanatana Dharma. It is
difficult to say whether the misrepresentation is deliberate or due to
the theologians’ penchant for seeing their own pet god presiding over
every manifestation, in the realm of thought as well as of things. But
all the same it is there.

Readers of the dialogue between Swami Devananda Saraswati and Fr. Bede
Griffiths which has been summarised in this study (pp. 386-98) can see
for themselves how confidently Fr. Bede invokes the names of Sri
Ramakrishna, Swami Vivekananda, Sri Aurobindo, Ramana Maharshi, Mahatma
Gandhi and Ramalinga Swamigal and regards them as “Hindu in religion
while being Christian in spirit.” Dr. M. M. Thomas, a noted theologian,
goes much further in his thesis, *The Acknowledged Christ of the Indian
Renaissance*, first published in 1970 and republished in a second
edition in 1976. It is supposed to be a rejoinder to Dr. Raymond
Panikkar’s *The Unknown Christ of Hinduism*, an earlier theological
exercise published in 1964. But while the title of Dr. Panikkar’s book
had the merit of suggesting only a speculation, howsoever wild, the
title of Dr. Thomas’ book is a misrepresentation of the Hindu point of
view, as he himself shows in course of presenting the views of Raja Ram
Mohun Roy, Keshub Chander Sen, P. C. Mozoomdar, Sri Ramakrishna, Swami
Vivekananda, Dr. Radhakrishnan and Mahatma Gandhi. None of these Hindu
thinkers ever admitted that the Jesus of history was the Christ of
Christian theology, that is, the only son .of God and the sole saviour
of mankind.

And that brings us to the crux of the encounter between Hinduism and
Christianity. No Hindu thinker has had the least objection to Christians
believing in and seeking salvation through Jesus. Nor do Hindus bother
about the dogmas of the only sonship, the virgin birth, the atoning
death, the resurrection and the rest, so long as Christians keep these
to themselves. It is only when the Christian missionary apparatus tries
doggedly to impose these dogmas on other people that Hindu thinkers are
forced to register a protest and have a close look at the Jesus of
history.

Christian missionaries should thank their stars that the historical and
critical research undertaken by Western scholars regarding Jesus and New
Testament stories, has not yet reached the Hindu
intelligentsia,^([2](#2)) partly due to the traditional Hindu
indifference towards the historicity of saints and sages and partly due
to the Christian domination over education and mass media in this
country. The Hindu intelligentsia at large is also not yet acquainted
with the history of Christianity in Europe and its missions elsewhere.
Western scholarship has already produced several hundred well documented
studies which have made the historical Jesus of Christian theology
evaporate into thin air and Christian history look like a tale of terror
and wanton bloodshed. The Christian missionaries in India will run for
cover whenever the findings of Western research become widely known to
the Hindu intelligentsia, the same way as the churches have been doing
in all Western countries since the middle of the eighteenth century. The
missionaries know it very well that Christianity being in a very bad
shape in the West is trying desperately to find a safe-house in the
East.

We have also something to say about “dialogue” which has become the most
famous as well as the most frequent word in current Christian parlance.
The Second Vatican Council is supposed to have made a radical departure
from the earlier Christian stand vis-a-vis other religions. “The
Catholic Church,” says a proclamation, *Nostra aetale*, dated October
28, 1965, “rejects nothing of what is true and holy in these religions
\[Hinduism and Buddhism\]. She has a high regard for the manner of life
and conduct, the precepts and doctrines which although differing in many
ways from her own teaching, often reflect a ray of that truth which
enlightens all men. Yet she proclaims and is duty bound to proclaim
without fail, Christ who is the way, the truth and life (Jn. 14:6). In
him, in whom God reconciled all things to himself (2 Cor. 5:18-19), men
find the fullness of their religious life. The Church, therefore, urges
her sons to enter with prudence and charity into discussion and
collaboration with members of other religions. Let Christians, while
witnessing their own faith and way of life, acknowledge, preserve and
encourage the spiritual and moral truths found among non-Christians,
also their social life and culture.”^([3](#3)) Before we offer our own
comments on this proclamation, we like to quote a Christian missionary
regarding how difficult the dialogue remains. “But if we accept,” says
J. Dilasa, Superior General, I.M.S., “the unique claim of Christ as the
only Son of God who entered human history and radically changed it as
the Lord of history, there is very little scope for inter-religious
collaboration. As heralds of the one Gospel of salvation we have to
proclaim it and others have to accept it. Similarly if we consider the
unique mission of the Church to continue the work of Christ, I wonder
how an inter-religious missionary activity is possible.”^([4](#4))

It should be plain to any reader who is not over-awed by the pope and
his ex-cathedra ordinances that apart from being patronising in its
tone, the proclamation breathes an air of reserve and reluctance in
conceding even the little it does. The most amazing part, however, is
that it has taken the disciples of Jesus well-nigh two thousand years to
find in Hinduism and Buddhism only “a ray of that truth which enlightens
all men.” it speaks volumes of the wisdom which the Church of Christ is
supposed to have enshrined down the ages. The less said about that
Church’s new role in preserving and encouraging “the spiritual and moral
truths found among non-Christians”, the better. The non-Christian
religions have preserved on their own their truths, their social life
and their culture throughout these long centuries; they certainly do not
stand in need of help from an apparatus which has tried its utmost to
uproot them. The stark truth seems to be the other way around; it is the
Church of Christ which is seeking desperately the help of non-Christian
religions in order to save whatever little is left of its superstitions.
That is the meaning of the “dialogue” for which Christian theologians
and missionaries are crying now-a-days. The “dialogue” does not seem to
be a sincere attempt at reconciliation; on the contrary, it is only a
strategy for survival on the part of Christianity.

The Church will sound sincere only when it stops saying that Jesus
should be accepted by all as the one and only saviour of mankind and
that Christianity holds a monopoly of the highest truth. That will also
lead it to renounce its ridiculous exercises in theologies of
fulfilment, inculturation and liberation, etc. The missionary apparatus
which was created with the help of imperialist armies and which is now
being sustained by means of massive money and media power of the West
will have to be dismantled. Exclusive claims and missionary, efforts
stand or fall together.

As the following pages make it clear, the spokesmen for Hinduism have
examined and rejected every exclusive claim of Christianity. If orthodox
Christianity survives in this country, it is not because there is any
merit in its dogmas but simply because it has established itself over
the centuries as a powerful political and economic entity. It is high
time for Christian theologians to come down to earth and recognize every
person’s right to seek truth and salvation in his or her own way. They
should know that while they invoke the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the Constitution of India in order to protect their
aggressive apparatus, they are riding roughshod over the most
fundamental human right, that is, to know God directly, without the aid
of officious intermediaries most of whom are no better, if not worse,
than those whom they choose to evangelize. Dr. Radhakrishnan put the
matter straight when he told a missionary friend, “You Christians seem
to us Hindus rather ordinary people making extraordinary claims.” When
the missionary explained that the claims were being made on behalf of
Christ, he observed, “If your Christ has not succeeded in making you
better men and women, have we any reason to suppose that he would do
more for us, if we became Christians?” He reminded the missionary that
Hinduism was “more modest and more logical” in teaching that “the divine
immanence in every man and women makes it possible for all to seek the
truth in their own ways.” Finally, he pointed towards a living example
of what religion means to the Hindus. “The fact of Gandhi,” he said, “is
a challenge to the exclusive claims of Christianity.”^([5](#5))

Rakshabandhana Purnima   
August 17, 1989,   
New Delhi.

<div align="right">

Sita Ram Goel

</div>

  

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) The term “Hinduism” is used here, as throughout this study, in
the sense in which Gandhiji used it, that is, to cover all schools of
Sanatana Dharma - Buddhism, Jainism, Shaivism, Shaktism and Vaishnavism
which includes the Santa-*mata* and Sikhism Treating these segments of a
single spiritual vision as separate religions is not only misleading but
also mischievous.

[²](#2a) Since this Preface was written, an attempt to make this
research available to the Hindu intelligentsia has been made in Sita Ram
Goel, *Jesus Christ: An Artifice for Aggression*, voice of India, New
Delhi, 1994.

[³](#3a) *Vatican Council II: The Conciliar and Post Conciliar
Documents* edited by Austin Flannery, O.P., St. Paul Publications,
Bombay, 1983, p. 668. 

[⁴](#4a) ‘Problems of Evangelisation’, in *Jeevandhara: A Journal of
Christian Interpretation*, September 1988, pp. 330-31.

[⁵](#5a) Sarvepalli Gopal, *Radhakrishanan: A Biography*, OUP, 1989, p.
195.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
