+++
title = "12 10 Encounter with Sariskrit Pandits"

+++
**10**  
**Encounter with Sariskrit Pandits**

Yet another dialogue between Hinduism and Christianity was held from
1839 to 1845.  It is particularly interesting because it took place
through the medium of Sanskrit.  John Muir (1810-1882) published the
first draft of his *MataparikshA* in 1839 and the final in 1840.  It
drew three rejoinders from Hindu Pandits.  SomanAtha, whose real name
was Subaji Bapu, published his *MatataparIkshAsikshA* in 1839. 
Harachandra *TarkapañchAnana* came out with his *MataparIkshottara* in
1840.  NIlakaNTha Goreh reacted somewhat late and published his
*ShAstratattvavinirNaya* at the end of 1844.

John Muir had come to Calcutta in 1828 as a civil servant of the East
India Company.  He was, for some time, a student of William Carey at the
Fort William College.  From 1840 to 1853, he occupied several senior
positions in the administration of North Western Provinces (later on the
United Provinces and now Uttar Pradesh).  In 1844-1845 he “supervised
the reorganisation” of the Benares Sanskrit College founded by Jonathan
Duncan in the late eighteenth century.  By that time he had acquired a
working knowledge of Sanskrit and collected what he considered an
arsenal against Hinduism.  All through his service career, he was a
Christian missionary except in name.

The atmosphere in North Western Provinces (NWP) at that time was
particularly favourable for his mission because the majority of
Englishmen in the administration were inclined the same way. 
“Historians have long recognised,” writes Dr. Young, “that committed
Christians took an active role in the British administration in NWP and
that many of them engaged, privately or publicly, in religious and
social causes... The ideals that drew these administrators (for the most
part Hailesbury graduates from the 1820s and 1830s) together were
evangelical, expansionist, and reformist.  Under the leadership of James
Thomason, Lieutenant Governor of NWP (1843-1853), these Christian
administrators coalesced even more tightly.”^([1](#1)) It may be added
that by “social reform” they meant interference with Hindu religious and
social traditions.  Whatever Hindu practice did not conform to the
Christian standard of correctness was a “social evil” for them.

James Thomason was a follower of Charles Simeon, a Cambridge clergyman
and leader of the Clapham Sect, the missionary brigade of the Church of
England organised earlier by William Wilberforce.  Simeon exercised
great influence on Charles Grant, member of the Board of Directors of
the East India Company.  He secured through Grant the appointment of
many administrators in India.  They were and remained “his own curates.”
Thomason was one of them.  “Administrators,” continues Dr. Young, “who
looked to Thomason for leadership in matters of government and religion,
linked themselves with missionaries, especially Evangelicals, wherever
they served.  Pockets of Evangelicals, consequently, existed in most
provincial centres wherever Muir served.”^([2](#2))

At the time Muir started using his official prestige and power for
spreading Christianity, a section of the missionaries, led by William
Carey were experimenting with what came to be known as Church Sanskrit. 
Carey was convinced that Hindus believed what they believed because it
was written in Sanskrit, a language which they regarded as sacred.  He
wanted to train a group of “Christian Pandits” who would probe “these
mysterious sacred nothings” and expose them as worthless.  He could not
help being deeply impressed by the structure and diction of Sanskrit,
but he was distressed that this “golden casket exquisitely wrought” had
remained “filled with nothing but pebbles and trash.”^([3](#3)) He was
out to fill it with “riches-beyond all price”, that is, the doctrines of
Christianity.  That was what he meant by Church Sanskrit.  He was joined
in this enterprise by several other Sanskritists, notably William Hodge
and H. H. Wilson.  Helped by Hindu Pandits, they translated Christian
terminology and the New Testament into Sanskrit and wrote some other
Christian tracts in this language.  The enterprise continued till long
after Carey was dead.  “Such, indeed, is the exuberance and flexibility
of this language and its power of compounding words,” M. Monier-Williams
would write in 1861, “that when it has been, so to speak, baptised and
thoroughly penetrated with the spirit of Christianity, it will probably
be found, next to Hebrew and Greek, the most expressive vehicle of
Christian truth.”^([4](#4))

These learned men believed sincerely that Hindus honoured certain
doctrines simply because they were expressed in Sanskrit.  It never
occurred to any of them that Hindus honoured those doctrines no less
when they were stated in other languages.  Long before Carey and his
tribe appeared on the Indian scene, the Alvars, the Nayanars, the
Siddhas, the Sants and the Bhaktas had produced a prolific literature in
all Indian vernaculars, expounding the same spiritual truths as the
earlier spiritual seekers had done in Sanskrit.  All this vernacular
literature was held by Hindus in equal reverence.  The missionary
conviction that Hindus will buy the abomination that is Christianity if
it is wrapped up in Hindu forms, persists in our own days.  The
missionary mind has so far failed to grasp the simple truth that what
Hindus find fundamentally objectionable in Christianity is its
doctrine.  The objection will not disappear because that doctrine is
stated in Sanskrit or dressed in an ochre robe.^([5](#5))

Turning back to Muir, he started “urging missionaries to learn Sanskrit
in order to ‘combat… hydra-headed paganism’.”^([6](#6)) As no other
missionary came forward with Christian lore composed in Sanskrit, he
himself took the lead by publishing his *MataparIkshA* in 379
*anuSTubha* verses in the form of a dialogue between a teacher and his
disciple.  It was published by Bishop’s College, Calcutta, in 1839. 
Next year it was expanded to 1032 *Slokas*, quoting many Sanskrit
sources.  Muir was out to impress Hindu Pandits with his mastery of
Sanskrit literature.  The mastery came easy to him, as to many other
Christian scholars and missionaries, because he could employ poor Hindu
Pandits to find for him the references he fancied.

Muir said nothing in his *MataparIkshA* that had not been stated earlier
by other missionaries.  He laid down three criteria for characterising a
true scripture: the founder’s power to work miracles, source in the one
True God, and universality, that is, equal validity for every race.  He
faced no trouble in “proving” that the Christian scripture alone was
true in terms of these criteria, while Hindu Shastras were false.  He
asserted that miracles mentioned in Hindu Shastras were “merely
ornamental in that religion instead of being at its very centre as in
Christianity.”^([7](#7)) This way of arguing is pompously called
Evidential Apologetics in Christian theology.  At one point, however,
Muir was deliberately dishonest.  He criticised the cosmography of the
Puranas as erroneous.  Surely he must have known what Galileo and
Copernicus had done to the cosmography of the Bible and how they had
suffered persecution at the hands of the Church. 

**SomanAtha**

The challenge thrown by Muir was accepted immediately by a Maharashtrian
scholar, Subaji Bapu, who published his MataparIkshAsikshA soon after
Muir’s shorter treatise became known in 1839.  Subaji published his work
under a pseudonym, SomanAtha.^([8](#8)) He was working in Central India
with an English civil servant and Orientalist, Lancelot Wilkinson, as an
interpreter of Jyotisha (Hindu astronomy and astrology) and thought it
prudent not to use his real name.  Association with an Englishman had
earned him some bad name among his own people.  But work with Wilkinson
had proved advantageous to him in one way.  He had acquired knowledge of
Christianity and come to know that “on rational grounds, Christianity,
too was defective in physical sciences.”^([9](#9))

*MataparIkshAsikshA* was a short treatise of 107 verses divided in three
chapters.  It was also in the form of a dialogue between a teacher and a
disciple.  Subaji started by dismissing the miracles of Jesus as nothing
special.  Books belonging to all *mArgas* mention miracles.  If the
miracles of Jesus are true, so also those of the others, and vice versa:
“But if some believe that Christ alone was the greatest by virtue of his
power, then why was he killed by weak men?”^([10](#10)) Nor can Jesus be
held as the only saviour: “If (Christ) destroyed mankind’s sins by the
sacrifice of his own body, then can that not be done... by those who,
like him, are virtuous?”^([11](#11))

Next, he showed that what Muir regarded as universality was, in fact,
uniformity and unsuited to all because human nature varied from race to
race: “Since God made men with particular natures, those belonging to a
specific race must follow a particular scripture uttered by God.  If
only one scripture is agreeable to God, why did he... not make mankind
singlenatured?  For this very reason, that he made spatial, temporal and
other differences, it would be perfectly certain that differences
between scriptures would also he quite pleasing to him.” It is,
therefore, the same One God who gave different scriptures to different
people: “Worship him, the universal *atman*, true God who is honoured as
Buddha in the Buddhist *darshana*, Jina in the Jain scripture, known by
the name Christ in the Christian religion, as Allah in the Mohammedan
religion and by the name Arka, Pramathesha, Shakti, Girisha, Srisha and
so forth in the threefold Veda, various Tantras and  
Puranas.”^([12](#12))

In one respect, however, Subaji found Christianity quite sinful.  The
followers of this religion injure and slaughter animals: “The worst sin
is injuring bulls, helpers in ploughing, and cows, who regularly give
milk.”^([13](#13)) He weakened his argument by giving economic grounds
for protection of animals.  The Hindu doctrine of *ahiMsA* goes much
deeper.  Perhaps he thought that economic justification was better
suited to minds for whom life by itself held no sanctity.

Finally, he appealed to the missionaries to stop their campaign against
other religions: “You should never revile people who are satisfied with
their own religion... Listen you disciples of Christ!  I, solicitous of
your own welfare, tell you this truthfully... Diminution of Hari’s
religion, anger, cruelty, subversion of authority and dissensions among
the populace would result from reviling the religion of
others.  Increase of God’s religion, contentment, gentleness, harmony
between the ranks would result from praising all religions.  For each
person his own religion is best; the same religion would be perilous for
another person.”^([14](#14))

**Harachandra TarkapañchAnana**

The *MataparIkshottara* of Harachandra was published in Calcutta but
before Muir brought out the second and bulkier edition of his
*MataparIkshA*.  Harachandra was a poor Bengali Brahmana about whom
nothing is known except the authorship of this book.  The book itself
was a short treatise of only 137 Sanskrit verses in Bengali script with
a two-page Preface in English.  He was, however, prepared to write more
if Muir agreed to “bear the cost of printing and remunerated him for his
labours.”^([15](#15))

Harachandra started by taking note of the missionary epidemic.  He said
that there was no escape from the missionaries “either in the
market-place or on the roads, with their constant refrain, ‘convert to
our religion and be happy for ever.’” He rebuked rather strongly the
Hindu converts: “Only that man... who is deluded, who is desirous of
acquiring profits, who has neither deliberated upon his own religion,
nor looked at the defects in Christianity, would become a
Christian.”^([16](#16)) They should have known that compared to
Christianity Hinduism was a very ancient religion and had prevailed
through the ages because of its innate strength: “If there is to be
faith in a book, let it be in the Veda, since it has prevailed on earth
from the time of creation onward.”^([17](#17))

Harachandra was familiar with the debunking of Christianity at the hands
of Western scholars: “Since many fearless, intelligent men such as Hume,
Tom Paine, the great Voltaire, Palmer and Gibbon, confuted these
priests, the priestly classes, answerless, called them
infidels.”^([18](#18)) Pointing to the rise of successive Christian
sects, he asked, “How could that religion, the religious customs of
which would constantly change, deserve respect from intelligent men
endowed with reasoning?” He added sarcastically, “As the world-creator
was powerless at the time of creation to establish religious customs, he
(taking) the form of Christ established them afterwards: when Christ
died, the world-creator (assuming) the form of Pope and others
established them.” Being devoid of substance, Christianity has always
depended upon force and fraud: “Formerly there was a certain king there,
named Constantine.  This deluded king stupidly converted to Christianity
and strove to propagate this worthless religion by fraud, distributing
wealth, craft and force.  He made citizens everywhere in his realm
convert to that religion.  From that time until now, its propagation
comes by nothing other than royal decree.  Men don’t convert to it by
their own will.”^([19](#19))

Harachandra demonstrated what could be done to Jesus if Hindus resorted
to missionary methods of polemics.  He knew how historico-critical
studies in Europe had reduced Jesus to a pathetic figure.  The story of
his virgin birth had been subjected to searching questions.  In the
gospel of Luke, the Pharisee contemporaries of Jesus had told him to his
face that he was a “bastard”, a “winebibber” and a “glutton” Harachandra
had “read the New Testament - between the lines.”^([20](#20))

Finally, Harachandra presented the ten tenets of Sanatana Dharma -
constancy (*dhriti*), forgiveness (*kshamA*), self- control (*dama*),
non-stealing (*asteya*), purity (*Saucha*), restraint of senses
(*indriyanigraha*), devout thought (*dhI*), knowledge (*vidyA*), truth
(*satyam*) and absence of anger (*akrodha*).  He invited the Christians
to practise these dharmas.  They will be born as Hindus in their next
life.^([21](#21)) What he was saying was that Christians will then make
a start on the path of *moksha* (freedom from the bondage of birth,
disease, old age and death).  This was his way of putting Christianity
in its proper place in the scale of spiritual evolution.  He was
anticipating Mahatma Gandhi who will say, “For me there can be no
deliverance from this earthly life except in India... anyone who seeks
such deliverance... must go to the sacred soil of India.”^([22](#22))

The *MataparIkshottara* “caused a sensation in Calcutta.”^([23](#23))
Christians, white and native, were up in arms against Harachandra. 
Krishna Mohan Banerjea, a Hindu convert, wrote a tract in Bengali in
order to refute Harachandra’s “insinuations” against converts and
explain away the differences among various Christian sects.  On the
other hand, Harachandra was hailed as “defender of the faith” in
awakened Hindu circles.  Christian scholars find it difficult to forgive
him even today.  Dr. Young calls him “tactless and
pugilistic.”^([24](#24)) It is a classical case of seeing the mote in
the other man’s eye while missing the beam in one’s own.

**NIlakaNTha Goreh**

The third Hindu who reacted to Muir’s *MataparIkshA* was NIlakaNTha
Goreh, a Maharashtrian Brahamana resident in Varanasi.  He had been
“outraged by bazaar preaching in his sacred city” and wanted “to silence
the missionaries.” He said he would “compel them either to leave the
country or confine themselves to the instruction of
Christians.”^([25](#25)) He had been holding a dialogue with William
Smith of the Church Missionary Society (CMS) when he was given a copy of
*MataparIkshA* in April 1844.  It was the second and enlarged edition
which Muir had completed in 1840.  Muir had tried to dispute
Harachandra’s argument about the antiquity of the Vedas by borrowing H.
T. Colebrook’s historico-criticism of the Vedic literature.

Before he wrote his *ShAstratattvavinirNaya* in reply to Muir, Goreh had
sent to Smith a small treatise in Hindi which he had circulated in
Varanasi “in order to stem the tide of conversions.” He had raised in it
six “Doubts concerning Christianity.”^([26](#26))

First, he had wondered that if “none can be saved except those who
believed in Christ”, why had God delayed the message for so long and
“created many nations and innumerable generations for hell?”

Second, he had asked, “Is it justice that the innocent should suffer for
the guilty and the guilty escape?” Only an unjust God could devise this
scheme of atonement.  If God is just, “repentance and amendment” are
what he should demand.

Third, the miracles ascribed to Jesus are tales “not worthy of credit”
by wise men.  One hears such tales everywhere.  Moreover, Christians
refuse to believe the “wonderful works, which wise men amongst us have
related.” Why should Hindus “believe in yours?”

Fourth, why do Christians ascribe justice and mercy to a God who created
“disordely” and “unfortunate” souls though it was in his power to create
only good souls because he created them out of nothing?

Fifth, Christianity condemns image-worship as if the worshipper regards
the image as the creator of the world.  This is a misconception.  Hindus
“set apart one thing in particular, in order, by meditating upon it, to
remember God.” This is quite in keeping with the Hindu perception that
“God’s essence is in everything.”

Sixth, Christians reject transmigration and believe that there is only
one birth.  This is convenient only for those “who after death attain
salvation.” But it is very unjust to those who “die in their sins and
are never to obtain birth again.” Sending these souls to ever-lasting
punishment, “is not only useless, but it would prove God guilty of
enmity, cruelty and injustice.”^([27](#27))

Goreh’s *ShAstratattvavinirNaya*, published at the end of 1844,
consisted of 786 *anuSTubh* verses divided into six chapters.  It has
survived in one complete and two fragmentary manuscripts.  A critical
edition prepared by S. L. Katre was published in 1951 by the Scindia
Oriental Institute of Ujjain.

Goreh starts where Muir had started - the miracles of Jesus.  How can
people at present know that the powers ascribed to Jesus really existed
in him?  Christians claim that those powers were witnessed by
contemporary people who were adversaries of Jesus.  They also claim that
their scriptures have a divine source and cannot lie.  But these are not
rational proofs.  Miracles and contemporary witnesses can be invented
once you have decided to claim divine origin for some books. Conversely,
when Christians say that those miracles really happened because they are
mentioned in divinely inspired books, they are only proving what they
have already assumed.  If Jesus was God incarnate and cured blind people
in the past, “why are blind people who firmly believe in him, not now
also possessed of eyesight?” Has God ceased to be compassionate as
before?  Moreover, Christians say that Jesus performed miracles “for the
sake of confidence in (his) divinity.” Why has he stopped doing the same
today?  “Are not people anxious to have confidence now as well?” The
entire argument based on miracles is bogus. Christians are simply
saying, “Believe it because we say so.”

The Christian doctrine that God created everything including human souls
out of nothing, involves God in serious difficulties.  “If God was going
to create people intending only to send them to heaven, he would neither
have frivolously made them human beings in the meantime nor have given
them a place to sin.” But if he created them so that they may commit
sins, he and not human beings are responsible for those sins.  If he
sends sinners to hell, he is unjust.  “The one who brings thieves into
existence” is himself a thief.  Moreover, what is the sense in bringing
into existence human beings who die in childhood or are retarded since
their birth?  It is funny that the same God who creates sinners comes
out next to give them salvation.  Hindus have a better doctrine.  They
explain human nature in terms of deeds done in past births.  Sounder
still is Vedanta which says that sin and suffering and salvation are
illusions from the viewpoint of Brahma.

The Christian doctrine of ever-lasting punishment for human beings whom
God himself created sinful, turns God into a criminal. Why should souls
suffer in an eternal hell for no fault of theirs?  According to Hindu
perceptions, sinful souls suffer in hell for a limited period.  “Thus,
experiencing pleasure and pain in numerous existences, they also
gradually attain mukti.”^([28](#28)) The Christian doctrine of original
sin makes no sense at all.  Why should all human beings at all times
inherit the sin of Adam and Eve?  Biologically also, the doctrine is
absurd.  “The child’s body indeed but not his intellect is derived from
his father.” This can be easily verified.  “The son even of a very
wicked-minded man is seen to be the crest-jewel of virtuous people.” A
child cannot be blamed because he has been begotten by a corrupt
father.  “Surely, birth depends on God, not on man.”^([29](#29))

Coming to Jesus, it is preposterous to believe that he saved mankind by
himself suffering the punishment for the sins of mankind.  It is
impossible for anyone to escape the consequences of one’s sins even if
someone else comes forward to suffer as a substitute.  It is also unjust
to make someone else suffer for one’s own sins.  Moreover, if sins get
washed simply by believing in Jesus, “men who delight in sins would
commit them at whim.” But if, on the other hand, belief in Jesus has to
be accompanied by repentance, belief becomes redundant because it is
repentance which serves the purpose.  That is what Hinduism teaches. 
Repentance is the real cure for sins.^([30](#30))

We see everywhere that persons who sincerely believe in Jesus continue
to suffer in this world.  How do we know that the will not continue to
suffer in the next world as well? Christianity says that God inflicts
suffering in order to test men’s faith.  Why, then, are human beings who
die at birth brought into existence?  They are not given a chance to
pass the test.  Where do these human beings go? To heaven, or to hell? 
In any case, “creating them is purposeless.” Moreover, “There is no
equally just punishment for both major and minor sins.”^([31](#31))

Christian salvation also is a very poor concept.  It “Is a state of
being called heaven where there are celestial pleasures.” There is no
place for “inward peace of good people” which comes from
“world-renunciation, meditation and equanimity.” Celestial pleasures
also arise from sense-objects.

Hankering for such pleasures cannot he extinguished by enjoying them. 
On the contrary, the hankering grows.  The Christian heaven is,
therefore, a place of perpetual dissatisfaction.  Hinduism says that
“merit and demerit are produced because of ego-centric activities.” It
is only when such activities cease that the wheel of pleasure and pain
stops turning.  The *Atman* is completely purified by the destruction of
Karma and exists in its own essential nature.^([32](#32))

Christianity has not spared any thought for animals, birds and God’s
other creatures.  If God has created them only to suffer as they do
under man’s dispensation, he is very obnoxious.  Human hearts melt on
seeing the suffering of animals.  “Does not God’s, too, who is
compassionate?” Why has Christianity failed to see that animals and
birds and other creatures are so much like human beings in many
respects?  They know hunger and thirst, sleep and sex, fear and hope. 
Birds build houses and rear families.  What is more, they do not need a
scripture to tell them what is good and what is bad for them.  They know
it by instinct.  Does not God who created them want them to have the
happiness of knowing him?  Do they continue to exist after death? 
Christianity has no answers for these questions.  Hinduism, on the other
hand, envisages that “Creatures become animals by reason of sins in
previous existences” and that “having experienced the fruit of their
deeds, they are released” from their animal status.^([33](#33))

Compared to Christianity, Hinduism is a very comprehensive philosophy. 
Only “those who are dull-witted, their understanding vitiated by
argumentation, have no aptitude for truth explained in the Upanishads.”
But God is compassionate and solicitous of salvation for everyone.  He
has, therefore, provided these dull-witted people with other scriptures
suited to their understanding.  “Men have an endless number of
aptitudes, high and low, in nature” on account of their “good and bad
*karman*.” They worship Govinda in various ways and come to Vedanta in
due course.  “Bhagwan, an ocean of compassion, made various kinds of
*margas* by which everyone may attain salvation.” To each according to
his aptitude.  Missionaries insist that there is only one mArga.  They
have missed the point from which Hinduism makes its start.^([34](#34))

“Images are never worshipped with the mind on either clay or wood - only
with the mind on God, who is all-pervasive.” What is wrong with that? 
“God is spotless like the sky.” He accepts whatever worship is offered
to him, in whatever way.  Those who know the purpose of pilgrimages and
image-worship “know that, although these things are said to cause merit,
surely this, too, aims at commanding knowledge of God, patience of mind,
purification of consciousness, etc.” The sun and the other symbols we
worship, indicate God.  The worshipper’s imagination is fixed “squarely
on God.”^([35](#35))

Muir says that the differences in language render the Vedas defective. 
“Now on account of the difference in subject-matter, the language of
Mantras, Brahmanas and the Upanishads is somewhat mutually distinct...
The language in the Mahabharata is seen to be clearer than the Veda;
language of that sort, somewhat different than the Puranas, is also
found in the Smritis.” That does not make them contradict each other. 
Language is adopted to the theme and also to the level of
understanding.  Nor do the variations in language make the Vedas less
ancient.^([36](#36))

Lastly, the Puranas are not books of geography.  The subject-matter of
the Puranas is the glorification of God.  They describe the Cosmos in
various ways.  If one is looking for science, one should go to the
Siddhantas.  Moreover, it is not for Christians to find fault with the
astronomy of the Puranas.  “In your religion there is also a conflict
between religion and science.  In science it is acknowledged that the
earth moves, but in (your) scripture the sun moves.”^([37](#37))

**Summing up**

“Perhaps the most remarkable feature,” concludes Dr. Young, “of Hindu
apologetics within the *Matapariksha* Context is not so much what it
contained but what it lacked.  A most curious absence is Jesus Christ,
the figure in the very centre of Christianity.  This lack of interest is
especially surprising in view of the awe in which he was held even
during the time of the *Matapariksha* Controversy by Hindus such as
Rammohun Roy and Keshab Chandra Sen in Calcutta and the reverential
fascination of contemporary Hindus.  To Somanatha, Harachandra and
Nilakantha, Jesus was mostly a *deus ex machina* introduced by
Christians to extricate their creator God from the dilemma he had
brought upon himself by his *ex nihilo* creative act.  They were not
interested in his beatitudes… neither did they adopt him as an
*avatara*… or identify his name with Krishna.”^([38](#38)) He is right
when he identifies the role which, according to Hinduism, Jesus plays in
Christian theology.  Jesus is, in fact, no more than a *deus ex
machina*.  But, like most Christians, he is sadly mistaken when he says
that contemporary Hindus had a fascination for the figure of Jesus.  We
shall see when we come to contemporary Hindu views of what they think of
this myth.

**Impact of MataparIkshA Controversy on Muir**

Muir revised his *MataparIkshA* once more between 1852 and 1854 when he
returned to Scotland.  Then he gave up writing in Sanskrit and took to
publishing Original Sanskrit Texts.  “The materials in these still
standard books never betray the author’s original purpose in amassing
them: to demonstrate that Christianity is rationally superior to
Hinduism.”^([39](#39)) Sanskrit studies had a beneficial effect on Muir
and he no more regarded the language as a “golden casket full of pebbles
and trash.” The contents of Sanskrit texts now so fascinated him that he
endowed a Chair of Sanskrit Language, Literature, Philosophy and
Comparative Philology at the University of Edinburgh in 1862.

Muir also moved away from Evangelism and towards the Broad Church
movement which thought that “Christian doctrine was sorely out of
alignment with modern science.” He now believed that “the Bible could
not be exempted from the rigorous philological and historical analysis
to which he had subjected the Vedas.” In 1861, Muir published his *Brief
Examination of Prevalent Opinions on the Inspiration of the Old and New
Testaments*.  He found that both had mutual discrepancies besides
several other shortcomings.  The introduction to this book was written
by H. B. Wilson who said that it “clearly reveals the impact of the
*Matapariksha* Controversy upon Muir’s belief in the Bible.” Muir
himself wrote, “We may be assured that as Christianity comes into actual
close contact with Orientals of acute intellects…it will be met with a
style of controversy which will come upon some among us with
surprise.  Many things will be disputed which we have been accustomed to
take for granted, and proofs will be demanded, which those who have been
brought up in the external evidence school of the last century, may not
be prepared to supply.”^([40](#40))

Muir continued to believe for some time that Christianity had an
immeasurably superior message in the sphere of morality.  But after a
few years he gave-up that belief also “admitting that Christian virtues
are neither superior to others nor *sui genesis*.” In 1879, he published
*Metrical Translations from Sanskrit Writers* in which “didactic
passages from Indian literature were juxtaposed with others from
Biblical and classical Greek authorities.” He concluded, “These
sentiments and observations are the natural expression of the feelings
and experiences of Universal humanity; and the higher and nobler portion
of them cannot he regarded as peculiarly Christian.”^([41](#41))  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Richard Fox Young, *op. cit.,* p. 51

[²](#2a) *Ibid.,* p. 52

[³](#3a) *Ibid.,* p. 34.

[⁴](#4a) *Ibid.,* p. 48.

[⁵](#5a) Fr. Bede Griffiths and Henri le Saux have been the main
exponents of this Christian self-deception in recent years. See
*Catholic Ashrams: Sannyasins or Swindlers?,* Voice of India, New Delhi,
1994.

[⁶](#6a) Quoted in Richard Fox Young, *op. cit.,* p.64

[⁷](#7a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 72.

[⁸](#8a) It is not known from what place he published his work.  It is
not mentioned in the only copy now available in the India Office
Library.

[⁹](#9a) *Ibid.,* p. 92.

[¹⁰](#10a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 110.

[¹¹](#11a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 115.

[¹²](#12a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 92.

[¹³](#13a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 120.

[¹⁴](#14a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 145.

[¹⁵](#15a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 93.

[¹⁶](#16a) Quoted in *Ibid.*

[¹⁷](#17a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 99.

[¹⁸](#18a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 96.

[¹⁹](#19a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 97.

[²⁰](#20a) *Ibid.,* p. 99,

[²¹](#21a) *Ibid.,* p. 150.

[²²](#22a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 152n.

[²³](#23a) *Ibid.,* p. 100.

[²⁴](#24a) *Ibid.,* p. 93.

[²⁵](#25a) *Ibid.,* p. 103.

[²⁶](#26a) *Ibid.,* p. 104.

[²⁷](#27a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 104-105

[²⁸](#28a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 113-14.

[²⁹](#29a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 114-115.

[³⁰](#30a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 115-16.

[³¹](#31a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 116-17.

[³²](#32a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 117-118.

[³³](#33a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 123-24.

[³⁴](#34a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 123-124.

[³⁵](#35a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 127.

[³⁶](#36a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 131-32.

[³⁷](#37a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 133-134.

[³⁸](#38a) *Ibid.,* p. 137.

[³⁹](#39a) *Ibid.,* p. 166.

[⁴⁰](#40a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 167-68.

[⁴¹](#41a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp., 168-69.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
