+++
title = "23 21 Exploding a Mischievous Myth"

+++
**21**  
**Exploding a Mischievous Myth**

The history of Christianity, crowded as it is with crimes of the most
horrendous kind, provides a running commentary on the Christian
doctrine. And the biggest share in Christian crimes down the centuries
can safely be alloted to the Roman Catholic Church, its head, its
hierarchy, its theologians, its religious orders, and its missionaries.

There is, however, one criminal field in which the Roman Catholic Church
has remained unrivalled. No other Christian denomination - these are as
many as 23,000 of them comes anywhere near the Roman Catholic Church
when it concerns committing of blatant forgeries and foisting of pious
frauds. It is no exaggeration to say that starting with Jesus Christ,
the entire doctrinal and institutional edifice of Catholicism rests on a
series of staggering swindles.

The Roman Catholic Church in India has remained true to the tradition.
The literature it has produced during the last five centuries is full of
lies of the filthiest sort, not only about Hindu religion and culture
but also about its own ‘religion’ and role. And this garbage heap is
topped by the hoax about the so-called St. Thomas.

We are told by Catholic ‘historians’ that Judas Thomas, a brother as
well as an apostle of Jesus Christ, had landed in Malabar in 52 AD,
founded the Syrian Christian Church, and travelled to Tamil Nadu for
spreading the Good News when he was killed by the ‘wily Brahmins’ in 72
AD at the Big Mount (now called St. Thomas Mount) near Madras at the
behest of a Hindu king named Mahadevan. The San Thome Cathedral on the
beach in Mylapore is built on the spot where the saint is supposed to
have been buried. This spot, like many others of the same spurious sort,
has become a place of Christian pilgrimage not only for the flock in
India but also for the pious Christians from abroad.

I had examined the story of St. Thomas in 1986 when I wrote a book on
the Papacy during the Pope’s visit to India.^([1](#1)) I had discovered
that while some Christian historians doubted the very existence of an
apostle named St. Thomas, some others had denied credibility to the
*Acts of Thomas*, an apocryphal work, on which the whole story is based.
Even those Christian historians, who had accepted the fourth century
Catholic tradition about the travels of St. Thomas, had pointed out the
utter lack of evidence that he ever went beyond Ethiopia or Arabia
Felix. The confusion, according to them, had arisen because these
countries were often mistaken for India by ancient geographers of the
Graeco-Roman world.

I had also cited Bishop Stephen Neill who had spent many years in South
India and who had examined the St. Thomas story as late as 1984. “A
number of scholars,” wrote Neill, “among whom are to be mentioned with
respect Bishop A.E. Medlycott, J.N. Farquhar and Jesuit Dahlman, have
built on slender foundations what can only be called Thomas romances,
such as reflect vividness of their imagination rather than the prudence
of historical critics.”^([2](#2)) And pained by the spread of spurious
history he had observed: “Millions of Christians in India are certain
that the founder of their church was none other than the apostle Thomas
himself. The historian cannot prove it to them that they are mistaken in
their belief. He may feel it right to warn them that historical research
cannot pronounce on the matter with a confidence equal to that which
they entertain by faith.”^([3](#3))

Next, I had raised a question: “What difference does it make whether
Christianity came to India in the first or the fourth century? Why raise
such a squabble when no one denies that the Syrian Christians of Malabar
are old immigrants to this country?” I had also answered the question:
“The matter, however, is not so simple as it sounds at first. Nor can
the scholarly exercise be understood easily by those who have not been
initiated in the intricacies of Catholic theology.” The motives for
manufacturing the myth were also detailed by me as follows:

> Firstly, it is one thing for some Christian refugees to come to a
> country and build some churches, and quite another for an apostle of
> Jesus Christ himself to appear in flesh and blood for spreading the
> Good News. If it can be established that Christianity is as ancient in
> India as the prevailing forms of Hinduism, no one can nail it as an
> imported creed brought in by Western imperialism.^([4](#4))
>
> Secondly, the Catholic Church in India stands badly in need of a
> spectacular martyr of its own. Unfortunately for it, St. Francis
> Xavier died a natural death and that, too, in a distant place. Hindus,
> too, have persistently refused to oblige the Church in this respect in
> spite of all provocations. The Church has had to use its own resources
> and churn out something. St. Thomas about whom nobody knows anything,
> offers a ready-made martyr.
>
> Thirdly, the Catholic Church can malign the Brahmins more confidently.
> Brahmins have been the main target of its attack from the very
> beginning. Now it can be shown that the Brahmins have always been a
> vicious brood, so much so that they would not stop from murdering a
> holy man who was only telling God’s own truth to a tormented people.
> At the same time, the religion of the Brahmins can be held responsible
> for their depravity. 
>
> Fourthly, the Catholics in India need no more feel uncomfortable when
> faced with historical evidence about their Church’s close cooperation
> with the Portuguese pirates in committing abominable crimes against
> the Indian people. The commencement of the Church can be disentangled
> from the advent of the Portuguese by dating the Church to a distant
> past. The Church was here long before the Portuguese arrived. It was a
> mere coincidence that the Portuguese also called themselves Catholics.
> Guilt by association is groundless.
>
> Lastly, it is quite within the ken of Catholic theology to claim that
> a land which has been honoured by the visit of an apostle has become
> the patrimony of the Catholic Church. India might have been a Hindu
> homeland from times immemorial. But since that auspicious moment when
> St. Thomas stepped on her soil, the Hindu claim stands cancelled. The
> country has belonged to the Catholic Church from the first century
> onwards, no matter how long the Church takes to conquer it completely
> for Christ.^([5](#5))

But the leviathan which had ignored the serious doubts expressed by
renowned Christian historians could not be expected to take notice of
what an almost unknown Hindu had to say on the subject of St. Thomas.
The Catholic Church in India went on spreading the myth merrily.
Meanwhile, the Liberation Theology of the Church had added a new
dimension to it. St. Thomas started being sold not only as the first
founder of Christianity in India but also as the first to proclaim a new
social message in this country. The Express Weekend of Madras dated 30
December 1989 presented this new portrait of the ancient Christian saint
in an article written by C. A. Simon under the title, ‘In Memory of A
Slain Saint’.

Besides providing the standard Catholic ‘history’ of St. Thomas and the
cathedral at Mylapore, the article struck the following new note: “St.
Thomas spent the last part of his life in Madras preaching the Gospel. A
large number of people listened and embraced the way of life preached by
him. *The oppressed and down-trodden followed him and claimed equal
status in society as it was denied them by the prevailing social norms.
He condemned untouchability and attempted to restore equal status to
women.”* (Emphasis added).

The Christian scribe had written with great confidence because similar
stuff, presented in a plethora of books as well as the popular press,
had passed off without being challenged. He was not aware that Hindu
scholars had started examining Christian claims about Christian
doctrines and Christian saints, as also Christian calumny about
Hinduism, Hindu society, Hindu culture, and Hindu history.^([6](#6)) Nor
did the editor of the *Express Weekend*, a Hindu by accident of birth,
anticipate the spate of letters and articles which he soon had on his
desk from knowledgeable Hindus. He did his best to suppress the true
facts about the so-called St. Thomas and his so-called tomb at Mylapore.

The first Hindu salvo came from Ishwar Sharan of Madras. In a letter to
the *Weekend Express* he pointed out what Christian historians such as
R. Garbe, A. Harnack and L. de la Vallee-Poussin had stated long ago
about the spurious character of the *Acts of St. Thomas*. He also cited
Bishop Stephen Neill’s warning to Christians against accepting the St.
Thomas story as serious history. But what was more significant, he made
known for the first time to the lay readers that the “St. Thomas Church
stands on the ruins of a Jain Neminatha-swami temple and a Hindu Shiva
temple which had a Nataraja shrine attached.” The fact that Jain and
Shiva temples stood at the site where the St. Thomas church stands now,
stated Ishwar Sharan, was vouchsafed by inscriptions discovered in the
church compound and recorded in a scholarly book, *Jain Inscriptions in
Tamil Nadu*, compiled by A. Ekambarnath and C. K. Sivaprakasam and
published from Madras in 1987. In another book, *Indiavil Saint Thomas
Kattukkadai* written in Tamil by Ved Prakash and published from Madras
in 1989, the Shiva temple that existed at Mylapore before it was
replaced by the St. Thomas church, had been identified with the original
Kapaliswara temple.

The *Weekend Express* published this letter in its issue of 13 January
1990 but suppressed its first and last paras. The first para had
expressed astonishment that the “*Indian Express* allows its respected
columns to be used to promote this Catholic romance as historical fact
in this age of excellent and critical scholarship.” The last para was
about the two temples replaced by the St. Thomas church and the evidence
from the inscriptions and Ved Prakash’s book. This censorship was
applied in spite of the fact that the Weekend Express had before it Ved
Prakash’s book which the author had sent to the weekly for review
several months before C.A. Simon’s article was flashed on its front
page.

So Ishwar Sharan wrote a letter of protest on 16 January 1990 and sent
it to the resident editor of the *Indian Express* in Madras. He pointed
out how his letter had been truncated by a paper which had ‘given prime
space’ to a Catholic apologist to “tell his version. of a controversial
story.” He brought to the resident editor’s notice the articles which
had been published earlier in the *Indian Express* about the destruction
of Hindu temples by Muslims and that of some Jain and Buddhist temples
by certain Hindu kings, and saw no reason why “Christians have escaped
this review though they were the worst perpetrators of these kinds of
deeds.” He also pointed out that though Ved Prakash had sent as many as
four copies of his book to the *Express Weekend*, the latter had not
even acknowledged it in the “books received” column, not to speak of
reviewing the scholarly study. Finally, he asked the resident editor
that “when the Pope in Rome can no longer enforce the Index, how is it
that the *Indian Express* can censor our reading material, obstruct a
free access to information, and suppress discussion of a subject because
it is controversial?”

The resident editor did not acknowledge this letter. And the *Indian
Express* dated 29 January 1990 published on its city page an article,
‘Madras - City Of Neglect’, by Harry Miller denouncing the American
evangelists for “disfiguring the city walls with their offensive
posters” but repeating the St. Thomas story. Miller had reminded the
Americans that “the very first evangelist - one Thomas by name - landed
on our shores within a few years of the Crucifixion, some five centuries
before America was ‘discovered’” and that “we have never needed
another.” Ishwar Sharan wrote another letter to the *Indian Express*
stating the facts which he had presented to the *Express Weekend* in his
letter of January 13 and adding some more. He mailed a copy of it to
Harry Miller as well. The *Indian Express* did not publish the letter.
Nor did Harry Miller acknowledge or respond to it.

But Ishwar Sharan had taken care to circulate his 13 January letter
among a number of Hindu scholars in Madras and elsewhere. Some of these
scholars also wrote letters to the *Express Weekend* presenting the same
facts in their own individual ways. They seemed to have forced the
*Express Weekend* to have second thoughts on the subject. It published
on 10 February 1990 a letter from Swami Jyotirmayananda which referred
to the Tamil inscriptions and the book by Ved Prakash and stated: “There
is reason to believe that St. Thomas church stands on the ruins of a
Jain Neminathaswami temple and a Shiva temple which had a Nataraja
shrine attached.” The letter inferred correctly that the Shiva temple
was the original Kapaliswara temple on the Mylapore beach but made a
mistake in speculating that the original Kapaliswara temple “got eroded
by the sea.”

The mistake was corrected by Ved Prakash in a letter which the *Express
Weekend* published on 3 March 1990. “Nowhere in the book,” he pointed
out, “do I mention that the Siva temple on the Mylapore beach was eroded
by the sea. What is mentioned about the Siva temple is as follows:
‘…many evidences available in Santhome church show how there was a Siva
temple and it was occupied, then step by step demolished and converted
into a church.” in support of his case, he cited a 12th century Chola
inscription of 8 lines “found in the Cathedral” and an established Hindu
tradition showing that the Kapaliswara temple “was there up to the 16th
century” when the “Christians started demolishing it.” He concluded that
the present-day Kapaliswara temple did not stand on its original site
and was built by Hindus at its new place “out of whatever they could
salvage from the ruins of the old temple.”

Ved Prakash’s statement about destruction of the original Kapaliswara
temple by Christians was confirmed by Dr. R. Nagaswamy, formerly
Director of Archaeology, Tamil Nadu, and now Director of the Indian
Institute of Culture in Madras. In an article, ‘Testimony to Religious
Ethos’, published in *The Hindu* of 30 April 1990, he wrote: “A careful
study of the monuments and lithic records in Madras reveals a great
destruction caused by the Portuguese to Hindu temples in the sixteenth
century A.D. The most important temple of Kapaleeswara lost its ancient
building during the Portuguese devastation and was originally located
near the Santhome cathedral… A few Chola records found in the Santhome
cathedral and bishop’s house refer to Kapaleeswara temple and Poompavai.
A Chola record in fragment found on the east wall of the Santhome
cathedral refers to the image of Lord Nataraja of the Kapaleeswara
temple. The temple was moved to the present location in the sixteenth
century and was probably built by one Mallappa… A fragmentary
inscription, twelfth century Chola record, in the Santhome church region
refers to a Jain temple dedicated to Neminathaswami.”

Meanwhile, on 9 March 1990 Ishwar Sharan had sent to the *Express
Weekend* a scholarly article, ‘What the Historians Say About Saint
Thomas’, in reply to C.A. Simon’s piece on the ‘slain saint’. It carried
citations from several impeccable sources, literary and archaeological,
regarding the career and character of St. Thomas, the chronology of
Christian presence in India, and the replacement of Hindu temples by
churches at Mylapore. The article was neither acknowledged nor returned.
Subsequent queries regarding the fate of the article also brought no
response. So he addressed a registered letter to the resident editor on
1 June 1990 stating that his article had been “accepted by a respected
publisher” to be published as book, and that “if you do not intend to
publish the article… then the same should be indicated to me within the
next two weeks…” The resident editor replied by a letter dated 11 June
1990 and said: “I find that *Express Weekend* carried on 13th January a
letter from you on Mr. C.A. Simon’s ‘In Memory of a Slain Saint’. We
have also published letters from Swami Tapasyananda and Mr. Ved Prakash
on the same subject. It is not as if, therefore, the Indian Express
refused to give space to your point of view. The availability of space
being a severe constraint *Express Weekend* finds it very difficult
indeed to publish long articles.”

Ishwar Sharan decided to do some plain speaking to this editor who had
equated a brief and censored letter to the editor with a grossly
misleading front-page article. In his letter dated 25 June 1990, he
said: “So the truth of the matter is that you do indeed have space to
promote the ancient lie about St. Thomas coming to India to get killed
by the wicked Hindus and especially the very wicked Brahmins, but you do
not have space at all in your newspaper when somebody tries to unmask
the fable… Swami Tapasyananda did not get a letter published in the
*Express Weekend* as you have stated, but has written his own article in
*The Vedanta Kesari*… What is really distressing is that you not only
connive at this vicious lie being published in your paper to malign the
Hindus but that you support it by suppressing the truth no matter how
often or in what form it is presented to you.” The resident editor did
not care to reply.

Till this time, Ishwar Sharan did not know that Swami Tapasyananda of
the Ramakrishna Mission in Madras had also sent an article to the
*Express Weekend* and had received neither an acknowledgment nor a
rejection. All he knew was that the Swami’s article, ‘The Legend of A
Slain Saint To Stain Hinduism’, had been published in the June 1990
issue of *The Vedanta Kesari*, the monthly of the Ramakrishna Mission in
Madras. So it was a puzzle to him as to how the resident editor’s letter
had named Swami Tapasyananda as the writer of a letter which was never
published. The cat came out of the bag when he referred the matter to
the Swami, and learnt that the latter had indeed sent his article to the
*Express Weekend* in the first instance.

Swami Tapasyananda’s article being as detailed and documented as his
own, Ishwar Sharan sent a copy of it to C.A. Simon whose address he had
succeeded in obtaining from the *Express Weekend* after waiting for
several months. The reply he received from C.A. Simon was revealing.
Firstly, Simon disclosed the sources of his information about the story
of St. Thomas. He referred to two modern books, a few leaflets, a stamp
issued by the Government of India in 1972, and a speech by Dr. Rajendra
Prasad, President of India. Secondly, he admitted that he was. no
scholar of the subject and ‘not aware of the controversial version’
given by the other side. Finally, he prayed: “I learned that you are
going to publish a book and intend to include my article as the
Christian version. As I do not stand for any religious sect or group you
may desist from doing so. Instead you may refer to more authoritative
works on the subject if you feel so.” The confidence with which he had
written his article was gone as soon as he was made to know the
difference between fact and fiction. What intrigued Ishwar Sharan,
however, was the question: How had C.A. Simon come to know that Ishwar
Sharan’s article was going to be published as a book? Ishwar Sharan had
not conveyed the information to him. The conclusion was obvious - C.A.
Simon had learnt it from the resident editor of the *Indian Express*!

But in spite of all evidence presented to it regarding the myth of St.
Thomas, the *Indian Express* persisted in promoting it. On 2 August
1990, it published a letter from Raju Thomas, a learned Christian of
Madras. The letter was about the plight of Scheduled Caste converts to
Christianity. It rebuked the rich and powerful Christian Church in India
for demanding reservations for these converts while itself doing nothing
for them although they constituted 85 per cent of the Christian
population in India. But it was prefaced by the old lie that
Christianity had reached Kerala “in the first century before it went to
Europe.” Ishwar Sharan wrote another letter to the *Indian Express* on 3
August 1990 stating once again the true facts of the case. This letter
was not published. But as a copy of the letter had been sent by him to
Raju Thomas, the latter wrote a long letter to the *Indian Express*
expressing doubts about the existence of Christianity in India in the
first century AD. Raju Thomas’ letter, too, was not published. Shri
Ishwar Sharan came to know about it only when Raju Thomas wrote to him
on 31 August 1990.

“You may ask me,” said Raju Thomas in his letter to. Ishwar Sharan, “if
such is the case why did I assert that Christianity had come to India
before it had reached Europe? My answer to this question is that I
deliberately wanted an open debate and discussion on this subject… We
will be able to challenge and question such falsified histories and
traditional beliefs only when we take up such issues to the public and
do not keep them as the top secrets. But the question is how many of our
‘intellectuals’ are ready to have open-minded debates and discussions?…”
He was not quite correct in blaming the intellectuals alone. It is true
that intellectuals who take pains to study every subject from its
sources, are few and far between in this country. But it is also true
that an intellectual culture cannot grow in an atmosphere where the
media is controlled by purveyors of palpable falsehoods or bullied into
abject surrender by the thought police of Nehruvian Secularism.

That the intellectuals were hungry for correct information on an
important subject, was proved when Ishwar Sharan’s book, *The Myth of
St. Thomas and the Mylapore Shiva Temple*, was published by VOICE OF
INDIA in February 1991. The book sold very fast. It was reviewed in
leading journals and commented upon favourably by well-known scholars.
The main chapter in the book carried Ishwar Sharan’s article submitted
by him to the *Express Weekend* in reply to the one by C. A. Simon. The
article had been expanded with additional material and informative
footnotes. Besides, the book reproduced the articles by C. A. Simon,
Swami Tapasyananda and Harry Miller. The letters which Ishwar Sharan had
addressed to the Express Weekend on the subject of St. Thomas and the
Santhome cathedral were also reproduced along with his exchanges with
the resident editor of the *Indian Express* and Raju Thomas. The
crowning piece in the book was the confession by C.A. Simon.

The most important development, however, was the stir which the book
caused among the intelligentsia in Madras. The intelligentsia was aware
that Christian missionaries had been using the St. Thomas story for
maligning Hinduism and extolling Christianity. But it was not in a
position to develop a dialogue because it lacked the correct information
and the proper perspective. Now it was fully equipped and could hit
back.

The International Institute of Tamil Studies, an academy sponsored and
financed by the Government of Tamil Nadu, had published in 1985-86 a
book titled *Viviliyam, Tirukkural, Shaiva Siddhantam Oppu Ayu*. The
writer of the book was M. Deivanayakam, a Christian scholar supposed to
be an expert on Tamil antiquities. The University of Madras had
conferred a doctor’s degree on the author for writing this dissertation.
The thesis propounded by him was that the ancient Tamil saint,
Tiruvalluvar, had become a disciple of St. Thomas and converted to
Christianity. Stray sentences had been picked up from the Tamil classic,
*Tirukkural*, and lined up with stray sentences from the Bible in order
to prove the point that the Tamil saint owed his teaching to his contact
with the Christian scripture.

Some scholars had written letters to Deivanayakam pointing out that his
book was full of distortions and altogether misleading. But Deivanayakam
had remained unrelenting. The Dharampuram Shaiva Math had invited the
Christian scholar to a conference of Tamil scholars, and requested him
to disown the thesis. He had come to the conference but refused to yield
ground. Finally, the Math had prepared a book of refutation. It had been
written by an eighty-five years old Tamil and Shaiva scholar, Arunai
Vadivel Mudaliar. Ishwar Sharan’s book on St. Thomas came as a -shot in
the arm of Mudaliar whose book was released by Sarojini Varadappa in a
gathering of three hundred Tamil and Shaiva scholars held in a packed
hall at Madras on 24 October 1991.

The meeting was presided over by justice N. Krishnaswami Reddiar, a
retired judge’ of the high court. He denounced Deivanayakam’s book as
“trash in the name of research.” He quoted from Ishwar Sharan’s book to
point out that “the visit of St. Thomas to India was a myth”, and
wondered how a book like that by Deivanayakam could be published by an
institute set up by the Government and honoured by a university with a
doctorate. Dr. R. Nagaswami, eminent archaeologist, also censored the
institute and the university for sponsoring a spurious thesis, and said
that the St. Thomas story “was a ruse to spread Christianity in India.”
He cited what he knew from his own excavations at the Santhome church.
Some other speakers, too, took Deivanayakam to task.

Meanwhile, Ishwar Sharan had discovered another Christian fraud. It came
to light that Deivanayakam had collaborated with Dr. R. Arulappa, the
Catholic Archbishop of Madras, in writing another but similar book,
*Perinbu Villakku*, published in 1975. The Archbishop had also tried to
prove that Tiruvalluvar had come in contact with St. Thomas during the
latter’s travels in South India, and converted to Christianity. But he
had gone much further, and forged ‘evidence’ on palm-leaf scrolls in
support of his thesis. He had employed a Hindu scholar of Christianity,
Ganesh Iyer, for this purpose, and paid him to the tune of 15 lakh
rupees. The fraud had been exposed when someone put the police on the
trail of Ganesh Iyer. The case had dragged on in the Madras metropolitan
court from 1980 to 1986 when Ganesh Iyer was sentenced to ten months’
imprisonment on various counts. But Dr. Arulappa had got him acquitted
by means of a civil suit for compromise filed in the Madras High Court
at the same time that the criminal case was going on. Ganesh Iyer had
spilled the beans soon after.

Ishwar Sharan included the full story of this fraud in the revised and
enlarged second edition of his book published by VOICE OF INDIA in 1995.
The second edition included all the material published in the first
edition and several other very informative articles, particularly those
from Koenraad Elst and Leela Tampi. “What was originally an introduction
to the study of the myth of St. Thomas and the destruction of a great
Shiva temple” had now “begun to take the shape of a broader
investigation into the Christian presence in India.” It carried an
introduction by Koenraad Elst. “In Catholic universities in Europe,”
wrote Elst, “the myth of the apostle Thomas going to India is no longer
taught as history, but in India it is still considered useful. The
important point is that Thomas can be upheld as a martyr and the
Brahmins decried as fanatics.”

Two conclusions emerged clearly from this particular Hindu-Christian
encounter. Firstly, although the major print media in India is owned by
Hindu moneybags, they have handed it over to Hindu-baiters of all
sorts.^([7](#7)) Secondly, there is no law in the country which can deal
with intellectual crimes committed by Christian scribes ever so often.
In fact, the existing law comes down heavily on those who expose those
crimes; they are branded as Hindu communalists and accused of creating
enmity between communities.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) *Papacy. Its Doctrine and History*, Voice of India, New Delhi,
1986.

[²](#2a) Stephen Neill, *History of Christianity in India: The
Beginnings to 1707 AD*, Cambridge University Press, 1984, p. 27.

[³](#3a) *Ibid.,* p. 49.

[⁴](#4a) Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru provides an excellent example of how
some innocents abroad lap up lies sold by powerful organizations. “You
may be surprised to learn,” he wrote to his daughter, Indira, on April
12, 1932, “that Christianity came to India long before it went to
England or Western Europe, and when even in Rome it was a despised and
proscribed sect. Within 100 years or so of the death of Jesus, Christian
missionaries came to South India by sea... They converted a large number
of people” (*Glimpses of World History*, CUP reprint, Fourth Impression,
1987, p.87).

[⁵](#5a) *Papacy*, pp. 56-57.

[⁶](#6a) C. A. Simon admitted subsequently that “I was not aware of the
controversial version given by Sri Sita Ram Goel.”

[⁷](#7a) *The Indian Express* at Madras continues to spread Christian
lies in a big way while sharing an occasional paragraph for mild or
uninformed protests against them.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
