+++
title = "02 CHAPTER II THE NATIONAL TERRITORIAL TRADITION"

+++
**CHAPTER II**  
**THE NATIONAL TERRITORIAL TRADITION**

The perspective of *The Tragic Story of Partition* by Shri H.V. Seshadri
is set by what the learned author has written in his short but succinct
Preface. He says: “In the \[past\] one thousand years many parts of our
country had been ruled by the Muslims and then by the British, but the
nation had never compromised, in principle, its sovereignty over any
part of the motherland. As a result, our nation had never ceased to
strive for throwing out the aggressors and liberate those parts. And
history tells us that ultimately it did succeed in freeing the entire
land from the clutches of foreign invaders. However, for the first time,
Partition conceded the moral and legal right to them over certain parts
of the country and declared an ignominious finale to the one thousand
years old heroic struggle for freedom. Thus it was an act of humiliating
surrender on the point of principle. The usual interpretation of
Partition, however, does not utter a word about this aspect. Even while
conceding Partition to be a tragedy, it is sought to be made out as the
only practical way out then available - as the inevitable price for
achieving freedom.”^([1](#1))

This is a very significant statement. Firstly, it carries within it a
consciousness of the territorial and historical traditions cherished by
the people of Bharatavarsha since ages past. Secondly, it brings out the
point that the surrender of a national principle by a people is more
suicidal than the surrender of national territory under unfavourable
circumstances.

We shall take up the territorial tradition first. The vision of
Bharatavarsha which had inspired our struggle against British
imperialism has been described by Shri Seshadri in the very first
chapter in the following words: “Indeed how many were the seers and
sages, poets and prophets - right from the Vedic age upto the modern
times - who had fostered in the nation’s breast the integrated and whole
picture of Bharat as the Divine Mother. Bharat, in their eyes, was not a
mere clod of clay. It was verily the *Matrubhoomi*, the *Punyabhoomi*,
the *Dharmabhoomi*, the *Devabhoomi*, the *Karmabhoomi* - all sublimated
into one single majestic figure of Bharat Mata. To Bankimchandra, She
appeared as the triple manifestation of Saraswati, Lakshmi and Durga.
Rabindranath Tagore visualised Her as *Devi bhuvana-mana-mohini* - the
divine enchantress of the world. To Swami Vivekananda, She was the
Mother of all the thirty-three crores of gods and goddesses - whose
worship would gratify all those myriad deities. Guruji Golwalkar
visualised Her as Trinity of *Mata* - the loving mother, *Pita* - the
protecting father, and *Guru* - the elevating spiritual guide. The unity
of Bharat is so basic to its nature, so sublime in its depths - in fact,
an inseparable aspect of its national soul.”^([2](#2))  
 

**BHARATAVARSHA BECOMES A “MULTITUDE OF DIFFERENT COUNTRIES”**

Shri Seshadri goes on to point out in the second chapter, Breaking the
Hindu Morale, how Bharatavarsha “was newly painted by the British as a
‘continent’ or ‘sub-continent’, and not as a single country”. He cites
John Strachey who had “held some of the highest offices in India”. In a
series of lectures delivered in 1885 at the University of Cambridge,
Strachey had said, “What is India? What does this name India really
signify? The answer that I have sometimes given sounds paradoxical, but
it is true. There is no such country and this is the first and most
essential fact about India that can be learned. India is a name which we
give to a great region including a multitude of different
countries.”^([3](#3)) This great falsehood about our country was foisted
upon generation after generation of Hindus by the British system of
education till it passed into day-to-day political parlance. Rare is the
scholar or politician who does not now refer to his country as the
Indian or Indo-Pak subcontinent.

The very sound of ‘Indian sub-continent’ is shocking to the ears of
those who have had the privilege of performing or participating in some
Hindu *saMskãras*. The wording of every *saMkalpa*, starting with
*Jambudvîpe BharatakhaNDe*, invokes the opposite vision of a single,
though vast and variegated land, inhabited by a people who are proud of
being born and having lived in it. The territorial unity and integrity
of Bharatavarsha - the land that lies south of the Himalayas, east of
Sakadvipa (Seistan), south-east of Vãhlîka (Balkh), west of Burma and
between the two seas - was never a political contrivance created by the
sword of a conqueror. On the contrary, it was meant and manifested by
Mother Nature herself as the cradle of an incomparable culture - the
culture of *Sanãtana Dharma*.  
 

**CULTURAL UNITY VERSUS POLITICAL UNITY**

It is pointed out by superficial students of Indian history that the
‘Indian sub-continent’ has been more often a congeries of independent
and warring states than a single and sovereign political entity. But if
they look a little deeper, they will soon discover a type of unity which
far surpasses mere political unity and which has proved more permanent.
This is the cultural unity of Bharatavarsha. The seers and sages of
India have always placed political unity at the lowest rung of the
ladder. What they have prized above all is a more abiding unity based on
the very sound principles of *svabhãva, svadharma* and *svarãjya*,
nurtured by numerous regions and communities within a common framework
of spiritual and moral values. To their perceptive eyes, political
empires are passing phenomena which leave behind them nothing better
than memories of bloodshed, coercion, and exploitation. Ashoka’s
imperialist adventure into Kalinga and the anguish and remorse it
entailed in a sensitive soul has all along been cited as a classical
example in this context.

Where is the empire of ancient Iran to-day, or that of Alexander of
Macedonia, or that of ancient Rome, or that of the medieval Arabs? The
empires built by the Turks, the Spaniards, the Portuguese, the Dutch,
the British, the Belgians, and the French were far-flung fabrics till
our own times. Did these empires create or leave behind them any sense
of unity among the lands or the peoples over which they presided for
long? On the other hand, the cultural unity that was envisaged by
*Sanãtana Dharma*, and embodied in tried and tested traditions in its
laboratory of Bharatavarsha, is still a living force. In the final
analysis, this cultural unity is the only guarantee of a political unity
in the face of so many fissiparous forces let loose by self-alienated
scholars and secularist politicians.

The Mahabharata carries a complete picture of this cultural unity in its
*tîrtha-yãtrã-parva*, which is part of the larger *Vana-parva*. The
Pandavas accompany their *Purohita*, Dhaumya, on a long pilgrimage to
all parts of Bharatavarsha. They pay their homage to many mountains,
rivers, *saMgamas*, lakes, tanks, forest groves and other sacred shrines
which had become hallowed by association with Gods and Goddesses,
*rishis* and *munis, satees* and *sãdhvees*, heroes and heroines. And
they feel fulfilled as they never did before or after in their long
lives. The same Pandavas made an imperial conquest of the whole country,
not once but twice and performed a *rãjasûya yajña* at the end of each
triumph. But the Pandava empire is a faint memory of the forgotten past.
On the other hand, the sacred spots which the Pandavas visited during
their one and only pilgrimage, draw millions of devotees in our own days
as they did in the distant past, long before the Pandavas appeared on
the scene.

The politicians have bartered away several precious parts of the
motherland and betrayed the people who had lived in those parts for
untold ages. The same brood is now busy beating up provincial passions
on every petty pretext. But the common people still flock to all ancient
pilgrimage places in the residue that is Hindustan.  The common people
still pay the homage of their hearts to those sacred shrines also which
have been left in hostile hands, whenever they listen to recitations of
the Bhagavata and the Mahabharata. Even the national anthem adopted by
those who surrendered to Islamic imperialism, pays homage to Panjãba,
Sindha and Banga which are now supposed to be foreign lands. 
Rabindranath who composed and sang this great song had the whole of
Bharatavarsha imprinted on his mind and heart. He had never heard of the
‘Indian sub-continent’.

The Ramayana, the Puranas and the Dharmashastras paint the same portrait
of an ancient land, every spot of which is sacred to some cultural
memory or the other. The Jainagama and the Tripitaka speak again and
again of sixteen Mahajanapadas, which spanned the spread of
Bharatavarsha in the life-time of Bhagvan Mahavira and the Buddha. Even
a dry compendium on grammar, the Ashtadhyayi of Panini, provides a near
complete count of all the Janapadas in ancient India-Gandhara and
Kamboja, Sindhu and Sauvira, Kashmir and Kekaya, Madra and Trigarta,
Kuru and Panchala, Kaushala and Kashi, Magadha and Videha, Anga and
Vanga, Kirata and Kamarupa, Suhma and Udra, Vatsa and Matsya, Abhira and
Avanti, Nishadha and Vidarbha, Dandakaranya and Andhra, Karnataka and
Kerala, Chola and Pandya. The epic poetry poured out by Kalidasa, Magha,
Bharavi and Sriharsha continues the same tradition of talking endlessly
about Bharatavarsha as a single and indivisible geographical entity, as
a *karmabhûmi* for Gods and Goddesses, Brahmarshis and Rajarshis, and as
higher than heaven for all those who have had the good fortune of being
born in it.

The names of places and provinces had changed considerably by the time
the Buddhist pilgrims - Fa-hien, Hiuen-Tsang and It-sing - came to India
in the 4th, 7th and 8th centuries. But the ancient contours of
Bharatavarsha as a self-contained territorial unit had not undergone any
change. The pilgrims from China found themselves on the sacred land
which they had come to visit as soon as they stepped into what is now
known as Afghanistan. Many other lands beyond this North-Western
province of India worshipped the Buddha and were dotted with Buddhist
temples and monasteries. But the Chinese pilgrims did not experience the
same spiritual stir in those lands as they did on entering the holy land
which had given birth to the Buddha.

The three Chinese travellers have left detailed accounts of stupas and
temples, schools and colleges, Brahmins and Bhikshus, kings and
courtiers, classes and masses, towns and villages, mores and manners,
customs and traditions. These accounts also leave the same impression of
a deep cultural unity in the midst of many apparent diversities. They
testify to the fundamental fact that no inhabitant of Bhãratavarsha, no
matter what province or region he came from and no matter what language
or dialect he spoke, felt like a foreigner in any other province or
region.

It was this feeling of being at home everywhere in the country which
took the Adi Shankaracharya from the southernmost tip to the farthest
corners of Bharatavarsha in North and East and West and helped him found
(or revive) the four foremost *dhãmas* at Badrinath, Dvaraka,
Rameshvaram and Puri. There is no count of sadhus and sannyasins and
house-holders who have travelled ever since on the trail blazed by that
great acharya. Six and a half centuries later, Guru Nanak Dev followed
in the footsteps of the Pandavas and the Shankaracharya in search of
spiritual company. Chaitanyadeva who lived in the 16th century and Swami
Vivekananda who came towards the end of the 19th, roamed over the same
route, feeling similarly at home everywhere.  
 

**THE CHARACTER OF POLITICAL UNITY**

It is not that the authors of this deeper and firmer unity had no
conception of political unity. Only they did not give primacy to
political unity, nor promote it at the cost of cultural unity. That was
why they did not sanction the destruction or eclipse of local dynasties,
or the socio-political autonomies of various regions and provinces, or
the local cultural traditions, by any empire-builder. Nor did they
sanction imperialist adventures outside the bounds of Bharatavarsha for
subjugating people who did not belong to the national family.

The image of the whole of Bharatavarsha being a *chakravartikshetra* is
as old as the oldest Vedic literature. The Itihasa-Purana provide
glorious accounts of many *chakravartins*-Ikshvaku, Puru, Prithu Vainya,
Sivi Ausinara, Mandhata, Raghu and so on-who accompanied the *ašvamedha*
horse demanding submission from all kingdoms and republics, big and
small, spread all over the country. The *rãjasûya yajña* which was
performed at the end of this campaign was more in the nature of a
meeting of equals than a durbar held by a despot in order to humble or
humiliate subordinate princes and patriarchs. Sri Krishna had demanded
death for Jarasandha because the latter had violated this dharmic
tradition of empire-building, and kept a hundred kings captive in his
castle. The Nandas had won notoriety as an ignoble dynasty because they
had also violated the standard code of conduct laid down by the
*rãjadharma* for righteous emperors, destroyed many local dynasties, and
reduced other princes to provincial satraps.

And we have no record of an Indian empire-builder crossing over to
foreign lands in search of conquests. Chandragupta Maurya (or
Chandragupta I of the Gupta Dynasty according to an alternate
chronology) could have easily overrun the Macedonian empire in West Asia
after defeating Seleucus Nikator. But he stopped at the borders of
Bharatavarsha after throwing out the foreign invader. So did
Samudragupta after rounding off his victorious march in the Uttarapatha,
however rich and inviting the lands beyond the borders might have been.
This traditional taboo on going out and destroying the *dasyu*
(aggressor) in the latter’s own homeland was to prove quite costly in
subsequent periods. It even degenerated into what is known as the
Panipat mentality of waiting for the invader till he reached a
particular field of battle. But what we wish to emphasize here is that
there was a well-defined tradition of empire-building in India and thus
providing political unity to the whole country.  
 

**DEFENCE OF THE NORTH-WESTERN FRONTIER**

Before the British invader entered from the South and the East, it was
the North-Western border of Bharatavarsha which was battered and
breached again and again by a series of foreign invaders. That border,
therefore, became an abiding part of national consciousness. This
awareness is writ large in many a battle fought in defence of that
border. Skandagupta had stormed towards that border in his fight to the
finish against the Huna (or Saka) hordes. Later on, when Bharatavarsha
was threatened by an Islamic invasion under the Arabs, some of the
bravest battles were fought, and fought very successfully, in defence of
Kabul and Zabul and Sindh. Still later, many Indian princes rallied
round the Hindu Shahiya Dynasty of Udbhandapur, first in order to
recover Kabul which had been overrun by the Islamicized Turks under
Subuktigin, and then to contain the invasion by the same Turks after
Indian forces had suffered a setback in the first endeavour.^([4](#4))

In more recent times, after the stranglehold of Islamic imperialism had
been broken, the Marathas marched towards the same border impelled by
the same national instinct and aspiration for freeing the motherland
from all traces of foreign rule. The Sikhs under Maharaja Ranjit Singh
fought some of their fiercest battles in the North-West to recover
national territory from the Pathans who had meanwhile become alienated
from the national mainstream after several centuries of subjugation to
Islamic terror. The success achieved by the Marathas and the Sikhs was
spectacular and was applauded by our people as a whole. On the other
hand, the defeat of the Marathas in the Third Battle of Panipat was
regarded as a national disaster and mourned far and wide. The Jats of
Bharatpur who had plundered and harassed many imperial armies of the
Mughals opened their doors as well as their purse-strings to provide
succour and shelter to the worm-out Maratha veterans returning from
Panipat.

Neither Chandragupta nor Samudragupta felt for a moment that he was
intruding into foreign territory when he subdued the smaller
principalities in the areas which have come to be known as Afghanistan
and Pakistan in our own times. Nor did Skandagupta or Jayapala Shahiya
or the Marathas or the Sikhs suffer from such an uncomfortable feeling
when they set out to repel the Huna (or Saka) and Islamic invaders.
Conversely, the Macedonian invader had proclaimed that he had entered
India only after he had crossed what is now known as the Hindukush
mountain. Greek historians leave no doubt that the army of Alexander
which retreated by the land route through Baluchistan regarded itself as
still inside India, and not free from the danger of Indian
counter-attacks, till it had crossed over into the desert of Makran. The
Arab chroniclers recorded again and again that the armies sent by
successive Caliphs against Kabul and Zabul and Sindh had gone out for
the conquest of Hind.  
 

**SURRENDER OF A VITAL PRINCIPLE**

Shri Seshadri has, therefore, rightly pointed out that the national
leadership surrendered a very vital principle and betrayed a very old
and cherished territorial tradition when it conceded a permanent
alienation of people and territory on both sides of the borders, and
accepted the British definition of Bharatavarsha as a sub-continent
constituted of many countries and communities. He observes with great
anguish in his very first chapter, Crucial Hour of Freedom Struggle,
that “Millions of devoted and loving children of Bharatavarsha had been
overnight turned into subjects of a fanatically anti-Hindu State. River
Sindhu became alien to crores of her progeny and the birth-place of the
Vedas was turned over to their inveterate foes. Crores upon crores of
brothers and sisters on either side of the dividing line became
foreigners to each other. Lakhs perished in the ensuing genocide.
Unspeakable atrocities were let loose on men, women and children. 
Temples, pilgrimage centres and all holy places were razed to the
ground.”^([5](#5))

It would have been one thing to concede Partition because it could not
be prevented at that time due to a combination of powerful and hostile
forces brought into play by the British game to divide-and-rule, by the
parasitic Islamic imperialism, and by the failure of the national
leadership to evolve an appropriate strategy for a total liberation of
the motherland from every vestige of foreign rule. But it was quite
another thing to concede that the lands grabbed by the rearguard action
of a retreating Islamic imperialism had become foreign lands for ever,
and that the people alienated and subjugated by an Islamic state had
become foreign nationals till the end of time. The former concession
could have been forgiven as a state of helplessness in a particular
situation. The latter concession was, without doubt, a cowardly
surrender by a leadership which had lost its moorings in the national
tradition of India’s territorial integrity.

This loss of the national territorial tradition was the direct result of
a loss of proper vision pertaining to national history. Shri Seshadri
refers to this latter loss also before he sets out on his main theme.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) *The Tragic Story of Partition*, p. 12.

[²](#2a) Ibid., p. 9.

[³](#3a) Ibid., p. 12

[⁴](#4a) See Sita Ram Goel, *History of Heroic Hindu Resistance to
Muslim Invaders* (636 A.D. to 1206 A.D.), Voice of India, 1984 reprinted
in 1994.

[⁵](#5a) *The Tragic Story of Partition*, p. 10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


