+++
title = "13 APPENDIX ISLAMIC MANIFESTO FOR INDIA"

+++
**APPENDIX**  
**ISLAMIC MANIFESTO FOR INDIA**

It is old. It is new. It is an enduring theme on which the Ulama and the
Sufis of Islam thrive.

It is a rueful review of an opportunity lost in the past. It is a fond
dream about a future fulfilment. It is a fanatic faith to fight for in
the present.

Borrowing a metaphor from the *Communist Manifesto* of Karl Marx, the
theme can be summarised as well as sloganized as follows: “We, the Ulama
and the Sufis of Islam, disdain to hide our aim. We stand for a full and
final conquest of India by Islam. Muslims of India unite! You have
nothing to lose but your minority complex. You have a whole subcontinent
to gain!”

The Ulama and the Sufis grieve that Islam was a failure in India in the
final round, though it monopolised military as well as political power
for five centuries and more. They envy the history of Islamic
imperialism in Syria, Palestine, Persia, Central Asia, North Africa,
Malaysia, and Indonesia where it succeeded in a total subversion of
older societies and cultures in a far shorter span of time.

The Ulama and the Sufis hope and pray that Allah will be more merciful
towards his favourite faith in the future, and enable them to establish
a *hukumat-i-ilãhiyã* in India. They feel confident that this time they
will not fail, and that they will use the opportunity fully for
eradicating the last vestiges of *jãhiliyya* from this land.

The Ulama and the Sufis leave no stone unturned to keep their flock free
from every ‘taint’ of empiricism, rationalism, universalism, and
humanism. They also go in search of fresh pastures among the weaker
sections of Hindu society. The name of the game is mass conversions to
Islam.

In medieval times, when Islam ruled the roost, the most ‘upright’ Ulama
and the ‘saintliest’ Sufis carried on a long-drawn-out debate regarding
the treatment to be meted out to the Hindus conquered by the sword of
Islam. They quoted chapter and verse from the Quran, the Hadis and the
‘learned’ commentaries to prove a proposition. The syllogism had more
than the three standard steps. But the argument, they thought, was
unassailable. The inexorable logic unfolded as follows:

> 1\. The five categories of ‘unbelievers’ whom the Prophet came to know
> in his own lifetime were the Polytheists of Arabia, the Jews, the
> Christians, the Zoroastrians, and the Sabaeans;
>
> 2\. The Prophet had no qualms about the Polytheists; they were to be
> slaughtered unless they surrendered and became Muslims;
>
> 3\. The Jews, the Christians and, later on, the Zoroastrians and the
> Sabaeans were recognized by the Prophet as *Ahl-i-Kitãb* (People of
> the Book);
>
> 4\. The Prophet honoured them with the designation of *Zimmîs* who
> could be allowed to live in an Islamic state, provided they renounced
> resistance, and agreed to pay jizyah;
>
> 5\. Umar, the second pious *Khalîfah* of Islam, spelled out in so many
> words the numerous disabilities to be imposed on the *Zimmîs*,
> reducing them to a status of non-citizens inside an Islamic state;
>
> 6\. The Prophet had not known any Hindus in his own life-time and
> could not, therefore, receive a Revelation regarding their status in
> an Islamic state;
>
> 7\. The Hindus were not *Ahl-i-Kitãb*; on the contrary, they were
> unashamed and outright Polytheists;
>
> 8\. The Hindus, therefore, could not be designated as *Zimmîs*
> entitled to pay *jizyah* and live under disabilities imposed by an
> Islamic state;
>
> 9\. The Islamic state in India was under an inescapable obligation to
> use all its power and resources to force the Hindus to embrace Islam,
> failing which they were to be sent to hell where they rightly
> belonged.

Quod erat *demonstrandum*. It was difficult to find a flaw in this logic
without putting Islamic jurisprudence in jeopardy.

One could have, of course, faulted the syllogism by asking a simple
question: “What happened to the Zoroastrians whom your Prophet had
‘honoured’ as *Zimmîs*? Did Islam allow them to live as *Zimmîs* in the
beloved land of their birth? Where are they now?” But the Ulema and the
Sufis of Islam have never acquired the ‘bad habit’ of asking or
answering questions. They have always found it far more convenient to
call for a cutting off of *kãfir* heads.

This, then, was the imperative of Islamic theology vis-a-vis the Hindus.
But there were other realities such as the balance of power between the
Islamic state and the Hindu society. In large parts of India, Hindus
were far from being conquered completely. If pressed too hard, Hindus
revolted, and imperilled the Islamic ‘empire’ itself. Hindus were also
needed by the Islamic state as hewers of wood and drawers of water so
that Muslim swordsmen, Ulama and Sufis, who had become the aristocracy,
could enjoy the lands and the loot which Allah and his Prophet had
bestowed upon them.

Some Sultans strived hard to carry out the commands of the Ulama and the
Sufis. But they discovered very soon and to their great discomfiture
that Hindus despised Islam as a species of barbarism, and fought back
fiercely when driven to the wall. The Sultans had to admit defeat and
die unfulfilled. Many Sultans of the imperial and provincial dynasties
suffered this supreme frustration while attempting to forge  
ahead in the way of Allah.

The Hanafi school of Islamic ‘law’ came to the rescue of the Sultans who
had found themselves between the devil of the Ulama and the Sufis, and
the deep sea of Hindu resistance. This school searched the scriptures of
Islam to find support for their contention that Hindus also could be
designated as *Zimmîs*, and thus allowed to live in an Islamic state. So
the Sultans indulged occasionally in the luxury of forced conversions,
and killing of Hindus *en masse*. But, for the rest, they were content
to collect *jizyah* and other back-breaking taxes from Hindus and enjoy
in peace their imperial power and privilege, including harems crowded
with Hindu women captured in war and otherwise.

A notable exception to these two types of Sultans was Akbar. He saw
through the exclusive claims of Islam and kept the Ulama and the Sufis
at an arm’s length. He was favourably impressed by Hindu saints, sages,
scholars and statesmen and became increasingly attached to them. He
evolved a policy of *sulah-i-kul* between the Islamic state and the
Hindu society. He abolished *jizyah*, banned cow-slaughter, permitted
questions regarding the character of Islam and its Prophet, allowed
Hindu converts to go back to their ancestral religion, and prohibited
killing of Hindus for marrying Muslim women without getting converted to
Islam. In short, he restored self-respect to the Hindus who came forward
to help him in building a splendid and stable empire which came to be
envied by the rest of the world.

But there is a strong element of atavism in Islam which prevents it from
learning any lesson from history. Akbar’s policy of peace came in for an
adverse review in the reign of Shah Jahan and underwent a total reversal
under Aurangzeb. This great *ghazi* of Islam declared a new *jihãd*
against the Hindus. The result was the ruin of the Mughal empire which
crumbled within two decades after his death. Power now passed into the
hands of Hindus-the Rajputs, the Marathas, the Jats and the Sikhs.

Islam is also famous for breeding a brand of fanatics who refuse to
recognize objective reality and who love to live in a world of fantasy.
The Ulama and the Sufis refused to believe that the imperial power of
Islam in India was gone for good. Soon after the break-up of the Mughal
empire, there arose Shah Waliullah (1702-1762) followed by his son,
Abdul Aziz, followed by the latter’s disciple, Syed Ahmad Barelvi
(1786-1831), all of whom were possessed by the passionate idea - which
they preached with great fervour - that the imperial power of Islam
could and should be restored in India.

These early Don Quixotes of Islam were followed by others like
Shariatullah (1790-1831), Dudhu Mian (1819-60), Titu Mian (1782-1831)
and the Wahabis who titled their swords at the British power in Bengal
and the Sikh sovereignty in the Punjab. They declared that India had
once again become a *Dãr-ul-harb* (enemy territory), and invited their
brethren in faith to practise *jihãd* or *hijrat*. They met the fate
which such lunatics deserve, and disappeared into the dustbin of
history. Only the Ulama and the Sufis hail them as *shahîds* (martyrs).

A new type of wisdom, though within the four walls of Islamic fanaticism
and day-dreaming, dawned upon Khwaja Hasan Nizami in the early years of
the 20th century. He was no ordinary pen-pusher or paid mullah in some
suburban mosque. On the contrary, he was a highly placed ‘divine’ in the
hierarchy of Nizamuddin Auliya’s prestigious *silsilã*, and widely
honoured in the Muslim world. He published in 1920 a big book, *Fãtami
Dãwat-i-Islam*, in which he advocated all means, fair and foul, by which
Hindus were to be converted to Islam. He advised the mullahs to
concentrate on Hindu ‘untouchables’, and convert them *en masse* so that
Muslims could achieve parity of population with the Hindus. He disclosed
in the introduction to his book that he had consulted many Muslim
leaders including the Agha Khan regarding the soundness of his scheme,
and that all of them had agreed with the caution that the scheme should
be kept a closely guarded secret. Unfortunately for the Khwaja, the
scheme came to the notice of Swami Shraddhananda who exposed it, fought
it tooth and nail, and frustrated it completely by means of his Shuddhi
Movement.

And now we have the same scheme resurrected before us by the Islamic
Centre in London, in a still more ambitious form. The aim of achieving
parity with the Hindus has been abandoned in favour of full Islamisation
of India. The Islamic fraternity in India has welcomed the scheme with
open arms. Jama‘t-i-Islami is the most fanatic constituent of this
fraternity. There are many more individuals and organizations operating
under different disguises. In any case, the scheme is being pushed ahead
vigorously with the aid of petro-dollars. Many Islamic countries,
particularly Kuwait, Libya, and Saudi Arabia, are its ‘pious’ patrons.

The full contours of this conspiracy were reveled by Javed Ansari in the
December 1981 number of Arabia: *The Islamic Review* published by the
Islamic Press Agency, London. The Agency is an expensive outfit
maintained and financed by Saudi Arabia. Javed violated no oath of
secrecy because the conspiracy became widely known in India as soon as
it was hatched by a conference of Islamic embassies in the West. He only
presented it in a finished form and with full self-confidence, so that
no one was left in any doubt about its ramifications.

The article by Javed is titled *India: The World’s ‘Largest
Democracy’*.  We need not quarrel with his oblique reference to
democracy in India. The ‘gentleman’ has in mind the Islamic
‘democracies’ of Pakistan, Iran, Libya, Saudi Arabia, Syria and the
United Arab Emirates. What he writes in his article is much more
interesting. The main point made by him comes at the end of the article.
He says: “Such a programme would require first of all an abandonment of
the strategy which gives priority to protecting the ‘special status’ and
‘minority rights’ of the Muslim community. No minority community can
have such ‘rights’ within the existing Indian system. The only realistic
political option is to develop an alternative vision of India’s future -
a vision capable of mobilising all sections of the Indian people into
making sacrifice for its realisation.”

What is the alternative vision? Javed does not mince words. His clarion
call is loud and clear. He announces: “Islam must be presented as an
ideological framework capable of redefining the social perspective of
the ordinary Indian citizen. Islam must emerge as a cohesive social
force challenging the hegemony of both nationalism and socialism in
India. This is a difficult and challenging task, calling for the
building of a new political and social base.”

Who is going to provide that political and social base? Javed concludes:
“The movement of the Harijans towards Islam provides a rare opportunity
of initiating this struggle. If this opportunity is missed, India’s
Muslims will have lost a chance to play a decisive role in the making of
history.”

We have suspected for a long time that Islam is not a religion as the
protagonists of *sarva-dharma-samabhãva* would have us believe. We are,
therefore, grateful to Javed for conceding that Islam is an ideology. A
discussion about the nature of that ideology need not deter us here. At
the moment we are concerned with the way that ideology is being
presented by the spokesmen of Islam.

It is not an accident that over the past several years the emphasis has
suddenly shifted from the ‘scriptures’ to the ‘social message’ of Islam.
Islam is still being presented as the ‘only true religion’. But a louder
noise is being made about Islamic society being an ideal society. There
is an implied admission that the ‘scriptures’ of Islam have failed it in
India over the long stretch of some 1300 years. So the ‘social
philosophy of Islam’ is being given a turn to try its luck in the same
old game of subversion.

Again, we do not want to be detained by discussion about the nature of
Islamic ‘social philosophy’. That discussion will be taken up in due
course. Here we are concerned with how that ‘philosophy’ is being
presented to us at this time.

Islam, we are told, stands for the Brotherhood of Man and an
equalitarian social order free from caste hierarchy, class oppression,
economic exploitation, and so on. It all sounds as if Islam is another
version of Communism. Haven’t we been told by some noted spokesman that
Communism is Islam minus Allah, or that Allah plus Communism constitutes
Islam? But we shall not press home the parallel.

What is the social milieu in which this ‘ideal’ social order has to
operate? Well, it is the goddammed Hindu society “encumbered with gross
inequality, economic exploitation, caste cruelties, oppression of
women”, and so on. The ‘ideal’ social order has to overcome and destroy
this wicked social order and “redeem” these 700 million human beings
from fate “worse than that of the beasts and worms”. The logic is
irrefutable, however irritating it may be to “our brethren of the Hindu
fold”.

There was a time when the spokesmen of Islam stood alone in performing
the painful task of telling the truth about the Hindu social order.
Recently they have been relieved of that burden by a large tribe of
Hindu scribes and scholars serving in the daily and the periodical press
owned by Hindu moneybags. They have dragged out no end of skeletons
hidden in the Hindu cupboard. They have left us in no doubt about the
enormous inequalities handed down by the hoary Hindu heritage. Damn
Hinduism and get publicity as a secularist and a progressive! That is
the bait held out by some notable editors. Many scribes rise to the bait
because the payment they receive is much better. Many politicians
swallow the bait - hook, line and sinker - simply because a periodical
enjoys a large circulation. No politician worth his salt can ignore
publicity in the prestigious press.

It is not an accident that in recent years we have been flooded with
news about ‘atrocities on Harijans’. A selective news-reporting in the
press leaves the unmistakable impression that Harijans are the only
people who are being beaten up, burnt, and killed otherwise in our
countryside; that Harijan women are the only women being molested by
‘caste’ Hindus; and that Harijan labourers are the only labourers
getting buried under the debris of defective constructions. The
reporters who collect these stories and the editors who display them on
the front page have a glow of self-righteous satisfaction on their
faces. It is never news for them that Brahmins, Thakurs and other
‘caste’ Hindus also get killed in similar fracas; that ‘caste’ Hindu
girls also get molested and forced into prostitution; and that
non-Harijan Hindu labourers also get buried in like manner. The same
Hindu scribes and scholars have started singing the glories of the
Islamic Brotherhood of Man.

It is this spectacle of breast-beating on the part of the Hindu elite
which has emboldened the spokesmen of Islam to rewrite India’s history
vis-a-vis the swordsmen of Islamic imperialism. According to Javed,
“Islam came to India at the invitation of the peasants of Sindh who were
the victims of colonial central Indian rule in the 7th century. Muhammad
bin Qasim, the liberator of Sind, was immensely popular among the
mases.”

Several Muslim historians of Sindh tell us in so many words that Sindh
had been an independent kingdom for more than 150 years at the time it
was invaded by the Arab armies. Al-Biladhuri writes in *Futûh-ul-Buldãn*
that between 659 and 712 A.D, five Arab expeditions were defeated and
dispersed, and their commanders killed at the borders of Sindh by the
Jats and the Meds before Muhammad bin Qasim succeeded in his mission of
murder, rapine and loot. Does it all look like a guest party of Muslims
who the peasants of Sindh were waiting for in order to extend a warm
welcome? The *Chuchnãmah* based on a contemporary Muslim account
describes in detail how the Jat peasantry fought fiercely for every inch
of the motherland, and how it died but did not surrender. Brazen faced
liars like Javed will have to make a bonfire of many histories of Islam
written by pious Muslims in medieval times before their concoctions can
have a chance.

But while lying about Hindus and their history, Javed has told the truth
about the Sufis. He writes: “It was the sufi saints who initiated the
struggle for the establishment of an Islamic state in India. Khwaja
Muinuddin Chisti, Khwaja Nizamuddin Aulia and Bakhtiyar Kaki opposed the
secularist policies of the kings of the slave dynasty of medieval India.
Mujadid al-Thani Ahmed Sirhindi organized a resistance movement against
the Mughal Emperor Akbar and his attempts to establish a secular Indian
polity. The Mujidid’s disciples and devotees included Akbar’s
great-grandson, the dervish Prince Aurangzeb Alamgeer.”

It is an interesting disclosure about the Sufis. Many Hindus who have no
illusions about prophetic Islam have a very soft corner for the Sufis
whom Islam has been presenting as its saints for the past so many years.
But the painful truth is that the ‘Mystic Dimension of Islam’ has always
been the ideological arsenal of Islamic imperialism.

Javed has also informed us about the newly acquired self-confidence of
Islam in India. He proclaims: “The Muslims of India are more committed
to Islamic ideology, better politically organized and exhibit greater
unity to-day than at any time since independence. It is this newfound
sense of destiny which has enabled them to welcome the Harijans into
Islam throughout India and to assert their right to formulate a
national, social and political strategy which is distinct and uniquely
Islamic… This community is rapidly adopting the view that their destiny
in inextricably linked to that of India. India must undergo a social and
a political transformation before the bulk of its population can escape
from social deprivation and exploitation.”"

This self-confidence is symbolised by the waxing fortunes of
Jama‘t-i-Islami, the vanguard of the Islamic crusade in this country.
Javed reports: “This view has been consistently expounded by the Jamaat
Islami since 1947 when it was an insignificant political grouping with
little or no influence. It numbered its supporters in hundreds and its
message of preaching Islam ‘daawa’ and downgrading the importance of
‘minority interests’ evoked almost no response. However, the
Jamaat-i-Islami Annual Convention held in Hyderabad last July attracted
more than 10,000 participants. Its literature has now been translated
into 17 Indian languages. Thousands of Hindus count themselves amongst
its supporters.”

That brings us to the beginning. We have to give a vote of thanks to
Javed. He starts his article by the following statement: “Since 1947,
India, a leading champion of secularism and the home of the most ancient
philosophies known to man has witnessed more than 20,000 incidents of
serious communal rioting. Every year the number of Muslims who fall
victim grows larger.” We leave the statistics in this statement to the
Government of India. They have been cited by a spokesman of the Arabs
whose causes our Government defends, day in and day out. But we cannot
help being grateful to Javed for presenting India as the “home of the
most ancient philosophies known to man”. We do not mind it at all that
the compliment carries as a taunt. Truth needs telling, whatever the
twist. The worst liar in the world has a right to tell the truth once in
a while.

We wish and hope that the Ulama and the Sufis of Islam in Indian will
also admit this great truth, and stop denouncing this country as an area
of darkness which ‘Islam has to illumine’. We appeal to the worthies of
the Jama‘t-i-Islami in particular and Muslims in general to study some
of these “most ancient philosophies” to which Javed has referred. We
assure them that they will find it a refreshing change from the
cock-and-bull stories on which they have been fed so far by the Quran
and the Hadis.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


