+++
title = "01 INTRODUCTION"

+++
**INTRODUCTION**

This book will deal with items of faith central to the Christian
tradition.  It may therefore be in order to clarify where I stand
vis-a-vis this tradition.  For most practical purposes, I belong to the
Catholic community in my country: schooling, membership of cultural
organizations, trade-union etc. I confess (therewith upholding a
Christian ritual) that several times, I have voted for the
Christian-Democratic Party, a non-confessional party that vaguely
adheres to “values” upheld by the Christian tradition.

Moreover, in my youth I was a genuine believer, more than most of my
class-mates and my generation as a whole.  My father was one of the last
polemizing Catholics in Belgium, and a sharp critic of the degenerative
secularizing tendencies within the modem Church.  I have always
respected this wholehearted acceptance of the authentic doctrine and
tradition more than the wishy-washy approach currently taken by our
bishops and taught in our Theology faculty.

All this may be worth mentioning to clarify that I do not belong to that
category of people, fairly widespread in my country, who have a
deep-seated hatred against the Catholic Church and traditions, either
because they were brought up as militant atheists or because they
slammed the church door behind them during adolescence, never to look
back again except to pour contempt.  There is quite a literature by
writers who in adult life continue to react against the frustrations,
mostly sexual, which they associate with their years in the Jesuit
college.  Today, it is no exaggeration to say that the anti-Christian
people in countries like mine are more fanatical and intolerant than the
dwindling number of churchgoers.  My motive in writing this book has
nothing to do with that type of anti-Christian reaction.

The point is simply that we, European Christians of many generations,
have outgrown Christianity.  Most people who left the Church have found
that they are not missing anything, and that the beliefs which once
provided a framework for interpreting and shaping life, were but a
bizarre and unnecessary construction after all.  We now know that Jesus
was not God’s Only-begotten Son, that he did not save humanity from
eternal sin, and that our happiness in this world or the next does not
depend on believing these or any other dogmas.

When staying in India, I find it sad and sometimes comical to see how
these outdated beliefs are being foisted upon backward sections of the
Indian population by fanatical missionaries.  In their aggressive
campaign to sell their product, the missionaries are helped a lot by
sentimental expressions of admiration for Christianity on the part of
leading Hindus.  Many Hindus project their own religious categories on
the few Jesus episodes they have heard, and they base their whole
attitude to Christianity on what I know to be a selective, incoherent
and unhistorical version of the available information on Jesus’ life and
teachings.  That is why I have written the present introduction to one
of the most revealing lines of proper scientific research into the
origins of Christianity, viz. the psychological analysis of Jesus and of
several other Biblical characters.

As Jawaharlal Nehru said, we do injustice to the Vedas by treating them
as divine revelations rather than as milestones of human understanding. 
Glad that for once I can agree with Nehru, I affirm that we should take
a secular, historicizing look at the factual human basis of religious
scriptures.  In the case of religions, which describe their own basis as
God-given, directly revealed by God’s word, such a secular approach will
imply an analysis of the consciousness, which claims to receive direct
revelations from God.  That is the line of research to which this book
offers a brief introduction.

Delhi, 24 January 1993

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[](index.htm)**

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
