+++
title = "03 CHAPTER TWO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF PROPHETISM"

+++
**CHAPTER TWO**

**THE PSYCHOLOGY OF PROPHETISM**

The main part of this book is intended as an introduction to important
findings in Bible research from the angle of psychology, with the
emphasis on the work of the Flemish Bible scholar and psychologist Dr.
Somers (parts of chapters 3.6 to 3.10 are little more than a re-wording
of his original writings).

**2.1. A Jesuit breaks free**

Dr. Herman H. Somers, born in Antwerp on 3 October 1921, is an
accomplished scholar with acclaimed contributions in many fields of
learning.  He studied in Leuven and Rome, and is an M.A. in Philosophy,
Ph.D. in Classical Philology (i.e. Latin and Greek), Ph.D. in Theology,
and Ph.D. in Psychology.  For forty years he was in the Jesuit order. 
He had worked as a schoolteacher, journalist for the Jesuit-led paper
*De Linie*, lecturer in Classical Philology and in Psychology,
practising psychopathologist in a mental asylum, before he went on to
devote 25 years to scientific research.  He has been active in a variety
of research projects, from noise ecology and experimental psychology to
pioneering work in computer-aided mathematical text analysis of the
Bible.

As he studied the Bible more closely, he developed doubts about its
divine character.  In the face of unexpected findings inconvenient to
the faith, he refused to renounce scientific standards, and drew his
conclusions. In what he describes as a painful process, he grew away
from the Christian faith, and left the Jesuit order.  Pro-Jesuit sources
claim that it is only because of his unwillingness to comply with his
vow of poverty (concretely: renouncing the family property in favour of
the order after his mother died) that he has left the order.

In 1986, he published the book: *Jezus de Messias: was het Christendom
een Vergissing*? (“Jesus the Messiah: was Christianity a
Mistake?”).^([1](#1)) Written in Dutch, it is an abridged version of a
more technical study in French, which he sent to a number of experts and
interested parties, among them the Vatican.  It is a ground-breaking
exploration of the psychopathological syndromes accurately described in
the New Testament, especially of Jesus’ mental condition.

In June 1990, he published a more voluminous sequel, this time also
dealing with the Old Testament prophets.  It is called: *Toen God sliep,
schreef de mens de Bijbel.  De Bilbet belicht door een psycholoog*
(Dutch: “When God slept, man wrote the Bible.  The Bible explained by a
psychologist”).^([2](#2)) We hope that it will soon be translated into
all major languages, and meanwhile we will offer a summary of the book’s
most striking points.

Since then, dr.  Somers has also written a history of the Jesuit order,
a psychological study of Mohammed, and a study of the Jehovah’s
Witnesses.

**2.2. Methodology**

A psychological investigation of the Bible starts from the premise that
the Bible text is based on real events.  Of course, in the centuries of
writing and rewriting, distortions may have crept in (deliberately or by
mistake), stories from other traditions may have been added, historical
facts embellished, blown up to mythical proportions, or on the contrary,
concealed.  But nonetheless, the very tradition of which the text is a
part, could not have existed if the founders of that tradition, whose
life and times are described in the text, had not existed. The core of
the actual texts must be function of real words and deeds by real
people.

That this premises, evident though it seems, is not automatically
accepted, may be seen from two trends in modern Bible studies.  Firstly,
there are people who flatly deny that Jesus ever existed.  According to
the Marxist-leaning scholar P. Krijbolder, Jesus was merely a character
invented as a literary device in the presentation of a new ideology, and
the four Gospels were designed to present four aspects of this
ideology.^([3](#3)) In that case, if at all there is scope for
psychological analysis, it is of the psychological motives and attitudes
of the writers, not of the text’s characters, since these are fictional.

Secondly, there are a lot of theologians who follow the German
theologian Bultmann in his *Entmythologisierung* (demythologization) of
the Bible stories.  This means that the stories are not to be taken
literally, since they are in fact merely myths.  They are stories made
up by the community of believers in order to express their faith.  If we
want to read the Bible correctly, we have to relinquish the idea that it
describes what really happened, and interpret it as a collection of
expressions of the faith, moulded in literary genres developed for that
very purpose.  This approach does usually not imply that Jesus’
existence is doubted, merely that the miracle stories, the virgin birth,
the resurrection are “not to be taken literally”.

The skepsis regarding the existence of Biblical characters may be more
reasonable in the case of persons situated in the distant past, like
Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, but from Moses onward the stories
start looking too much like they are essentially historical.  However,
the “demythologizing” skepsis regarding the reality of Jesus’ divine
vocation and miracles may well be extended to characters like Moses,
Joshua, Samuel, David, and Solomon: while their life and times may have
been real enough, the postulated divine intervention in them is
considered, by the demythologizers, as just a figure of speech.

There are reasons for giving in only minimally to the extreme skepsis
regarding the basis in reality of the Bible narrative, and for sticking
to the essentially historical character of the Bible’s stories. 
Firstly, there is a logical contradiction in postulating that the core
text of a religious tradition is unhistorical, “mere” narrative.  A
religious tradition can only be created by people, in fact by people who
have managed to attract the loyalty of a number of followers. If the
first Christians made myths in order to “express their faith”, then
someone must have generated or inspired this new faith among them. 
Saying that Jesus never existed, implies that the Gospel-writers did
write about someone who did not exist and did not found their religion,
but failed to write about the man who did create their religion and
therefore must necessarily have existed.  This is not strictly
impossible, but it is also like saying that the Shakespeare to whom the
famous plays and poems have been attributed, never existed, but that his
plays and poems were written by someone else whose name may also have
been Shakespeare.

Secondly, there is quite a bit of external evidence.  There are several
references to Jesus in non-Christian sources, just like there are
external references to the Hebrew migration from Egypt.  Of course,
philologists have taken great pains to find forgeries and interpolations
in these texts, but by now this explaining-away has been superseded by a
willingness to take sources seriously as long as there are no solid
independent grounds for suspecting forgery.  For instance, the
historical authenticity of the passage on Jesus in Flavius Josephus’
work (late first century AD) is now accepted by many scholars: though it
has been tampered with, it was not inserted.

Thirdly, there is a lot of internal evidence in the Bible text.  That is
to say, there are passages that could not have been there except as
references to reality or (often as polemical replies) to historical
outside comments on Jesus.  While theologians of the
*Entmythologisierung* school say that many passages are edifying fables,
a number of Gospel passages are not edifying at all.  For instance,
Jesus cursing an innocent fig tree when, out of season, it isn’t bearing
fruit.  Or Jesus not being able to do miracles in some places, and not
being believed by his own townsfolk, even being considered insane by his
own family.  These things are mentioned because people in the audience
of Christian preachers remembered them, and they had to be acknowledged
and, if possible, explained in consonance with the preachers’ doctrines.
If these things hadn’t really happened, there would not have been any
reason for Christian writers to mention them.  Other criteria of
internal evidence, esp. to separate genuine testimony from made-up
stories, are provided by modem methods of forensic psychology to
evaluate courtroom testimonies.

Fourthly, the psychological investigation of the Bible comes up with a
new internal criterion.  We can safely assume that the Bible writers
were not aware of the findings of modem psychopathology, i.e. the study
of mental diseases.  They did not know the psychopathological conditions
that modem psychologists have studied and organized into categories of
coherent syndromes.  Yet, in some places they do give accurate
descriptions of such psychopathological syndromes.  The stamp of
realness is that in these descriptions, no symptoms of different
conditions get mixed up.  Anyone can name a few acts and attitudes that
he associates with the term “madness”.  But realistically describing a
condition of catatonic schizophrenia, or querulous paranoia, can only be
done by someone who knows psychopathology - or by someone who merely
describes what he sees in a particular real case of such a condition.

It is not out of place to look for psychopathological conditions in the
Bible.  After all, then as now, a certain category of mentally afflicted
people would be attracted to religion, and become the most ardent
students of Scripture.  Certain mental conditions do not lead to a total
personality disintegration, to a loss of intellectual capacities, or to
an unbearably antisocial behaviour.  In fact, highly talented and
literate people can be afflicted by psychopathological conditions.  In
the old days, some of them could set themselves up as teachers and
prophets, and their eccentric behaviour would only add to their aura of
godmen.  And though many religious madmen would be recognized for what
they were, a few would not (at least not by the final editors of the
Bible), and it is these few that interest us here.

For a first example of a pathological description, we can take a very
clear and simple case from the Gospel.  It does not concern Jesus or
another prophet, but a “possessed” child, cured by Jesus according to
Luke 9:37-43, Mark 9:14-29, Mathew 17:14-21.  The Gospel relates how a
child is brought to Jesus, because it is possessed by a deaf-and-dumb
demon which it has had since birth.  When it sees Jesus, it gets a
crisis, shakes and with foaming lips falls to the ground.  Jesus raises
it up and the crisis is over, “the demon has gone out”.  Remark that the
text doesn’t say that henceforth the child can hear and speak.

Even a layman can recognize this as an epileptic crisis which, as is
normal, subsides after a few minutes.  But the story gives two important
details that complete the syndrome.  Firstly, the child gets the crisis
when it is confronted with Jesus.  Typically, these crises erupt after
sudden emotions, such as a child may feel when confronted with this
strange man with his charismatic airs, probably accompanied by a number
of followers.  Here, the story does not say that the child was already
having a crisis before Jesus came in.  It was the other way round:
apparently, Jesus’ entry was causally related to the crisis.

Secondly, the child has been deaf (and therefore it can also not speak)
since birth.  Now, one typical physiological cause of epilepsy can be a
*trombophlebitis* occurring around the time of birth, which leaves a
scar on the brain, thus indirectly causing epilepsy while directly
causing deafness.

This simple story thus gives us important conclusions.  Firstly, this
“*possessed child*” *must have existed*.  It is so completely improbable
that a writer who knew nothing about these subtler points of the
epileptic condition, would have invented this story.  It could only be
an account of a real case.

Secondly, from the fact that the story is told as a report of a miracle
wrought by Jesus, it is clear that the writer did believe that a cure
took place, and that Jesus’ extraordinary powers had been demonstrated. 
In fact, from the details of the story, it seems that Jesus himself
believed this.  Yet, both the writer and Jesus were wrong: epileptic
crises *always* subside, and that is no indication of cure at all.  This
shows how easily people in those days could be made to believe in the
miraculous power of anyone who had the guts to style himself a
miracle-worker; and how some people, notably Jesus, could erroneously
believe such a thing about themselves.

As Dr. Somers writes: “The features, found in the text, are all coherent
with the syndrome of epilepsy and especially with an infantile form:
perinatal infection of the ears with inflammatory complications, causing
thrombo-phlebitis in the brain with the consequence of epileptic
seizures and deaf muteness.  In the text of Mark 9, all symptoms are
described with precision: the child is mute, falls in the water and the
fire (a loss of consciousness), utters a cry and is agitated, has foam
on his mouth, becomes like dead and after a while is ‘cured’. 
Obviously, 2000 years ago nobody was aware of the true nature of
epilepsy and the typical features of this illness in young children.  If
a witness describes so correctly the phenomena of an epileptic seizure
in a child with all concomitant circumstances, this fact has precedence
over all philological arguments and constitutes proof of authenticity
and historicity.  If moreover, the witness mentions all these features
in order to prove his incorrect view on the facts (viz. that Jesus
effected a miracle cure), it is clear that the testimony is beyond
suspicion. If anything here depends on culture, it is the
*interpretation*, in this case: that it is the devil who causes the
seizure.”

Another example is the “exorcism” related in Matthew 8:28-34, Mark
5:1-20.  A man was possessed by a host of demons, and dangerous.  He had
broken the chain in which people had put him, and now lived in caves and
on burial-grounds, and the people were afraid of him.  Jesus asked the
“demon” in this man for his name, as was customary in exorcisms.  The
name was “Legion”, since there were many demons at once.  Then he drove
the demons out, into a flock of pigs, who became mad, threw themselves
into the lake, and drowned.  The man became calm and asked to stay with
Jesus, but was not allowed to.  The people of the area asked Jesus to go
away.

This man apparently suffered from schizophrenia with catatonic
agitation. In a fit of rage, such people can develop an unbelievable
strength, enough to break handcuffs.  Even Jesus, after “curing” him, is
apprehensive about having him around, and consequently sends him away. 
Such people’s personalities totally disintegrate, they eat their own
excrement and live worse than animals.  Jesus speaks to the man, and the
next thing we read is that the pigs become mad and run away, into the
lake.  Unless you believe in miracles, this seems to mean that the man
went into a rage and didn’t take on Jesus but went after the
pigs.^([4](#4)) Seeing the madman in his rage, the pigs naturally ran
away, and afraid as pigs can be, some of them even ran into the lake. 
But then, as always, the rage subsides and the afflicted man becomes
quiet.  Jesus sends the man away, and a proof that this indeed was a
lasting cure is not even attempted.

In this story we have a smaller number of elements, so the improbability
of the writer just making it up is not as striking as in the first
story.  Still, the picture of the sick man here is realistic, as is the
impression that mere passers-by, such as Jesus’ followers (who don’t get
to see his regular crises followed by equally regular periods of calm),
would think that after a fit of rage everything has come back to
“normal”, and that a cure has been effected.

From these examples a method can be derived:

1.  the search in the text for certain symptoms should precede any other
    consideration;

2.  if a well-known syndrome can be identified, all other elements
    should be coherent with this syndrome (if no syndrome can be
    identified, then psycho-pathology considers its job finished. it is
    nobody’s intention to force a psycho-pathological explanation where
    there is no solid ground for one);

3.  the fact that the witness is unaware of the scientific significance
    of the elements he mentions, will be considered as decisive.

Therefore, this psychopathological control of old texts can decide the
questions about the historicity of the facts almost with certainty.  As
the syndrome described is culture-neutral and independent, all textual
and philological criticism has to take this fact into account.  Some
methods of judicial expertise can subsidiarily be applied (such as the
criteria of U. Undeutsch)^([5](#5)) in order to decide about the
truthfulness of a testimony according to internal criteria.

As a consequence of this methodological solution some earlier
philological conclusions are to be re-examined.  It can be shown that a
number of hypotheses intended to solve ununderstood texts of the Gospel
and the Apocalypse, are defective. If one reads that in the story of the
epileptic child two devils were mentioned: a mute one and an epileptic
one, and that therefore one can suspect that two different stories were
joined, it is clear that this clumsy construction is only rendered
necessary by ignorance of the infantile epileptic syndrome.^([6](#6))

According to Somers: “Similarly, the attempts by some philologists to
explain the story of the possessed man of Gerasa (Mark 5) as a synthesis
of two or three others, mixed with folklore, is now superseded by a
realistic understanding of the story through psychopathological
examination.  The possessed of Gerasa shows all symptoms of
schizophrenia with catatonic agitation.  The story is quite realistic,
including the delusion that he was possessed by a legion of devils. 
Mark’s text is rather precise: the man was subject to a grandiose
delusion; he was agitated esp. during the night, he roamed amidst the
graves, howling, and he mortified himself with stones.  Nobody could
control him, he broke all chains.  It is not very strange that such a
lunatic chases a herd of pigs while uttering loud shrieks, sending his
devils into them.  All these elements confirm the diagnosis of catatonic
schizophrenia.

“The probability that such description could be put together by accident
is infinitesimal.  In practice, there can be no more doubt about the
historicity of the facts.  There is only one story, no folklore, nothing
but a rather precise report of a real encounter of Jesus with a
schizophrenic patient, written with the intention to show how Jesus had
power over the devils.  The witness intended to prove a very different
thesis from what he actually did prove.  Indeed, in our two examples:
the epileptic child and the schizophrenic of Gerasa, Mark has shown that
Jesus did not have power over the devils because there were none, but
that he thought he did.  From these two examples it is clear how the
psychopathological examination of these texts is able to explain them
and to show directly their historical truth.”

These were two examples of accurate descriptions of psychopathological
conditions in the Gospel.  Now, after many years of Bible analysis, dr. 
Somers realized that the descriptions of some prominent Bible characters
also show coherent descriptions of psychopathological syndromes.

**2.3. The Patriarchs**

The first Old Testament character who deserves a closer psychological
investigation, is Abraham.  His story is that of a man who has no
children, but hears a voice promising him a numerous progeny.

Dr. Somers takes the trouble of demonstrating that everything in the
story of Abraham regarding marriage customs is authentic: the fact that
children born by a slave girl were legitimate, that the official wife
could adopt such a child (e.g. if she was sterile, as Sarah is said to
be), that the nomads lent out or sold their sisters and daughters to
visitors or in exchange for food supplies, and so on.  Some of these
customs were not in vogue anymore in the time the Bible was committed to
writing, so if they figure in this story, this indicates its historical
authenticity. The report of Abraham’s visit of Egypt completely fits the
social facts that we know from Egyptian historiography.  Modernist
theologians are mistaken if they say that the patriarch’s story is just
an edifying narrative concocted by priests in order to express the
Israelites’ faith in their God.

The theological dimension of the story seems to be more recent, but the
skeleton of actual events related is no doubt about real people, living
in the 16th and 15th century BC.  The personal data about Abraham also
bear the stamp of authenticity.  Dr. Somers lists the following
remarkable data which the Bible narrative gives us about Abraham:

1.  He hears Yahweh’s voice, giving him orders, and claims Yahweh visits
    him.

2.  He thinks he is the progenitor of a numerous progeny, though at
    first he cannot have children with Sarah.

3.  He offers his wife for the pleasure of the Pharaoh and of chieftain
    Abimelek.

4.  He considers himself Yahweh’s chosen one, elevated above all other
    tribes.

5.  He institutes male circumcision, and gives it the symbolical meaning
    of the Covenant with Yahweh.

6.  He sends his eldest son Ismael, together with the latter’s mother,
    the slave girl Hagar, into the desert.

7.  He wants to kill his and Sarah’s son Isaac.

This is not a normal behaviour pattern.  Yet, it is not entirely
inconsistent.  In fact, the psychopathologist recognizes a typical
pattern: the syndrome called *paranoia*.  In this mental disease, the
patient suffers from persistent thoughts that are in conflict with
reality.  Typical delusions are: being persecuted by an enemy, being
endowed with a special mission or special powers, belonging to a family
of otherworldly descent.  These delusions can be accompanied by
hallucinations, usually the well-known phenomenon of “hearing voices”. 
Often these voices command him to commit very specific symbolical acts,
sometimes specific crimes.  The refusal of one’s own sexuality, as well
as sexual impotence, often accompany this condition.

The limited mutilation called (male) circumcision, is not something
invented by (or prescribed by God to) Abraham.  The Egyptians and other
peoples knew the practice.  The rationale was that everyone has both a
male and a female soul.  In the male, the left-over female resides in
the prepuce, the skin covering the top of the penis; in the female, the
leftover male resides in the clitoris.  Incidentally, this primitive
insight corresponds with certain findings of modern embryology: the same
tissue that becomes the glans (top of the penis) in a male embryo,
becomes the clitoris in the female embryo; and the same tissue that
becomes the labia, the visible part of the girl’s genitals, becomes the
boy’s prepuce.  So, in order to achieve full sexual differentiation, the
part which corresponds to the outermost part of the opposite sex’s
genitals is removed.  In order to make real men, the left-over “labia”
is cut off, and in order to make real women, the left-over “glans” is
removed.

Since womanhood is more taken for granted, whereas a “real man” is
something one has to *become*, the practice of female circumcision is
fortunately not that widespread.  Today, it is confined to North and
East Africa, where its defendants often invoke Islamic sanction for the
practice.  In fact, Mohammed never prescribed it, but according to a
tradition, when seeing a girl’s circumcision, he told the people to
“diminish but not destroy”, which is generally understood as an
acceptance of the minor circumcision (removal of the clitoris), but a
rejection of the major circumcision (removal of the labia, followed by
sewing up the vaginal opening until the day of defloration).  The
practice is extremely painful and destructive, and the World Health
Organization and many social activists are trying to eradicate it.  Male
circumcision, on the other hand, is fairly harmless and is found among
many peoples in different continents.  The Bible only mentions
circumcision as applicable to males.

The fact that circumcision is so widespread, invalidates the Bible’s
claim that it was the token of the exclusive covenant between Yahweh and
His chosen people.  If Abraham perforce wanted to circumcise his son,
there must have been a different reason: perhaps the paranoia syndrome. 
Attempts at mutilation of one’s own or a child’s genitals are not
uncommon among paranoid patients.  They are a violent expression of
their refusal of their own sexuality.

But probably the story of Abraham instituting circumcision does not
warrant any inferences about the historical Abraham’s personality.  It
is quite possible that the priestly Bible editors during the Babylonian
exile (6th century BC) retroactively made circumcision into the sign of
the Covenant.  In Palestine and Egypt, it could not have been a
distinctive custom, because it was widespread, but in Babylon the
Hebrews distinguished themselves from the Babylonians by this custom, so
it got emphasized and sanctified as a factor of the Hebrews’ identity. 
To give the practice full sanction, it was attributed to God’s own will
as expressed in the Covenant with Abraham.

On the other hand, while circumcision may not originally have been
introduced as a sign of the Covenant, it may well have been started, as
far as Abraham’s own clan was concerned, by Abraham himself.  At least,
if we accept that Abraham was an immigrant to Kanaan from “Ur of the
Chaldees” in Mesopotamia, it is logical that he was the first in his
clan to have his son circumcised, as a matter of cultural adaptation to
his new environment.  All in all, it is safer to subtract the
introduction of circumcision from the list of peculiar behaviour traits
in the historical Abraham.  The aforementioned six facts that remain are
still peculiar enough.

It is possible that Abraham at first had a healthy sex life, and that he
got no children due to purely physical causes (*impotentia generandi
rather than impotentia coeundi*).  The frustration and inferiority
feeling that would naturally follow from being a married man without
children, might then have been a typical starting-point for the
progressive development of a paranoid delusion.  The inferiority feeling
gets transformed into delusions of greatness and divine favour.  The
typical construction you find among many paranoid patients is: my
present misfortune (including the fact that people consider me mad and
put me in a mental hospital) is merely a stage of testing, after which
my true mission will become clear to all and I will be glorified.

Abraham lent Sarah to other men (Genesis 12:10-20, 20:118).  Doing this
with your own wife (rather than with your sister or daughter) was very
unusual, because the laws against adultery were very strict.  In fact,
both the pharoah and Abimelek were very unhappy and indignant when they
found out this woman they had hired was already someone’s wife.  Is this
practice of making a childless wife available to the inseminative
potential of other men not an indication that her ultimate pregnancy was
brought about by one of those other men?

In Genesis 18:1-15 it is related that a visitor, called Yahweh (but
otherwise a perfectly human fellow who washes his feet and eats flour
cakes), wants to see Sarah, and afterwards tells Abraham that next year
he will have a son.  Although the story may have been censored a bit in
the final editing, there can be no doubt about what had happened in
between.  It would explain the oral tradition mentioned in the Talmud,
that Isaac didn’t resemble Abraham at all.  Similarly, the son that
Hagar is said to have given Abraham, may well have been another man’s
offspring: nobody keeps check on what exactly a simple maid is doing at
night.

At any rate, Abraham does not behave like a man who, after years of
fruitless trying, has been blessed with two sons. He sends the eldest,
Ismael, together with his mother Hagar, away into the desert.  The
youngest, Isaac, will be sacrificed at Yahweh’s command.  Did Abraham
suffer at the thought that these children, who had restored his manhood
in the eyes of his tribesmen, were in fact not his children at all?  Did
he suffer from a conflict between his delusion of a God-given promise of
numerous progeny, of which the sons were the fulfillment, and the
sneaking realization that they were not his own sons?  At any rate, in a
completely pathological development, he hears a voice telling him to
sacrifice his son.

This is one of the great religious founding moments of the
Judeo-Christian tradition: Abraham obeying Yahweh all the way, even past
the limits of absurdity.  But in the Bible narrative (Genesis 22:1-19),
this great and profound act is conducted without any religious pomp,
even secretively.  He doesn’t tell his family he is going to obey
Yahweh’s glorious command.  He makes his son believe they are going for
an ordinary animal slaughter, until Isaac himself notices that they have
everything for a proper slaughter except an animal.  He expressly tells
his servants that he and his son will both come back soon.  He knows his
family will prevent him from obeying Yahweh’s command, and rightly so.

The narrative goes on to relate that Abraham is prevented from striking
and killing his son. it says that an angel of the Lord intervened.  If
we discount the hypothesis that angels exist and intervene in human
actions, we simply read that someone stopped him.  Perhaps the voice
(“Yahweh”) has changed its mind, and now tells him not to go all the
way.  It tells him that he has already passed the test of obedience, and
resumes the older tune that he will be the ancestor of a numerous
people.  But more probably, it is the people in his surroundings who
stop him, and the explanation that they have really been Yahwah’s agents
ripens later in Abraham’s brain.

We may suppose that his family was kind enough not to start arguing when
he gave his own paranoid explanations for his behaviour.  In fact, it is
not uncommon that the patient’s surroundings, after they have come to
know the line of his delusion, start playing along.  Perhaps, when Sarah
gave her favours to the visitor, hoping he might get her pregnant after
all, she and the other family members told Abraham, in consonance with
the things he himself usually said, that this man was Yahweh, who had
come to fulfill his promise.  And when Abraham had been prevented by the
servants from killing Isaac, they joined him in ascribing it to divine
intervention.  This way, a family tradition was started that interpreted
the family saga in the terms of Abraham’s delusion.  And because it was
such an unusual story, it was preserved and came down to the time of the
Bible’s codification, to become the well-known foundation narrative of
prophetic monotheism.

In handing down the story, it is the unusual, not the ordinary, that
gets most attention.  That is why the faithful report of Abraham’s
strange behaviour has reached us.  It is also why any report of a normal
religious man, who does his daily devotions but doesn’t pretend anything
weird like being Yahweh’s chosen one, would never have become so
well-known and influential (for better or for worse).

Readers who fear that we are going to declare all the prominent Bible
characters madmen, need not worry.  The next two patriarchs, Isaac and
Jacob, were not crazy at all.  There are some interesting
non-pathological psychological aspects to their adventures, but we will
not go into that here.  It will suffice to remark that Jacob was a very
sly and unscrupulous man.  He and his sons shared an amazing harshness
and lack of fellow-feeling.  But in this world, that may be an
advantage: Jacob, also called Israel, is one of the few people (next to
Bolivar, Columbus, and Bharata) who have a country named after them. 
When his sons went to Egypt, they remembered Kanaan as “the land of
Israel” (in Hebrew: *Eretz Ishrael*).  This expression was later
understood as “the land Israel”, so that Jacob’s new name got
eternalized as the name of the land which is also known, after the
inhabitants from whom the Israelites wrested it, as Kanaan or
Philistine/Palestine.

**2.4. Moses**

The Bible report about Moses is spread over no less than four Bible
books: Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy.  In these books,
exegetes distinguish four layers.  The first is the Yahwist tradition,
written in the time of Israel’s kings, in the early first millennium BC,
and in which “Yahweh” is consistently used as God’s name.  The second is
the Elohist tradition, written in the time of the great prophets, and in
which “Elohim” is used as God’s name.  The third is the Priestly
tradition, from the time of the Babylonian exile in the 6th century BC,
and immediately after.  The fourth is the Deuteronomist tradition, the
codification of the “Mosaic” law, which was largely created in the 7th
and 6th centuries BC, and attributed to Moses for the sake of sanctity. 
So, the original narrative has gone through many hands, and the
historical Moses lies buried under many layers.

Yet, in tradition-oriented cultures, stories were often preserved in
full detail for many centuries.  Especially typical and unusual facts
about people and their remarkable feats were accurately preserved.  To
test the reliability of the Moses narrative, we dispose of two types of
criteria: external criteria, viz. some few possible references in
Egyptian sources; and internal criteria.  These latter comprise the
coherence between the different stages in the story: is the Moses of the
time before the Exodus depicted as having the same personality as the
Moses of the wanderings in the desert?  This is the so-called
*split-half reliability*.  The other important internal criterion is
whether the narrative gives us an unambiguous and typical character
description, or a mere collection of commonplaces and stereotypes. 
Moreover, does such a character description reveal negative traits which
were certainly not concocted for glorifying the “founder of monotheism”,
or perhaps even pathological traits which the writers couldn’t have
thought up even if they had wanted to?

Moses in Egypt is depict d as a man of violent temper, who did not shy
away from terrorism.  When a Hebrew worker is whipped by an Egyptian
officer, which was a rather common practice in those days, Moses goes as
far as killing the Egyptian.  If historical, the “tenth plague of
Egypt”, the killing of the first-born son of every house, was clearly
brought about by a terrorist campaign.  Why else were the Hebrews
ordered to make a sign on their doors?  Surely God didn’t need such a
sign to avoid killing the wrong people: but the terrorists did.  The
other plagues of Egypt (locusts, mosquitoes, hail storms, the colouring
of the Nile water) were all natural phenomena, which Moses or the
narrators may have played up as divine signs.  Moses was a panic monger,
who knew how to impress and fool the crowds.  He was very cunning and
even beat the court magicians at snake tricks.  Considering the Biblical
information on his court education, he may have been trained by one of
the fabled magicians of Egypt, and had shown himself a gifted and
creative pupil.

The Moses of the desert years is definitely the same impulsive man. 
According to Ex. 32:19-25, when he came down from Mount Sinai and saw
the golden calf, he was enraged and destroyed the idol; he gathered a
band of Levites and ordered them to go around the camp and make a
slaughter; they killed 3000 people.  Trespassers of Moses’ Law are
punished with death, the one and only penalty Moses knows: “Someone who
had cursed Yahweh’s name was stoned to death, as Yahweh had ordered
Moses to do” (Lev. 24:23). A man who was caught in the act of chopping
wood on a Sabbath day was brought before Moses, who ordered the people
to stone him (Num. 15:32-36).

And Moses still played his magic tricks.  Once when the people uttered
their discontent, Yahweh sent snakes to bite the people (Num. 21:4-9):
if we remember Moses’ dexterity with snakes displayed before the
pharaoh, we can guess who was behind this act of Yahweh’s.  Several
times, Moses asserts his authority by invoking miracles from Yahweh. 
Thus, he plants his brother Aaron’s staff in the ground, and it starts
to blossom (Num. 17:16-28). The most famous occasion is of course his
stay on top of Mount Sinai, where he receives the Ten Commandments: the
hilltop gets covered with a cloud of smoke, and mighty trumpet calls are
heard.  It was a simple kind of show, enough to impress the credulous
people.  Like any juggler, he never allowed people to peep behind the
curtain: in Ex. 19:21-24, Yahweh orders Moses not to allow the people to
come near the mountain, “for many would die”, and Moses assures Him that
the mountain has been sealed off safely.

Like in Egypt, but on a far larger scale, he practised terrorism against
other peoples who came in the way of his own people’s expansion.  Yahweh
ordered him to destroy the altars and sacred symbols of the peoples of
Kanaan (Ex. 34:12-13). “Thus ye shall do unto them: ye shall strike down
their altars, smash their sacred stones to pieces, fell their sacred
trees and bum their idols.  Nobody will resist you until ye have
exterminated them” (Deut. 7:2-24). Indeed, Yahweh is not satisfied with
idol-breaking, he wants skulls to be broken as well, many thousands of
them: “\[of the peoples who are remote neighbours\] ye shall slaughter
all the males.  But in the cities that Yahweh puts in your possession,
ye shall not let anyone survive” (Deut. 20:13-16). Perhaps killing the
males and abducting the females can be somewhat excused as a common
practice in every kind of war.  But even by those standards, Yahweh goes
too far when he orders all living beings killed.

Moses put these divine orders into practice.  He flew into a rage when
his men had killed all the adult males of the Midianite people (which,
incidentally, had given Moses shelter years before, see Ex. 2:11-18) but
had left the females and children alive.  He had all the boys and
non-virgin women also killed, but the virgins they could keep for their
pleasure (Num. 31:7-18). After Moses’ death, his successor Joshua
followed in his footsteps.  The gruesome treatment of the 31 cities he
conquered, is described in detail in Joshua 8-12: “He destroyed all the
living beings in the city and did not let anyone escape” (10:28). 
Joshua merely carried out the commandments inherent in Moses’ deal with
Yahweh.

In all this slaughter, Moses styled himself as merely the hand of
Yahweh.  It was not he but Yahweh who did the killing, as is clear from
Deut. 19:1: “When Yahweh your God hath exterminated all the people of
the land that He hath given you…” From the theological viewpoint, the
importance of this is that he introduced the concept of Holy War, which
in principle meant that God engaged in warfare *for* (actually also
*through*) His people.  From the viewpoint of the inquiry into the
historicity of the Moses narrative, the importance is that Holy War talk
is perfectly consistent with Moses’ style of action in Egypt (where he
also portrayed the killing of the first-born Egyptians as God’s
intervention).

It is remotely possible that this consistency (the split-half
reliability) is due to a systematic imposing of this Holy War doctrine
on the entire Moses narrative by the editors.  The tirade against other
gods and the repeated induction to kill apostates, in Deut.13, may be
such a later priestly interpolation.  Perhaps Moses was much too busy
with actual warfare to carry out religious inquisition and purification
campaigns, which was more a task for. the later scribes and prophets. 
But the Holy War doctrine is probably not a later addition, for it does
fit the military situation well.  Even if it were a later addition, this
would only weaken but still not contradict the case for the historicity
of Moses’ personality description as the Bible has preserved it.

External evidence has been claimed to exist, confirming Moses’
historicity and the essentials of his religious outlook.^([7](#7))
Egyptian sources give a lot of information on a character whose career
is contemporary with and entirely similar to that of Moses: the Egyptian
dignitary Beya.  The name already points to the Semitic Yahwist
tradition: Be-Yah means “on/by/in Yah”, as in “by Yah (I swear)” or “in
Yah (I trust)”.  He also had a long Egyptian name of which “moses”
(child of) was a part, as was very common in Egyptian names.  So, it is
possible that Moshe/Moses was a Hebraized abbreviation of the Egyptian
name of this Beya.

This dignitary Beya was a very powerful man at the Egyptian court, and
several depictions of him have been preserved.  It is striking that he
apparently refused to be depicted as bowing before any of the Egyptian
gods.  He disappears from the Egyptian sources after the unsuccessful
palace revolution of the regent princess Tausret against the legitimate
young king Siptah.  Probably he was part of the conspiracy, and had to
flee after its failure.  As he is called “the Syrian” in one source, he
may have joined hands with the numerous Semitic immigrant community
(which may have been held guilty, rightly or wrongly, for the political
trouble, just like the Hyksos earlier), and led it into exodus.

Without using those sources, and merely relying on the (not obviously
interpolated) data in the Bible narrative, dr. Somers claims to discern
some not exactly pathological but still rather extreme traits in Moses. 
Thus, the “burning bush” need not be understood as a hallucination, but
can be explained by natural causes: certain plants in the desert secrete
etheric oils which can inflame spontaneously under the sun’s heat.  This
might have made a big impression on someone not familiar with it, and
the desert heat may have helped in making Moses sense a divine presence.

Moses may have suffered from what is called a “reactive psychosis”,
caused by guilt feelings about the murder of an Egyptian in anger
against his punishing a Hebrew slave (or about other, unrecorded
crimes).  That is also the line followed by Freud in his analysis of
Moses.  What sometimes happens in such cases, is that a murderer
afterwards develops the conviction that God had wanted this murder, that
it was God’s will overruling human morality, so that the murder was
justified.  This would then have led to Moses’ remarkable and
self-righteous proneness to murder, terror and the death penalty.

Dr. Somers rejects the thesis put forward by Hirsch that Moses suffered
from paranoia.  Contrary to the objections of some religious people, the
psychological interpretation of the Bible narrative is not an arbitrary
projection of modem prejudices, with “paranoia” as a catch-all for
everything that does not live up to our standards of irreligious
conventionalism.  It is a precise scientific analysis, in which a
precise syndrome has to be discerned and checked against all the
reliable data in the narrative.

Of course, not everyone who has committed a crime develops this same
psychosis.  A certain temperamental disposition should be present. 
Psychology knows of a specific condition called the *ixoid* (= viscous,
sticky) personality, with these characteristics:

1.  domineering and vindictive behaviour;

2.  impulsive, inclined to violence;

3.  intolerant of disagreement;

4.  waves of bad temper, explosions;

5.  yet, over-social, wants to serve, has a sense of fairness (so that
    their angry explosions are occasioned by perceived injustice);

6.  meticulous, order-loving, pedantic;

7.  persistent and tough;

8.  speech disturbances may occur (certain similarity, on a less
    physical level, with epilepsy).

While this syndrome may perhaps lack in precision, so that a firm
conclusion about its application to Moses may seem like overstretching
the method a bit, it is correct that this “syndrome” is in evidence in
Moses’ behaviour.  It is indeed in reaction to a perceived injustice
against the Hebrew labourer that Moses kills the Egyptian.  And it is
mentioned explicitly that he complains of not being a good speaker, so
that Yahweh allows his brother Aaron to speak for him.

Since man makes God after his own image and likeness, it is legitimate
to trace some of Moses’ personal character traits in the God-image which
Moses has impressed upon scores of generations of Jewish, Christian and
Muslim monotheists.  The sometimes morbid character of revealed
monotheism is partly traceable to Moses’ personal psychological
condition.

**2.5. The great prophets**

For some really pathological cases, we should read the stories of the
prophets.  Let us briefly relate dr. Somers’ diagnosis of the greatest
of them.

Of course, not all prophets were mentally disturbed people, many just
practised a kind of clairvoyance but remained balanced people, some even
with a healthy critical intellect.  Others are fanatics, but are not
described as personalities which we would now recognize as mentally
disturbed.

The prophet Elijah was not at all crazy, just clever.  When he engages
in a competition with the Baal priests, the poor fellows try to get a
fire burning on their alter by singing invocations of Baal, while he has
sprinkled “water” on his altar and claims the honour for Yahweh once it
catches fire (1 Kings 18:20-40).  The story smacks of propaganda, but
may nonetheless be a true report of a Yahwist prophet’s unscrupulous
deceitfulness.  The nature of the “water” sprinkled by Elijah becomes
clear when we read of a similar feat in the book of the maccabees (2
Macc. 1:20): the Levites have to get fire in a cave, they only find drab
water, they bring it nonetheless, and yes, it brings forth fire.  A
subsequent verse calls the water “nephtai”: petroleum was already known
to some insiders, and priests used it as a trick to impress people.  The
Romans also used it, as is clear from the allegation by the writer of
the Apocalypse (who appears not to have known the trick) that they had
the power to “make fire come down from heaven” (Ap.13:13).

After this episode, Elijah also manages to do what other prophets only
rant about and promise to make Yahweh do: some large-scale killing. 
After cunningly assembling them, he has hundreds of Baal priests
massacred.  On the whole, Elijah too believed he had a private telephone
line with God, but he had retained a firm grip on social and strategic
realities, and acquired a much more honourable positions than some of
his colleagues.

For a more tragic example, we turn to Isaiah, the “man of sorrow”.  He
had a *schizophreniform accident*, a vision with schizophrenic contents,
which deeply influenced his further thought, but did not form a chronic
condition of schizophrenia.  In this vision, he has sensory
hallucinations, catastrophic revelations, and a strong delusion of being
chosen by God to serve a mission.  This will condition his self-image
and his “prophetic” style of logorrhea, emotional exaggeration, and
making predictions.

Taking into account that some of Isaiah’s successful “predictions” are
in fact later interpolations, we find that the remaining authentic
predictions are little more than expressions of the prophet’s own
vengefulness and wishful thinking.  Liberation theologians get a kick
out of Isaiah’s tirades against the mighty and the successful (who will
be wiped away when the Lord cometh), thinking that he was a kind of
social revolutionary; in fact, he was just another typical unhappy man
who developed both an intense vengefulness against the successful and a,
delusion of being special in a supernatural way.  Unhappy and vengeful
people are keen observers and critics of others’ faults.  And who will
believe that Isaiah’s walking barefoot and naked for three years (Is.12)
is not abnormal behaviour but a deliberate sign of warning?

Isaiah’s hymn on the newborn son (“For a child is born unto us, a son is
given…”, 9:5-6), interpreted as referring to Christ by Christians and
probably by Christ himself, is more realistically about the prince
Manasse, born in 699 BC.  Of course, some of the imagery in Isaiah is of
great and lasting beauty (especially when put to music by Haendel in his
*Messiah*), in spite of the morbid element in the prophet.  We should
realize that the man, and more so his final editors, integrated his
delusion into a genuine religious vision.  A mere copy of his authentic
tirades and “predictions” would not have enthused many followers, but a
suitably enlarged and edited version endowed with a literate religious
doctrine and style became genuinely powerful.

Jeremiah, the prophet of doom *par excellence*, is a clear case of
*paranoia querulans*.  Israel has fallen and will be punished.  The king
of Babylon who subdues Israel is merely God’s punishing arm; which will
not save him, the idolater, from equally being punished in the end. 
Jeremiah is against everyone, including rivalling godmen and prophets,
and God’s revenge will be total.  His immense hatred for everyone who
disagrees and his hammering on always the same allegations and promises
of doom, and a secondary delusion of being persecuted, are typical signs
of querulous paranoia.

As Dr. Somers writes: “The book Jeremiah teaches us nothing about God,
it illustrates how a sick mind pictures God in terms of his own
delusion… Jeremiah shows a characteristic trait of the paranoia patient:
a deadly hatred against everyone who disagrees with him, a totally
disproportionate reaction to the ‘other opinion’, inspired by hurt
narcissism.  The inflated ego is invested with divine dignity and
power.  Whoever speaks up against God, must die.” In a sense, this is a
diagnosis of not only Jeremiah, but of prophethood itself.

Ezekiel, who lived in the Babylonian exile, reiterated the condemnation
of unfaithful Jerusalem by his contemporary Jeremiah.  But he is of a
different psychological type: he is not aggressive towards his audience,
rather he is indifferent.  The evil has been done, the catastrophe is
sure to follow, whether people listen or not.  Ezekiel is an
unmistakable case of *schizophrenia*.  In the 22 years (592-570) covered
by the book Ezekiel, we see a typical development of this condition: he
gets hallucinatory visions, develops an increasingly bizarre behaviour,
isolates himself.  In moments of calm, he relates his visions to others
and gives detailed descriptions.

Not every schizophrenia patient makes it to the status of prophethood. 
Ezekiel was not an extreme case, and he was a literate man who could
somehow make his visions relevant through religion, which made them
interesting for the Bible editors.  It was also his initial deep
religiosity that made him vulnerable to emotional collapse when
Jerusalem fell, its temple usurped by Baal priests, and the people (at
least, the elite) forced into exile in Babel.  Unlike many fellow
Hebrews, he could not adapt to this Pagan city full of opportunity, and
his emotional collapse developed into a permanent mental affliction.

**2.6. Henoch**

The last Old Testament prophet we must mention in this brief survey, is
Henoch.  His book (mid-second century BC) is classed as apocryphal, but
it is an integral part of the prophetic tradition.  Henoch was a staunch
pharisee^([8](#8)) and leader of the Essene sect.  Probably he was the
sect’s “teacher of righteousness”, mentioned in the so-called Death Sea
Scrolls unearthed at Qumran.  It is he who first applied the notion of
the “Son of Man” (developed by Daniel as pertaining to the Israelite
nation as a whole) to himself, which personalized notion Jesus in turn
was to interpret as applying to himself.  There can be no doubt that
Jesus borrowed from Henoch: the New Testament contains 64 almost literal
quotes from Henoch, plus other types of, references.

The book Henoch contains the writings of someone suffering from
*paranoid schizophrenia* (with all the typical features of schizophrenia
as Karl Jaspers described them).^([9](#9)) And it is these Henochian
visions which constitute an essential component of the belief system of
Jesus and his disciples.

Once more, it should not surprise us that someone with such an
affliction could be the recognized leader of a sect.  Among other
factors, people with a distorted consciousness are often capable of
feats of asceticism which require tremendous will-power in ordinary
mortals.  And the common people of those days would naturally associate
the abnormal with the supernatural, especially if it came clothed in the
language of religion.  But remarkably, in the case of Henoch at least
the guardians of the official religious tradition were suspicious of the
divine character of Henoch’s book, mostly because of its very open
self-centredness.  The typical thing with all people suffering from
delusions, is that these delusions are very self-centred and allot
special importance to the sufferer.  But in the case of Henoch, it was
conspicuous even to not very discriminating people that Henoch was
glorifying more himself than Yahweh.

Henoch claims that he had been given a divine job by God Himself, to
reprimand the angels who, sometime before the Flood, had fallen in love
with human females and begotten, on them the giants (remark the element
of jealousy).  Then, he is taken on a trip through heaven: “And I,
Henoch, I alone have seen the vision, the end of everything, and no man
will see the way I have seen” (19:3).  In heaven, he sees someone called
the “Head of Days”, who comes to him and says: “You, you are the Son of
Man, who was born for righteousness and righteousness remains with you
and the righteousness of the Head of Days will not abandon you”
(71:17).  In a vision of a terrible Day of Judgment, he refers to
himself as the Chosen One.

The concept of the “Son of Man” had already been introduced in the book
of Daniel, written at most a few decades earlier.  But there, it
explicitly refers to the Chosen People, the nation of Israel which will
inherit the rule over the earth after four successive great empires have
gone down.  But Henoch and later Jesus mistakenly identify the “Son of
Man” with their own individual selves.

The common trait in “prophets” is that they give themselves a very
central place in history.  Being the spokesman of the omnipresent
Creator is not a very modest claim. it belongs to the realm of
psychopathology.

**2.7. The first century**

The next important god-sent is none other than Jesus, whose case will be
presented in the ch.3. He lived in an age when prophets or at least
messianic and millennarist characters flourished.  One of his younger
contemporaries was the real founder of Christianity, Saint Paul, who
taught and believed that the Second Coming of Christ, inaugurating the
final days of the world before the judgment, was just around the corner.

The big turn in Paul’s life came when, on the road to Damascus, he fell
from his horse and had an experience which he later understood as Jesus
calling him.  But this experience was completely different in nature
from the prophetic revelations and conversations with God which we have
mentioned above (except for Moses’ awe before the burning bush, which is
a close parallel).  The event on the road to Damascus, which triggered
Paul’s conversion, was not a crisis in a developing mental disease, but
a simple and typical sunstroke.  Paul (then still called Saul) hears a
voice but doesn’t recognize the speaker: this confusion is the opposite
of the intense clarity typical of a hallucination.

Paul suffers a natural blindness for a few days, and under the care of a
Christian convert, he gets well again.  His inner stress because of his
frustrated desire for perfection in the observance of the Law, and more
acutely his guilt about the killing of Stephanus, the first Christian
martyr, would invest this otherwise ordinary breakdown with a religious
significance that was to have world-wide and millennia-long
consequences.

Paul’s sect was just one among a number of first-century Jewish sects
who expected the end of the world, the coming of the messiah, or a
similar cosmic event.

The Apocalypse of Baruch is a prophecy of the impending struggle for
Jerusalem, written in the revolutionary fervour of ca. 68 AD.  It has
remained apocryphal, either because the Jews saw too much inspiration
from the Christian Apocalypse in it, or because its predictions had
failed in a much too obvious and much too dramatic way.  Indeed, it had
predicted that the Romans would not be able to take the Temple Mount or
to bum down Jerusalem.  It is because the text was not canonized that
its failed prediction survives in cold print.  By contrast, Mark’s
Gospel, edited just after the fall of Jerusalem, has the correct
“prediction” that of the Temple of Jerusalem, “not one stone will be
left upon the other” (13:2).

Baruch’s Apocalypse is not at all the product of visions and
hallucinations, but an intellectual construction modelled on the extant
prophetic literature, adding some newer literary techniques such as the
Socratic dialogue.  It constructs imagery to evoke the shocking
developments of the final days, before Jerusalem shall defeat her
enemies and reign in glory.  While we will not further deal with it
here, we note that the book is interesting for two reasons.  Firstly, it
is a kind of missing link between Judaism and fledgling Christianity, at
a time when both were expecting the ultimate catastrophe and
glorification.  Secondly, it illustrates how sane and intelligent people
subscribing to an established belief system can integrate the prophetic
outlook in their worldview.  The entire edifices of Jewish, Christian
and Islamic theology are similar intellectual elaborations of a basic
literary material with an important irrational “visionary” component.

The last Jewish prophet was called Ezra.  In ca. 100 AD, he wrote a book
relating a dialogue with an angel, who is asked why God could let the
recent catastrophes happen to his chosen people, and what He has in
store for them now.  The visions described are very coherent, are
followed by an explanation, and give systematic answers to the questions
which Jews are asking.  Short, it is an intellectual construction, not
the report of real “prophetic visions”.  It is not the result of
pathological experiences, but merely a kind of theological manifesto.

The apocryphal book of Ezra contributed to the enduring revolutionary
fervour among Jewish die-hards.  It employs images from the earlier
apocalyptic literature including the Christian Apocalypse, and in more
cautious wording it retains essentially the same message: God has not
abandoned His people, He has been testing them, and the final crisis is
approaching.  In some details, its predictions were even enacted in the
last Jewish insurrection, that of the self-styled Messiah Bar Kochba in
132-135.  Ezra had predicted (13:9-10) that the saviour will have a
flaming mouth, and so Bar Kochba took burning hay in his mouth to prove
his credentials.

With the collective suicide of the last Jewish insurrectionists in
Masada, the period of Messianic expectation came to an end.  Reality had
outlasted and defeated all the prophetic Doomsday scenarios.  By that
time, the Christian sect had already accepted that Jesus’ second coming
was not around the corner after all.  For Doomsday prophets, the
glorious days were over.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))Published by the leftist publishing-house EPO in Antwerp,
Belgium (in spite of many priests’ leftist leanings, hard-core leftists
remain strongly anti-clerical, and they were glad to publish a book that
undermines Christian claims).

^([2](#2a))Published by Facet Publishers, Antwerp 1990.

^([3](#3a))E.g. P. Krijbolder: Jezus de Nazareeer. Een studie over de
historiciteit ven Jezus en de oorsprong van het Christendom, Amsterdam
1976, The same thing had earlier been said about Socrates, who would
have been merely a literary creation by Plato, but that theory has been
discarded.

^([4](#4a))These patients are not dangerous because of aggressiveness. 
Their rage is not directed at someone specific, as is the case with
paranoia patients.

^([5](#5a))U. Undeutsch: “Courtroom evaluation of eyewitness testimony”,
International Review of Applied Psychology, 33(1), 1984, p.51-67.

^([6](#6a))e.g. in P. Benoit & M.E. Boismard: Synopse des quatre
evangiles, II, Paris, 1972.

^([7](#7a))See Johannes C. De Moor: The Rise of Yahwism, ch.4.6.

^([8](#8a))The pharisees were a reform movement that moved the centre of
religion away from the priesthood and the temple worship, towards the
reading of Scripture and the observance of the Law.  Decentralized and
separate from the national symbol which the temple was, they led Judaism
through the Roman crackdown on the Jews after the rebellions of 70 and
134 AD, and shaped the rabbinical tradition which has since been
virtually synonymous with Judaism.  The anti-pharisaism in the Gospel
text is therefore actively anti-Judaism and one of the sources of
Christian anti-Semitism.

^([9](#9a))K. Jaspers: Allgemeine Psychopathologie, Berlin, 1948.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
