+++
title = "7 The Making of the Mongol Nation"

+++





With an alphabet and an army, Temujin was ready to create a nation. To mark a distinctly new beginning he chose a short, yet august, title for himself. He had no interest in the traditional title *Gurkhan* because too many wicked men with that title had come to bad ends, and in the words of a Christian priest, “its glory was forever tarnished.”1 Instead, he chose to call himself *Chinggis*, a new Mongol title that represented firmness, strength, constancy, and commitment—some of the same qualities suggested by his name, Temujin. The Mongolian word *chin* meant “determined” or “strong willed,” so he became the “Sovereign of the Strong” or “Khan of the Strong.” The earliest Chinese mention of his title, in a 1221 report to the Sung monarch by his envoy Chao Hung, says that his title meant “granted by Heaven.”2

To his Mongol followers Temujin became *Chinggis*, but to his Turkic followers he was *Tengis*, which meant “ocean,” a designation that had carried great meaning since the times of the Huns, as it was the name of Attila and his son. For centuries, steppe rulers had used such water titles for their leaders. These occurred in many forms, such as the Uighur *Bilge Kol*, meaning “ocean of wisdom,” or *Dalai* *Khan*, meaning “ruler of all within the sea.”3

When the time came to establish a base for his new empire in the summer of 1206, Genghis Khan chose to return to the foot of his sacred Burkhan Khaldun, along the headwaters of the Onon River. Nearly four decades earlier his mother had found refuge there. She had run up and down the river with a black stick in her hand, digging roots to feed her brood.4 Now, in choosing this place as the seat of his new nation, he was honoring both his spiritual home and his mother, who had witnessed his lifelong struggle and was still alive to see his triumph. Despite the honor, she was quite displeased that he awarded her only five thousand vassals for her new court.

No foreigners were present to witness the creation of the Mongol Empire, but later chroniclers created a variety of informed, and sometimes imaginatively invented, descriptions of the events. In the *History of the Nation of Archers*, the Armenian chronicler Gregory of Akner wrote that the Mongols prayed to God for salvation from their poor, miserable lives. God heard their prayers and sent an angel who appeared to Temujin in a vision as an eagle with golden feathers. The eagle angel stood out in the open, about one bow shot away from Temujin, as it proclaimed his new title and then proceeded to dictate the laws of the new nation.5

In another Armenian account, *The Flower of Histories of the East*, Hethum claims that the Mongol people did not initially believe that Genghis Khan’s title had come from a divine source, given the misfortune that had afflicted him as a child and the fact that the divine vision had not come from a holy, educated, or aristocratic man. In response to people’s skepticism, God sent a dream to Temujin, but still no one believed it. “The following night these same leaders saw the white soldier and the same vision which old Genghis had related to everyone. And they received the decree from immortal God to obey Genghis and to make everyone obey his orders. Thus those seven leaders and grandees of the seven Tartar peoples gathered in an assembly and agreed to obey Genghis as their natural lord.”6 Others described a royal seal descending from heaven, a mist of perfume filling the countryside, a precious stone blown in by the wind, a five-colored bird perched on a rock loudly proclaiming the title for all people to hear, and a divine light shining down from heaven.7

The Persian chronicler Rashid al-Din added that a shaman flew to heaven on a white horse to get the name. The more reliable Juvaini reported that the shaman had not given the name Genghis Khan, but rather that heaven had bestowed the name on him, saying, “God has spoken with me and has said: ‘I have given all the face of the Earth to Temujin and his children and named him Genghis Khan. Bid him administer justice in such and such a fashion.’”8

Each of these stories points toward a special divine mission, an anointment by God. “Their king is a relative of God,” reported the Armenian chronicler Kirakos of Gandzak in a clear echo of the Biblical account of the Virgin birth of Jesus. “God took heaven as his portion and gave earth to... Genghis Khan,” who “was not born from the seed of man but that a light came from the unseen, entered through a skylight in the home, and announced to his mother: Conceive and you will bear a son who will be ruler of the world.”9

If Genghis Khan’s father had been an emperor, a khan, or a king, his legitimacy would have been understood and accepted. As he lacked such a political pedigree, his followers embellished his life story with supernatural signs and explanations. His legitimacy did not come through blood or bone, but through the golden light of heaven. Despite the manifold supernatural elements in foreign accounts of Genghis Khan’s rise to power, the *Secret History* itself mentions nothing overtly religious in the choice of name or in the events related to the creation of the Mongol Empire. No shaman, priest, or other religious official is mentioned as participating in the anointing ceremony. The text mentions no prayers, no beating of drums, no sacrifices to the sky, no reference to God or the heavens, and emphasizes that this act—Temujin’s elevation to Genghis Khan—was simply the will of the people. The people gathered together, raised the white horse-hair banner of the nation, and gave him the title *Chinggis Khaan*. The *Secret History* offers loquacious descriptions of horses and things important to nomads, but regarding ceremony the writing tends to be quite blunt. “After Genghis Khan brought order to the people who live in felt walls, the people gathered at the Onon River in the Year of the Tiger and made him khan.”10

In addition to claiming a title for himself, Genghis Khan decided to give his nation a new name. The Chinese, although aware of many of the ethnic divisions on the steppe, referred to all the nomadic tribes as Tatars. Genghis Khan’s group, and most nomads north of the Gobi, had been known as the Black Tatars, whom the Chinese considered the least civilized and most dangerous, in contrast to the White Tatars who lived closer to China, south of the Gobi, and had acquired a semblance of Chinese culture. Genghis Khan wanted to break with all the names of the past \(Hun, Turk, Tatar\) and thus named his people “Mongol.” Many explanations have been offered, but he himself never explained the meaning of the term. Like so much in his life and government, the real meaning remained a secret; it was part of the power of knowledge reserved to only a select few.

Mongols are fond of the saying, “unity creates success.”11 Simply calling a diverse people by one name, however, did not create a unified state. Genghis Khan faced the enormous task of uniting and integrating a nomadic people, who lacked fixed abodes and cities, into one cohesive state. Even the concept of *state*, *country*, *nation*, or *government* so common to agricultural societies seemed incongruous when applied to nomads. They were what the Chinese called “moving states” or “states on horseback.”12 In their own eyes, the Mongols were simply *uls*, a nation.

The longest section at the heart of the *Secret History of the Mongols* describes the proceedings of 1206. It records in detail each person who helped Temujin in his rise to power, and explains precisely how that assistance was rendered and how he was rewarded. Special honors went to those who had performed feats of bravery and heroism in war, as well as to others who were not battle heroes but who had reported seeing signs or had dreams legitimizing his right to rule.

Mongols say that a dream is a letter left on a pillow, a message from somewhere for someone, and they believe most important events were portended in dreams. When Temujin was eight years old, Dei-Sechen, his future father-in-law, supposedly announced: “Last night I had a dream of a white gyrfalcon clutching the sun and the moon, and he flew to my hand.”13 Since Hun times, the gyrfalcon symbolized power for the steppe tribes. It had served as a family emblem for Attila, and Temujin adopted the white gyrfalcon to represent his family as well.14

Another revelation came from Qorchi of the Baarin, one of Jamuka’s followers who had deserted him in order to follow Temujin. Although Jamuka and Temujin shared no male ancestors, they were deemed to be children from one womb and of the same water because they both descended from an Uriyankhai woman captured by their mutual ancestor Bodonchar the Fool. Qorchi described how in a dream he had seen a powerful ox pulling the great cart of state along a broad road across the earth. As it moved forward, the ox bellowed out to the people that Father Heaven and Mother Earth had chosen Temujin to rule as Lord of the Nation and commanded the people to follow him. All the warriors should come and serve him, he cried; all the steppe tribes should turn to him and follow behind his cart.

After he revealed this dream, Qorchi offered Temujin certain teachings on moral principles.15 The dream about his rise to power was a prelude to the receipt of the secret spiritual knowledge he would need to rule. These teachings were called the Great Tor \(*Töre*\), and they embodied the most profound principles and truths of life. Their contents remained secret. In recognition of the importance of these teachings, later in life Genghis Khan referred to Qorchi not as a teacher or shaman but as *nendu khutukh*, extremely blessed.

Not long after the naming ceremony, Genghis Khan announced the organization of his new government, outlining the nature of the offices and who would hold them. He named each person who had given him exceptional service or performed a heroic deed during his twenty-five-year struggle to unite the tribes, and he rewarded them with an official office, exemption from taxes, or whatever seemed appropriate to their contribution. “All the tribes were of one color and obedient to his command,” wrote Juvaini. “Then he established new laws and laid the foundation of justice.”16

After the festivities the young people wrestled, raced horses, sang, played anklebones, and flirted. The elders drank *airag*, feasted on marmot meat boiled with hot stones, visited relatives not seen in many years, and laughed with erstwhile enemies. Men and women competed in archery and wrestling. Spectators enjoyed the show, and delighted when an overlooked horse unexpectedly won the race, or a small woman flipped a much larger man in wrestling. There was no gambling for money, but participants gambled with their reputations, which could be made or broken in a few dramatic moments of competition that the Mongols called *naadam*.

The creation of the Mongol nation was a compact between Genghis Khan and his people. No other blessing was needed. He had returned the Mongol people to their proper path according to the laws of heaven. In the words of the *Secret History*, he had “straightened” them or “put them into the right.”17



The summer of 1206 on the steppes was one of the most peaceful in generations. No feuding of clan against clan. No kidnapping of women. No revenge killings. The people gathered between the Onon and Kherlen rivers and luxuriated in the freedom of not having to stare at the horizon for raiders or wonder at night whether their family would be alive in the morning. The steppe nomads were accustomed to summer gatherings of hundreds or sometimes thousands of people, but never had so many people assembled as for this unprecedented event, the unifying of all the tribes. They quickly erected a city with hundreds of structures, all made of felt blankets stretched over wooden frames. Unlike the haphazard nature of most villages and cities, their winding streets jumbled with buildings, the layout of the Mongol camp had a strict military discipline, with straight lines and broad, open avenues. The *gers* were arranged according to a specific plan, with the home and court of the Great Khan at the center, markets on the periphery, and designated locations for the equipment repair neighborhood, the horse holding area, the meat distribution center, doctors, or the lost-and-found. Any stranger arriving for the first time would have known instantly where to find everything and everyone of importance.

When Temujin first became tribal khan in 1189, he had fewer than thirty thousand followers, but by 1206, when he became Genghis Khan, the number had grown to a million. He was not the khan of a tribe, he was now emperor of a new nation that had outgrown the old tribal structure whereby the khan acted as lawgiver, military leader, shaman, judge, and tax collector.

Genghis Khan was well aware that the fall of the Tatars, Kereyid, and Naiman was the result not just of his tactical superiority on the battlefield, but of internecine power struggles and frequent rebellions, pitting brother against brother and father against son. He knew that as long as the old tribes, clans, and aristocracy existed he would never be safe. Since his defeat of the Tatars he had made sure that men of the aristocratic clans either fled or were killed, for they could never be trustworthy or loyal to him. He was determined to establish a new political organization to prevent such treachery in the future.

Genghis Khan permitted some groups that had been consistently loyal to remain together under their traditional leaders, but his new empire would not be a collection of tribes with their own khans ruling over their traditional territories. He abolished all of the old tribes and clans that had resisted or betrayed him and redistributed the conquered subjects throughout his territory into new units of one hundred, one thousand, and ten thousand. He carefully blended his followers into mixed groups, placing former enemies or less reliable individuals into groups with people whom he trusted. These new units, adopted from the system used to ensure loyalty and conformity among the Uighurs, cut through kinship and class lines. Loyal men from the lowest families now ruled over descendants of khans and queens. To prevent the kinds of desertions and factionalism that characterized steppe life, he forbade any of his subjects to leave the units of ten warriors and families to which they had been assigned.

Genghis turned to members of his own family to enforce the law and to “decide on judicial matters.”18 He assigned his half brother Belgutei the authority to determine who was guilty of theft or falsehood and to adjudicate quarrels.19 Because of the great value he placed on writing, Genghis Khan wanted his laws to be carefully recorded, but Belgutei was illiterate. The old Uighur court had had an office of Master of the Law, and Genghis Khan created a similar position for his adopted Tatar brother Shigi-Khutukhu.20 He took pains to explain the importance of the law, and dictated that it should be written in Uighur script on white paper and kept in blue binders. “Let no one alter the blue writing,” he warned. These were laws that were to last for generations to come. He said that the new laws would be based upon existing custom, but as he wrote them down, Shigi-Khutukhu should “judge the judgments”21 and recalibrate them to fit current needs and concerns. Genghis Khan declared that Shigi-Khutukhu would be his “eyes to see with, ears to hear with.” He apportioned out responsibilities, but no one could change his laws or his words. Later, Genghis gave Shigi-Khutukhu the highest rank and the assignment to judge all: “curbing theft, and discouraging falsehood, execute those who deserve death, punish those who deserve punishment.”22 In time, these laws became known as the Ikh Yasa, the Great Law of Genghis Khan, and judges were known as Jarguchi, a title with the same linguistic root as the name of Genghis Khan’s first teacher, Jarchigudai.

Under Genghis Khan’s guidance, Shigi-Khutukhu created a new judicial system to ensure that the law was known and enacted throughout the Mongol nation. The law forbade torture and intimidation by officials. The accused “must not confess out of fear and anguish.” “Do not be afraid and speak the truth,” Shigi-Khutukhu inveighed.23 According to the testimony of Rashid al-Din, as the empire grew Shigi-Khutukhu sought to extend these legal procedures into China and into Muslim lands, where torture was routinely used against witnesses as well as the accused. As written laws gradually replaced the Ancient Sayings, a new network of express horse riders was established to deliver the law and other imperial orders. Genghis Khan’s central court could now make decisions formerly left to local chiefs. His vast but highly centralized system relied upon speed and communication rather than tradition and custom.



Temujin was now Genghis Khan, ruler of the entire Mongolian steppe, and just as he had sworn to do as a young boy on Burkhan Khaldun, he had made a name for himself. Now he was ready to take on any enemy or to make new ones, and he was confident he could prevail. He was not prepared, however, to be challenged from within his family. The new Mongol nation emerged as a massive experiment in social engineering, one that for most people, weary of the constant feuds and grateful for this new stability, proved successful. Like all happiness, however, the rejoicing at the creation of the new nation was temporary, and not everyone shared in it equally. Some inevitably resented that they had not been given enough power. Bitterness mounted among a minority of Genghis Khan’s more traditional subjects, who resented being cut off from the Great Khan even as Uighurs and other foreign advisers seemed to be coming and going into his *ger* in increasing numbers. They felt threatened by the fact that the power and prestige of their elders had been usurped by the rapid rise of a battalion of clerks writing letters and stamping the seal of approval. Younger brothers sometimes held rank over their elder brothers or clan uncles, and clerks consulted strange almanacs to forecast the movement of the stars and planets and foretell eclipses of the sun or moon. Others resented the destruction of their tribe or the killing of some of their relatives during the conquest, and many begrudged being ruled by the upstart Mongols, who had never before ruled an empire and had always been the vassals of the other, more cultured, steppe tribes. For them the change from tribe to empire was difficult to endure.

Opposition soon coalesced around one man who became Genghis Khan’s main rival.

Kokochu Teb Tengeri was the middle of seven sons of Monglik, the faithful companion of Temujin’s father.24 The two families had close ties of an imprecise nature. Temujin and Monglik came from different clans, but they had lived together during some of the more turbulent parts of Temujin’s life. The *Secret History* credited Monglik with saving Temujin from “whirling waters” and “blazing fire”—a reference to his help in defeating Ong Khan and Jamuka. Although Monglik and Temujin had called Yesugei *father*, and Yesugei had called them both *son*, Temujin showed deferential respect to Monglik.25

Genghis Khan rose to supremacy through military might, but Kokochu Teb Tengeri had attracted a following thanks to his spiritual powers. The *Secret History* does not refer to him as a shaman or state that he gave Genghis Khan his title, but several foreign chronicles have made both of these claims. The Chinese specifically referred to him as a magician, and the Persians wrote that he was a prophet. How he acquired the title Teb Tengeri, with its suggestion of a special divine consecration, is unclear, as scholars cannot agree on the origin and meaning of *teb*. Although shamans were known in the court of the defeated Tayang Khan and Ong Khan, none is specifically mentioned in the court of Genghis Khan. Some reports state firmly that no “trance shamans” appeared in the lineage of Genghis Khan.26 Mongol shamans communicated specifically and exclusively through their ancestors, and the old women who had barred Hoelun and her family from the ancestral ceremonies had severed Temujin’s connection to those spirits. So he worshipped the mountain and formed a direct connection to heaven without going through another medium.

Male shamans were treated with cautious respect, but they evoked suspicion and even disgust. As one saying put it, “the worst of men become shamans.”27 The word *boo*, Mongolian for “shaman,” is part of a cluster of words with loathsome connotations: foul, abominable, to vomit, to castrate, an opportunistic person without scruples; it is also the general term for lice, fleas, and bedbugs.28

Teb Tengeri’s followers, who are referred to in the *Secret History* as the “nine-tongue people,”29 seem to have included everyone who bore a grudge against Genghis Khan. They grew increasingly convinced of Teb Tengeri’s superior power and spiritual authority, and this created a tension that needed to be resolved. The vehemently anti-Mongol but usually perceptive Persian chronicler Juzjani may have been right in thinking that he was a fake who took excessive advantage of his close kinship with Genghis Khan. “The imposter was so puffed up with his own importance,” wrote Juzjani, “after the success of his pretended revelation that he began to entertain ambitious views for himself.”30

While outwardly feigning loyalty to Genghis Khan, Teb Tengeri used his growing spiritual authority to gather his own following. Whatever his inspiration, he vastly underestimated his rival’s skill, strength, and popularity. And he underestimated his ruthlessness. Without attacking the Great Khan directly, Teb Tengeri provoked repeated confrontations with family members around him, particularly stoking his rivalry with his brother Khasar by encouraging his ambitions while at the same time putting suspicions about him in Genghis Khan’s mind. Genghis Khan was emotionally vulnerable to threats from Khasar, as Khasar was larger, stronger, and much better with a bow and arrow. Khasar had also betrayed him in the past by siding with Genghis Khan’s rival Ong Khan.31

In the first years after the founding of the Mongol state, Teb Tengeri’s power grew and grew, until sometime around 1208, he triggered a crisis that Genghis Khan seemed unprepared for and uncertain how to contain. Knowing the significance his rival ascribed to dreams, Teb Tengeri told him he had had a revelation in a dream in which Khasar had become the Great Khan of the Mongols. After word of this threatening dream spread, Khasar fled the camp, further provoking the suspicion that his brother had plotted some form of treason. Some chronicles state that Khasar joined Teb Tengeri and his brothers in a conspiracy to overthrow Genghis Khan.32 Others suggest that Khasar had attempted to seduce Khulan, Genghis Khan’s beloved new wife. One chronicle stated delicately that Khasar went hunting and shot the wrong bird, but one of Genghis Khan’s retainers reported more bluntly, “When your brother Khasar was sitting drunk, he took lady Khulan’s arm.”

Genghis Khan never completely trusted Khasar. He seemed to be afraid of him. Jamuka had once described Khasar in supernatural terms of a sort he never used for Temujin. “He was born a coiling dragon-snake” and had the power to shoot enemies “who are beyond the mountain,” and “beyond the steppe.” His magical fork-tipped arrows could kill ten or twenty men with a single shot. He also had the power to swallow men and make them disappear “complete with quiver.”33

Still trusting Teb Tengeri and already suspicious of Khasar, Genghis Khan believed that his brother posed a threat and used the dreams as an excuse to move against him. He seized Khasar, stripped him of the men he had placed under his command, and was debating what to do with him. Only Hoelun’s intervention saved Khasar’s life. Upon hearing of Khasar’s detention, she rode in her camel cart all through the night, entered her son’s *ger* at daybreak, and demanded that he release him. At one moment she even exposed her breasts to remind him that he needed to protect his brothers who had nursed from the same breast as he. Genghis Khan reluctantly obeyed his mother and freed his brother, but he gave him command of only 1,400 followers and kept a close eye on him thereafter.34

Hoelun was so exhausted by the tensions and fighting among her sons that soon after this incident, though she was only in her mid-fifties, she “completed her age” and died. Her death gave Teb Tengeri a new opportunity to expand his power and increase his personal following. As *Otchigen*, or Prince of the Fire, Hoelun’s youngest son, Temuge, inherited her property. Indeed he had already been administering it, as he had been living with his mother prior to her death. Teb Tengeri now persuaded many of Hoelun’s followers to leave Temuge and come to him. When Temuge Otchigen confronted him, Teb Tengeri and his men publicly humiliated him, making him kneel down to apologize and assume submission as a vassal.

Temuge fled to his older brother’s court and tearfully begged for help. Borte was still in bed when he entered the *ger*, and when she heard his plea she became outraged at what had happened. She sat up in bed and, covering her breasts with a blanket, gave an impassioned plea to her husband to protect his children from Teb Tengeri, this evil shaman. If Teb Tengeri was willing to harm Genghis Khan’s younger brothers while Genghis Khan still lived, she said, what would he do to her children after Genghis Khan was gone? Borte had suffered a great deal in her life, but the only time in the *Secret History *that we see her crying is when she pleaded with her husband to take action against Teb Tengeri.35

After Borte’s urging, Genghis Khan allowed his younger brother to dispose of Teb Tengeri in revenge for the theft of his followers and the public humiliation. Temuge Otchigen waited for the next time Teb Tengeri appeared in Genghis Khan’s *ger* and challenged him to fight.

When the two men went outside, Temuge’s companions were waiting. According to Juzjani, they grabbed Teb Tengeri “by the throat and dashed him to the ground with such violence that he never rose again.”36 The *Secret History* records that they broke his back and left him on the edge of the camp to die. Later Genghis Khan publicly announced his final judgment: “Because Teb Tengeri slandered and beat my brothers,” he proclaimed, “Heaven no longer loved him and took away his life.”37

To Teb Tengeri’s father and brothers he spoke more directly, placing the blame on them. “You thought that you were equal to me, and now you have caused Teb Tengeri to die. If I had known this earlier I would have dealt with you as I did with Jamuka and the others.” Because of the debt he felt toward Monglik, he spared him and his remaining six sons, but he removed them from power. He permitted no rival for political power thereafter, and allowed no religious leader to exert too much influence. After Teb Tengeri’s death, no Mongol openly questioned the authority of Genghis Khan.

Genghis Khan strove to mix followers of different religions in the same way that he combined disparate clans and tribes into new military and political units. In this way, each religion would be represented in his court without any one forming a powerful bloc. Teb Tengeri’s overt challenge to his authority crystallized Genghis Khan’s suspicion of men of religion who promoted themselves as closer to the Will of Heaven than other people. He continued to use shamans for special purposes, such as forecasting the future or controlling the weather, but he never again allowed a man to come between him and heaven.

Teb Tengeri’s killing set a bloody precedent. This was the first, but far from the last, time that the Mongol khans would kill a religious leader who claimed a higher authority than the state or the khan. Later this policy would be invoked to justify the execution of the Islamic caliph and his sons in Baghdad in 1258, and of the imam of the Ismaili Assassins, whose followers considered him divine. Subsequent Mongol rulers repeatedly but unsuccessfully summoned the pope to examine his behavior and very likely would have killed him as well if he had accepted their invitation. Just as they tolerated no rival political leader, they killed religious leaders who defied the Great Khan. Genghis Khan was heaven’s representative, and to defy him was to disobey God. Buddhist, Sufi Muslim, and Orthodox Christian leaders understood the Mongol policy and quickly adapted their ways to accommodate this new force.

Rather than selecting a court shaman, he maintained the tradition of appointing wise elders as spiritual counselors, or *beki*, around him. “In the Mongol tradition,” he proclaimed in 1206, when he created the Mongol nation, “it is customary for a senior ranking person to become a *beki*.”38 He bestowed that title on Old Usun Ebugen of the Baarin, who had been consistently loyal, never “hiding or concealing” anything, and made him a counselor with special honors. Genghis Khan allowed him to dress like the old Manichaean priests. “He shall wear a white *deel*, ride a white gelding, and when in the *ger* he will be given a seat waited on by others.”39 Although greatly honored, these counselors offered advice but had little independence and no room to interfere in the affairs of state. They could never exercise power or become a threat like Teb Tengeri had. The ruling elite in Genghis Khan’s new nation would not be men of religion or tribal aristocrats. That privilege was reserved exclusively for his band of warriors.



Every story, whether factually true of not, has something to teach. One of the most interesting accounts of Genghis Khan’s founding of the Mongol Empire and creation of his code of law was recorded by an Egyptian scholar, Shihab al-Din al-Nuwayri, at the beginning of the fourteenth century. According to al-Nuwayri, early in his life Genghis Khan turned to a Jewish rabbi for guidance and asked him what gave Jesus, Moses, and Muhammad their power and fame.

“Because they loved God and devoted themselves to him, so he rewarded them,” the rabbi answered.

“If I love God and devote myself to him, will he reward me?” asked Genghis Khan.

“Yes,” replied the rabbi.

After a lengthy discussion of the teachings and laws of Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad, Genghis Khan retreated into the mountains to meditate. Sometime later, he emerged singing and dancing; he had contemplated the various religions around him, and in the end he chose not “to obey any religion and did not belong to any religious community.” Instead, he “just had love for God, as he claimed,” and “he stayed like this as long as God willed, and this was his beginning.”40

It seems doubtful that Genghis Khan ever met a rabbi, but the story combines aspects of his long spiritual training on Burkhan Khaldun with elements of his meetings with various religious scholars. Because he worshipped the *Tore*, Mongolian law, many observers frequently equated this with the Torah, which the Jews recognized as the Law of Moses, or with the *Tawrat*, which the Muslims recognized as the law of all prophets, including Jesus.41 For Mongols, the *Tore*, Torah, and *Tawrat* blended together into a search for the laws of truth and the proper way to live.

Genghis Khan taught his people to worship their nation as other people worshipped their gods, spirits, prophets, and saints. The Mongols made sacrifices and promises to the Spirit of the State, *Toriin Sulde*, and the national banners precisely as other peoples did to their gods.42 They treated the authority of the state, its *Tore*, as a god. The nation alone was the highest of all authorities and faiths. This idea was expressed clearly in the law as written by Genghis Khan’s descendant Altan Khan in the sixteenth century, whose law code placed the state above religion. “The laws of religion are like knotted silver ribbons,” he decreed, but “the laws of the emperor are like a golden yoke.”43

For centuries, observers sought the secret to Genghis Khan’s unparalleled conquest and imperial expansion. Was it the composite steppe bow, the sturdy Mongol horse, the diet of the warrior, the harsh life of the herder, some simple fluctuation in weather or climate, or was it, as the Mongol chroniclers wrote, simply fate or a reflection of the Will of Heaven above? Genghis Khan had no doubt as to the source of his many victories. His success came from his search for truth and unfailing effort to uphold the ultimate principles and the laws of the highest order. “My dynasty sits on the throne of many countries,” he said in the *Secret History*, “because I think constantly of the sacred way of truth, the *Yeke Tore*.”44




