+++
title = "62 CHAPTER XI COMMUNAL AGGRESSION"

+++
-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) --

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER XI

COMMUNAL AGGRESSION

  

 Even a superficial observer cannot fail to notice that a spirit of
aggression underlies the Hindu attitude towards the Muslim and the
Muslim attitude towards the Hindu. The Hindu's spirit of aggression is a
new phase which he has just begun to cultivate. The Muslim's spirit of
aggression is his native endowment, and is ancient as compared with that
of the Hindu. It is not that the Hindu, if given time, will not pick up
and overtake the Muslim. But as matters stand to-day, the Muslim in this
exhibition of the spirit of aggression leaves the Hindu far behind.

 Enough has been said about the social aggression of the Muslims in
the chapter dealing with communal riots. It is necessary to speak
briefly of the political aggression of the Muslims. For this political
aggression has created a malaise which cannot be overlooked.

 Three things are noticeable about this political aggression of the
Muslims.

 First is the ever-growing catalogue of the Muslim's political
demands. Their origin goes back to the year 1892.

 In 1885 the Indian National Congress was founded. It began with a
demand for good government, as distinguished from self-government. In
response to this demand the British Government felt the necessity of
altering the nature of the Legislative Councils, Provincial and Central,
established under the Act of 1861. In that nascent stage of Congress
agitation, the British Government did not feel called upon to make them
fully popular. It thought it enough to give them a popular colouring.
Accordingly the British Parliament passed in 1892 what is called the
Indian Councils Act. This Act is memorable for two things. It was in
this Act of 1892 that the British Government for the first time accepted
the semblance of the principle of popular representation as the basis
for the constitution of the Legislatures in India. It was not a
principle of election. It was a principle of nomination, only it was
qualified by the requirement that before nomination a person must be
selected by important public bodies such as municipalities, district
boards, universities, and the associations of merchants, etc. Secondly,
it was in the legislatures that were constituted under this Act that the
principle of separate representation for Musalmans was for the first
time introduced in the political constitution of India.

 The introduction of this principle is shrouded in mystery. It is a
mystery because it was introduced so silently and so stealthily. The
principle of separate representation does not find a place in the Act.
The Act says nothing about it. It was in the directions—but not in the
Act—issued to those charged with the duty of framing regulations as to
the classes and interests to whom representation was to be given that
the Muslims were named as a class to be provided for.

 It is a mystery as to who was responsible for its introduction. This
scheme of separate representation was not the result of any demand put
forth by any organized Muslim association. In whom did it then
originate? It is suggested**[/1/](#n01)** that it originated with the
Viceroy, Lord Dufferin, who, as far back as the year 1888, when dealing
with the question of representation in the Legislative Councils,
emphasized the necessity that in India representation will have to be,
not in the way representation is secured in England, but representation
by interests. Curiosity leads to a further question, namely, what could
have led Lord Dufferin to propose such a plan? It is
suggested**[/2/](#n02)** that the idea was to wean**[/3/](#n03)** away
the Musalmans from the Congress, which had already been started three
years before. Be that as it may, it is certain that it is by this Act
that separate representation for Muslims became, for the first time, a
feature of the Indian Constitution. It should, however, be noted that
neither the Act nor the Regulations conferred any right of selection
upon the Muslim community, nor did the Act give the Muslim community a
right to claim a fixed number of seats. All that it did was to give the
Muslims the right to separate representation.

 Though, to start with, the suggestion of separate representation
came from the British, the Muslims did not fail to appreciate the social
value of separate political rights; with the result that when in 1909
the Muslims came to know that the next step in the reform of the
Legislative Councils was contemplated, they waited of their own accord
in deputation**[/4/](#n04)** upon the Viceroy, Lord Minto, and placed
before him the following demands :—

> \(i\) Communal representation in accordance with their numerical
> strength, social position and local influence, on district and
> municipal boards.
>
> \(ii\) An assurance of Muhammadan representation on the governing
> bodies of Universities.
>
> \(iii\) Communal representation on provincial councils, election being
> by special electoral colleges composed of Muhammadan landlords,
> lawyers, merchants, and representatives of other important interests,
> University graduates of a certain standing and members of district and
> municipal boards.
>
> \(iv\) The number of Muhammadan representatives in the Imperial
> Legislative Council should not depend on their numerical strength, and
> Muhammadans should never be in an ineffective minority. They should be
> elected as far as possible (as opposed to being nominated), election
> being by special Muhammadan colleges composed of landowners, lawyers,
> merchants, members of provincial councils, Fellows of Universities,
> etc.

 These demands were granted and given effect to in the Act of 1909.
Under this Act the Muhammadans were given (1) the right to elect their
representatives, (2) the right to elect their representatives by
separate electorates, (3) the right to vote in the general electorates
as well, and (4) the right to weightage in representation. The following
table shows the proportion of representation secured to the Muslims in
the Legislatures by the Act of 1909 and the Regulations made thereunder
:—  


|                                                                                                        |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [Legislative Councils (Act of 1909): Communal Proportion between Hindus and Muslims](tables/411a.html) |

 The provisions were applied to all Provinces except the Punjab and
the C. P. It was not applied to the Punjab because such special
protection was considered unnecessary for the Musalmans of the Punjab,
and it was not applied to the C. P. because it had no Legislative
Council at the time.**[/5/](#n05)**

 In October 1916, 19 members of the Imperial Legislative Council
presented the Viceroy (Lord Cheirnsford) a memorandum demanding a reform
of the Constitution. Immediately the Muslims came forward with a number
of demands on behalf of the Muslim community. These were :—

> \(i\) The extension of the principle of separate representation to the
> Punjab and the C. P.
>
> \(ii\) Fixing the numerical strength of the Muslim representatives in
> the Provincial and Imperial Legislative Councils.
>
> \(iii\) Safeguards against legislation affecting Muslims, their
> religion and religious usages.

 The negotiations following upon these demands resulted in agreement
between the Hindus and the Muslims which is known as the Lucknow Pact.
It may be said to contain two clauses. One related to legislation, under
which it was agreed that :—

> "No Bill, nor any clause thereof, nor a resolution introduced by a
> nonofficial affecting one or other community (which question is to be
> determined by the members of that community in the Legislative Council
> concerned) shall be proceeded with, if three-fourths of the members of
> that community in the particular Council, Imperial and Provincial,
> oppose the Bill or any clause thereof or the resolution."

 The other clause related to the proportion of Muslim representation.
With regard to the Imperial Legislative Council the Pact provided :—

> "That one-third of the Indian elected members should be Muhammadans,
> elected by separate electorates in the several Provinces, in the
> proportion, as nearly as might be, in which they were represented on
> the provincial legislative councils by separate Muhammadan
> electorates."

In the matter of Muslim representation in the Provincial Legislative
Councils it was agreed that the proportion of Muslim representation
should be as follows**[/6/](#n06)**:—  


[TABLE]

While allowing this proportion of seats to the Muslims, the right to
\[a\] second vote in the general electorates which they had under the
arrangement of 1909 was taken away.

 The Lucknow Pact was adversely criticized by the Montagu Chelmsford
Report. But being an agreement between the parties, Government did not
like to reject it and to substitute in its place its own decision. Both
clauses of the agreement were accepted by Government and embodied in the
Government of India Act of 1919. The clause relating to legislation was
given effect to, but in a different form. Instead of leaving it to the
members of the Legislature to oppose it, it was provided**[/7/](#n07)**
that legislation affecting the religion or religious rites and usages of
any class of British subjects in India shall not be introduced at any
meeting of either Chamber of the Indian Legislature without the previous
sanction of the Governor-General.

 The clause relating to representation was accepted by the
Government, though in the opinion of the Government the Punjab and
Bengal Muslims were not fairly treated.

 The effect of these concessions can be seen by reference to the
composition of the Legislatures constituted under the Government of
India Act, 1919, which was as follows:—  


|                                                                    |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [Communal Composition of the Legislatures, 1919](tables/411b.html) |

The extent of representation secured by the Muslims by the Lucknow Pact
can be seen from the following table**[/8/](#n08)**:—  


|                                                                                   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [Representation of Muslims According to the Lucknow Pact, 1916](tables/411c.html) |

This table does not show quite clearly the weightage obtained by the
Muslims under the Lucknow Pact. It was worked out by the Government of
India in their despatch**[/9/](#n09)** on the Report of Franchise
Committee of which Lord Southborough was the Chairman. The following
table is taken from that despatch which shows that the Muslims got a
weightage under the Lucknow Pact far in excess of what Government gave
them in 1909.  


|                                                                    |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [Actual Weightage of Muslims According to the Lucknow Pact](#411d) |

 In 1927 the British Government announced the appointment of the
Simon Commission, to examine the working of the Indian Constitution and
to suggest further reforms. Immediately the Muslims came forward with
further political demands. These demands were put forth from various
Muslim platforms such as the Muslim League, All-India Muslim Conference,
All-Parties Muslim Conference, Jamiat-ul-Ulema and the Khilafat
Conference. The demands were substantially the same. It would suffice to
state those that were formulated by Mr. Jinnah**[/10/](#n10)** on behalf
of the Muslim League.

They were in the following terms :—

> 1\. The form of the future Constitution should be federal with
> residuary powers vested in the provinces.
>
> 2\. A uniform measure of autonomy should be granted to all provinces.
>
> 3\. All legislatures in the country and other elected bodies should be
> reconstituted on the definite principle of adequate and effective
> representation of minorities in every province without reducing the
> majority of any province to a minority or even equality.
>
> 4\. In the Central Legislature, Muslim representation should not be
> less than one-third.
>
> 5\. The representation of communal groups should continue to be by
> means of separate electorates as at present, provided that it should
> be open to any community at any time to abandon its separate
> electorate in favour of joint electorates.
>
> 6\. Any territorial redistribution that might at any time be necessary
> should not in any way affect the Muslim majority in the Punjab, Bengal
> and North-West Province.
>
> 7\. Full religious liberty, that is, liberty of belief, worship,
> observances, propaganda, association and education, should be
> guaranteed to all communities.
>
> 8\. No bill or resolution, or any part thereof, should be passed in
> any legislature or any other elected body if three-fourths of the
> members of any community in that particular body oppose such bill or
> resolution or part thereof on the ground that it would be injurious to
> the interests of that community or, in the alternative, such other
> method as may be devised or as may be found feasible and practicable
> to deal with such cases.
>
> 9\. Sind should be separated from the Bombay Presidency.
>
> 10\. Reforms should be introduced in the North-West Frontier Province
> and Baluchistan on the same footing as in other provinces.
>
> 11\. Provision should be made in the Constitution giving the Muslims
> an adequate share along with other Indians in all the Services of the
> Slate and in self-governing bodies, having due regard to the
> requirements of efficiency.
>
> 12\. The constitution should embody adequate safeguards for the
> protection of Muslim religion, culture and personal law, and the
> promotion of Muslim education, language, religion, personal laws,
> Muslim charitable institutions, and for their due share in
> grants-in-aid given by the Stale and by self-governing bodies.
>
> 13\. No Cabinet, either Central or Provincial, should be formed
> without there being a proportion of Muslim Ministers of at least
> one-third.
>
> 14\. No change to be made in the Constitution by the Central
> Legislature except with the concurrence of the States constituting the
> Indian Federation.
>
> 15\. That in the present circumstances the representation of Musalmans
> in the different legislatures of the country and of the other elected
> bodies through separate electorates is inevitable, and, further,
> Government being pledged not to deprive the Musalmans of this right,
> it cannot be taken away without their consent, and so long as the
> Musalmans are not satisfied that their rights and interests are
> safeguarded in the manner specified above (or herein) they would in no
> way consent to the establishment of joint electorates with or without
> conditions.
>
> Note:—The question of excess representation of Musalmans over and
> above their population in the provinces where they are in minority to
> be considered hereafter.

 This is a consolidated statement of Muslim demands. In it there are
some which are old, and some which are new. The old ones are included
because the aim is to retain the advantages accruing therefrom. The new
ones are added in order to remove the weaknesses in the Muslim position.
The new ones are five in number: (1) Representation in proportion to
population to Muslim majorities in the Punjab and Bengal, (2) One-third
representation to Muslims in the cabinets both Central and Provincial,
(3) Adequate representation of Muslims in the Services, (4) Separation
of Sind from the Bombay Presidency and the raising of N.-W. F. P. and
Baluchistan to the status of self-governing provinces, and (5) Vesting
of residuary powers in the provinces instead of in the Central
Government.

 These new demands are self-explanatory, except perhaps 1, 4 and 5.
The object of demands 1 and 4 was to place, in four provinces, the
Muslim community in a statutory majority where it had only communal
majority, as a force counteracting the six provinces in which the Hindu
community happened to be in a majority. This was insisted upon as a
guarantee of good treatment by both the communities of its minorities.
The object of demand No. 5 was to guarantee Muslim rule in Sind, N.-W.
F. P., the Punjab and Bengal. But a Muslim majority rule in these Muslim
Provinces, it was feared, would not be effective if they remained under
the control of the Central Government which could not but be in the hand
of the Hindus. To free the Muslim Provinces from the control of the
Hindu Government at the Centre was the object for which demand No. 5 was
put forth.

 These demands were opposed by the Hindus. There may not be much in
this. But what is significant is that they were also rejected by the
Simon Commission. The Simon Commission, which was by no means unfriendly
to the Muslims, gave some very cogent reasons for rejecting the Muslim
demands. It said**[/11/](#n11)**:—

> "This claim goes to the length of seeking to preserve the full
> security for representation now provided for Muslims in these six
> provinces and at the same time to enlarge in Bengal and the Punjab the
> present proportion of seats secured to the community by separate
> electorates to figures proportionate to their ratio of population.
> This would give Muhammadans a fixed and unalterable majority of the
> general constituency seats in both provinces. We cannot go so far. The
> continuance of the present scale of weightage in the six provinces
> could not—in the absence of a new general agreement between the
> communities—equitably be combined with so great a departure from the
> existing allocation in Bengal and the Punjab.
>
> "It would be unfair that Muhammadans should retain the very
> considerable weightage they enjoy in the six provinces, and that there
> should at the same time be imposed, in face of Hindu and Sikh
> opposition, a definite Muslim majority in the Punjab and Bengal
> unalterable by any appeal to the electorate. . . ."

 Notwithstanding the opposition of the Hindus and the Sikhs and the
rejection by the Simon Commission, the British Government when called
upon to act as an arbiter granted the Muslims all their demands old and
new.

 By a Notification**[/12/](#n12)** in the **Gazette of India**, 25th
January 1932, the Government of India, in exercise of the powers
conferred by sub-section (2) of section 52 A of the Government of India
Act, 1916, declared that the N.-W. F. Province shall be treated as a
Governor's Province.**[/13/](#n13)** By an Order in Council, issued
under the provisions contained in sub-section (1) of section 289 of the
Government of India Act of 1935, Sind was separated from Bombay as from
1st April 1936 and declared to be a Governor's Province to be known as
the province of Sind. By the Resolution issued by the Secretary of State
for India and published on 7th July 1934, the Muslim share in the public
services was fixed at 25 per cent. of all appointments Imperial and
Provincial. With regard to residuary powers, it is true that the Muslim
demand that they should be vested in the Provinces was not accepted. But
in another sense the Muslim demand in this respect may be deemed to have
been granted. The essence of the Muslim demand was that the residuary
powers should not be vested in the Centre, which, put in different
language, meant that they should not be in the hands of the Hindus. This
is precisely what is done by section 104 of the Government of India Act,
1935, which vests the residuary powers in the Governor-General to be
exercised in his discretion. The demand for 33 1/3 per cent.
representation in the Cabinets, Central and Provincial, was not given
effect to by a legal provision in the Act. The right of Muslims to
representation in the Cabinets was however accepted by the British
Government and provision for giving effect to it was made in the
Instruments of Instructions issued to the Governors and
Governor-General. As to the remaining demand which related to a
statutory majority in the Punjab and Bengal, the demand was given effect
to by the Communal Award. True, a statutory majority in the whole House
has not been given to the Muslims and could not be given having regard
to the necessity for providing representation to other interests. But a
statutory majority as against Hindus has been given to the Muslims of
the Punjab and Bengal without touching the weightages obtained by the
Muslim minorities under the Lucknow Pact.

 These political grants to the Muslim community by the British
Government lacked security, and it was feared by the Muslims that
pressure might be brought upon them or upon His Majesty's Government by
the Hindus to alter the terms of the grants to the prejudice of the
Muslims. This fear was due to two reasons. One was the success of Mr.
Gandhi in getting that part of the Award which related to the Depressed
Classes revised by means of the pressure of a fast unto
death.**[/14/](#n14)** Some people, encouraged by this success, actually
agitated for revision of that part of the Award which related to the
Muslims, and some Muslims were even found to be in favour of entering
into such negotiations.**[/15/](#n15)** This alarmed the Muslim
community. The other reason for the fear of revision of the terms of the
grants arose out of certain amendments in the clauses in the Government
of India Bill which were made in the House of Commons permitting such
revision under certain conditions. To remove these fears and to give
complete security to the Muslims against hasty and hurried revision of
the grants, His Majesty's Government authorized the Government of India
to issue the following communiqué**[/16/](#n16)**:—

> "It has come to the notice of His Majesty's Government that the
> impression is prevalent that what is now Clause 304 of the Government
> of India Bill (numbered 285 in the Bill as first introduced and 299 in
> the Bill as amended by the Commons in Committee) has been amended
> during the passage of the Bill through the Commons in such a way as to
> give His Majesty's Government unfettered power to alter at any lime
> they may think fit the constitutional provisions based upon what is
> commonly known as Government's Communal Award.
>
> "His Majesty's Government think it desirable to give the following
> brief explanation both of what they consider is the practical effect
> of Clause 304 in relation to any change in the Communal Award and of
> their own policy in relation to any such change.
>
> "Under this Clause there is conferred on the Governments and
> Legislatures in India, after the expiry of ten years, the right of
> initiating a proposal to modify the provisions and regulating various
> matters relating to the constitution of the Legislature, including
> such questions as were covered by the Communal Award.
>
> "The Clause also imposes on the Secretary of State the duty of laying
> before Parliament from the Governor-General or the Governor as the
> case may be his opinion as to the proposed amendment and in particular
> as to the effect which it would have on the interests of any minority
> and of informing Parliament of any action which he proposed to take.
>
> "Any change in the constitutional provisions resulting from this
> procedure can be effected by an Order in Council, but this is subject
> to the proviso that the draft of the proposed Order has been
> affirmatively approved by both Houses of Parliament by a resolution.
> The condition is secured by Clause 305 of the Bill.
>
> "Before the expiry of ten years there is no similar constitutional
> initiative residing in the Governments and the Legislatures of India.
> Power is, however, conferred by the Clause to make such a change by an
> Order in Council (always with the approval of both Houses of
> Parliament) even before the end of ten years, but within the first
> ten years (and indeed subsequently, if the initiative has not come
> from the Legislatures of India) it is incumbent upon the Secretary of
> Slate to consult the Governments and the Legislatures of India who
> will be affected (unless the change is of a minor character) before
> any Order in Council is laid before Parliament for its approval.
>
> "The necessity for the powers referred to in the preceding paragraph
> is due to such reasons as the following :—
>
> > "(a) It is impossible to foresee when the necessity may arise for
> > amending minor details connected with the franchise and the
> > constitution of legislatures, and for such amendment it will be
> > clearly disadvantageous to have no method available short of a fresh
> > amending Act of Parliament, nor is it practicable statutorily to
> > separate such details from the more important matter such as the
> > terms of the Communal Award;
> >
> > "(b) It might also become desirable, in the event of a unanimous
> > agreement between the communities in India, to make a modification
> > in the provisions based on the Communal Award; and for such an
> > agreed change it would also be disadvantageous to have no other
> > method available than an amending Act of Parliament.
>
> "Within the range of the Communal Award His Majesty's Government would
> not propose, in the exercise of any power conferred by this Clause, to
> recommend to Parliament any change unless such changes had been agreed
> to between the communities concerned.
>
> "In conclusion. His Majesty's Government would again emphasise the
> fact that none of the powers in Clause 304 can, in view of the
> provisions in Clause 305, be exercised unless both Houses of
> Parliament agreed by an affirmative resolution."

 After taking into account what the Muslims demanded at the R. T. C.
and what was conceded to them, any one could have thought that the limit
of Muslim demands was reached and that the 1932 settlement was a final
settlement. But it appears that even with this the Musalmans are not
satisfied. A further list of new demands for safeguarding the Muslim
position seems to be ready. In the controversy that went on between Mr.
Jinnah and the Congress in the year 1938, Mr. Jinnah was asked to
disclose his demands, which he refused to do. But these demands have
come to the surface in the correspondence that passed between Pandit
Nehru and Mr. Jinnah in the course of the controversy, and they have
been tabulated by Pandit Nehru in one of his letters to Mr. Jinnah. His
tabulation gives the following items as being matters of disputes and
requiring settlement**[/17/](#n17)**:—

> \(1\) The fourteen points formulated by the Muslim League in 1929.
>
> \(2\) The Congress should withdraw all opposition to the Communal
> Award and should not describe it as a negation of nationalism.
>
> \(3\) The share of the Muslims in the state services should be
> definitely fixed in the constitution by statutory enactment.
>
> \(4\) Muslim personal law and culture should be guaranteed by statute.
>
> \(5\) The Congress should take in hand the agitation in connection
> with the Sahidganj Mosque and should use its moral pressure to enable
> the Muslims to gain possession of the Mosque.
>
> \(6\) The Muslims' right to call Azan and perform their religious
> ceremonies should not be fettered in any way.
>
> \(7\) Muslims should have freedom to perform cow-slaughter.
>
> \(8\) Muslim majorities in the Provinces, where such majorities exist
> at present, must not be affected by any territorial re-distribution or
> adjustments.
>
> \(9\) The 'Bande Mataram' song should be given up.
>
> (10) Muslims want Urdu to be the national language of India and they
> desire to have statutory guarantees that the use of Urdu shall not be
> curtailed or damaged.
>
> (11) Muslim representation in the local bodies should be governed by
> the principles underlying the Communal Award, that is, separate
> electorates and population strength.
>
> (12) The tricolour flag should be changed or alternately the flag of
> the Muslim League should be given equal importance.
>
> (13) Recognition of the Muslim League as the one authoritative and
> representative organization of Indian Muslims.
>
> (14) Coalition Ministries should be formed.

 With this new list, there is no knowing where the Muslims are going
to stop in their demands. Within one year, that is, between 1938 and
1939, one more demand and that too of a substantial character, namely 50
per cent. share in every thing, has been added to it. In this catalogue
of new demands there are some which on the face of them are extravagant
and impossible, if not irresponsible. As an instance, one may refer to
the demand for fifty-fifty and the demand for the recognition of Urdu as
the national language of India. In 1929, the Muslims insisted that in
allotting seats in Legislatures, a majority shall not be reduced to a
minority or equality.**[/18/](#n18)** This principle, enunciated by
themselves, it is now demanded, shall be abandoned and a majority shall
be reduced to equality. The Muslims in 1929 admitted that the other
minorities required protection and that they must have it in the same
manner as the Muslims. The only distinction made between the Muslims and
other minorities was as to the extent of the protection. The Muslims
claimed a higher degree of protection than was conceded to the other
minorities, on the ground of their political importance. The necessity
and adequacy of protection for the other minorities the Muslims never
denied. But with this new demand of 50 per cent. the Muslims are not
only seeking to reduce the Hindu majority to a minority, but they are
also cutting into the political rights of the other minorities. The
Muslims are now speaking the language of Hitler and claiming a place in
the sun as Hitler has been doing for Germany. For their demand for 50
per cent. is nothing but a counterpart of the German claims for
Deutschland Uber Alles and Lebenuraum for Tthemselves, irrespective of
what happens to other minorities.

 Their claim for the recognition of Urdu as the national language of
India is equally extravagant. Urdu is not only not spoken all, over
India but is not even the language of all the Musalmans of India. Of the
68 millions of Muslims,**[/19/](#n19)** only 28 millions speak Urdu. The
proposal of making Urdu the national language means that the language of
28 millions of Muslims is to be imposed particularly upon 40 millions of
Musalmans or generally upon 322 millions of Indians.

 It will thus be seen that every time a proposal for the reform of
the constitution comes forth, the Muslims are there, ready with some new
political demand or demands. The only check upon such indefinite
expansion of Muslim demands is the power of the British Government,
which must be the final arbiter in any dispute between the Hindus and
the Muslims. Who can confidently say that the decision of the British
will not be in favour of the Muslims, if the dispute relating to these
new demands was referred to them for arbitration? The more the Muslims
demand, the more accommodating the British seem to become. At any rate,
past experience shows that the British have been inclined to give the
Muslims more than what the Muslims had themselves asked. Two such
instances can be cited.

 One of these relates to the Lucknow Pact. The question was whether
the British Government should accept the Pact. The authors of the
Montagu-Chelmsford Report were disinclined to accept it for reasons
which were very weighty. Speaking of the weightages granted to the
Muslims by the Lucknow Pact, the authors of the Joint Report
observed**[/20/](#n20)**:—

> "Now a privileged position of this kind is open to the objection, that
> if any other community here after makes good a claim to separate
> representation, it can be satisfied only by deducting the non-Muslim
> seats, or by a rateable deduction from both Muslim and non-Muslim; and
> Hindu and Muslim opinion are not likely to agree which process should
> be adopted. While, therefore, for reasons that we explain subsequently
> we assent to the maintenance of separate representation for
> Muhammadans, we are bound to reserve our approval of the particular
> proposals set before us, until we have ascertained what the effect
> upon other interests will be, and have made fair provision for them."

 Notwithstanding this grave flaw in the Lucknow Pact, the Government
of India, in its despatch referred to above, recommended that the terms
of the Pact should be improved in so far as it related to the Muslims of
Bengal. Its reasons make a strange reading. It argued that :—

> "The Muhammadan representation which they \[the authors of the Pact\]
> propose for Bengal is manifestly insufficient.**[/21/](#n21)** It is
> questionable whether the claims of the Muhammadan population of
> Eastern Bengal were adequately pressed when the Congress-League
> compact was in the making. They are conspicuously a backward and
> impoverished community. The repartition of the presidency in 1912 came
> as a severe disappointment to them, and we should be very loath to
> fail in seeing that their interests are now generously secured. In
> order to give the Bengal Muslims a representation proportionate to
> their numbers, and no more, we should allot them 44 instead of 34
> seats \[due to them under the Pact\]."

 This enthusiasm for the Bengal Muslims shown by the Government of
India was not shared by the British Government It felt that as the
number of seats given to the Bengal Muslims was the result of an
agreement, any interference to improve the bargain when there was no
dispute about the genuineness of the agreement, could not but create the
impression that the British Government was in some special sense and for
some special reason the friend of the Muslims. In suggesting this
augmentation in the seats, the Government of India forgot to take note
of the reason why the Muslims of the Punjab and Bengal were not given by
the Pact seats in proportion to their population. The Lucknow Pact was
based upon the principle, now thrown to the winds, that a community as
such was not entitled to political protection. A community was entitled
to protection when it was in a minority. That was the principle
underlying the Lucknow Pact. The Muslim community in the Punjab and
Bengal was not in a minority and, therefore, was not entitled to the
same protection which it got in other Provinces where it was in a
minority. Notwithstanding their being in a majority, the Muslims of the
Punjab and Bengal felt the necessity of separate electorates. According
to the principle underlying the Pact they could qualify themselves for
this only by becoming a minority which they did by agreeing to a
minority of seats. This is the reason why the Muslims of Bengal and the
Punjab did not get the majority of seats they were entitled to on the
population basis.**[/22/](#n22)**

 The proposal of the Government of India to give to the Bengal
Muslims more than what they had asked for did not go through. But the
fact that they wanted to do so remains as evidence of their
inclinations.

 The second occasion when the British Government as an arbiter gave
the Muslims more than they asked for was when the Communal Decision was
given in 1932. Sir Muhammad Shafi made two different proposals in the
Minorities Sub-Committee of the R. T. C. In his speech on 6th January
1931, Sir Muhammad Shafi put forth the following proposal as a basis for
communal settlement**[/23/](#n23)**:—

"We are prepared to accept joint electorates on the conditions named by
me: Firstly, that the rights at present enjoyed by the Musalmans in the
minority Provinces should be continued to them; that in the Punjab and
in Bengal they should have two joint electorates and representation on a
population basis; that there should be the principle of reservation of
seats coupled with Maulana Mahomed Ali's condition."**[/24/](#n24)**

In his speech on 14th January 1931 before the same Committee he made a
different offer. He said**[/25/](#n25)**:—

> "To-day I am authorized to make this offer: that in the Punjab the
> Musalmans should have through communal electorates 49 per cent. of the
> entire number of seats in the whole House, and should have liberty to
> contest the special constituencies which it is proposed to create in
> that Province; so far as Bengal is concerned that Musalmans should
> have through communal electorates 46 percent, representation in the
> whole House, and should have the liberty to contest the special
> constituencies which it is proposed to create in that Province; in so
> far as the minority Provinces are concerned, the Musalmans should
> continue to enjoy the weightage which they have at present through
> separate electorates, similar weightage to be given to our Hindu
> brethren in Sind, and to our Hindu and Sikh brethren in the North-West
> Frontier Province. If at any time hereafter two-thirds of the
> representatives of any community in any Provincial Legislative Council
> or in the Central Legislative Council desire to give up communal
> electorates and to accept joint electorates then thereafter the system
> of joint electorates should come into being."

 The difference between the two proposals is clear. "Joint
electorates, if accompanied by statutory majority. If statutory majority
was refused, then a minority of seats with separate electorates." The
British Government took statutory majority from the first demand and
separate electorates from the second demand and gave the Muslims both
when they had not asked for both.

 The second thing that is noticeable among the Muslims is the spirit
of exploiting the weaknesses of the Hindus. If the Hindus object to
anything, the Muslim policy seems to be to insist upon it and give it up
only when the Hindus show themselves ready to offer a price for it by
giving the Muslims some other concessions. As an illustration of this,
one can refer to the. question of separate and joint electorates. The
Hindus have been to my mind utterly foolish in fighting over joint
electorates especially in Provinces in which the Muslims are in a
minority. Joint electorates can never suffice for a basis for
nationalism. Nationalism is not a matter of political nexus or cash
nexus, for the simple reason that union cannot be the result of
calculation of mere externals. Where two communities live a life which
is exclusive and self-enclosed for five years, they will not be one,
because, they are made to come together on one day in five years for the
purposes of voting in an election. Joint electorates may produce the
enslavement of the minor community by the major community: but by
themselves they cannot produce nationalism. Be that as it may, because
the Hindus have been insisting upon joint electorates, the Muslims have
been insisting upon separate electorates. That this insistence is a
matter of bargain only can be seen from Mr. Jinnah's 14
points**[/26/](#n26)** and the resolution**[/27/](#n27)** passed in the
Calcutta session of the All-India Muslim League held on 30th December
1927. Therein it was stipulated that only when the Hindus agreed to the
separation of Sind and to the raising of the N.-W. F. P. to the status
of a self-governing Province the Musalmans would consent to give up
separate electorates.**[/28/](#n28)** The Musalmans evidently did not
regard separate electorates as vital. They regarded them as a good *quid
pro quo* for obtaining their other claims.

 Another illustration of this spirit of exploitation is furnished by
the Muslim insistence upon cow-slaughter and the stoppage of music
before mosques. Islamic law does not insist upon the slaughter of the
cow for sacrificial purposes and no Musalman, when he goes to Haj,
sacrifices the cow in Mecca or Medina. But in India they will not be
content with the sacrifice of any other animal. Music may be played
before a mosque in all Muslim countries without any objection. Even in
Afghanistan, which is not a secularized country, no objection is taken
to music before a mosque. But in India the Musalmans must insist upon
its stoppage for no other reason except that the Hindus claim a right to
it.

 The third thing that is noticeable is the adoption by the Muslims of
the gangster's method in politics. The riots are a sufficient indication
that gangsterism has become a settled part of their strategy in
politics. They seem to be consciously and deliberately imitating the
Sudeten Germans in the means employed by them against the
Czechs.**[/29/](#n29)** So long as the Muslims were the aggressors, the
Hindus were passive, and in the conflict they suffered more than the
Muslims did. But this is no longer true. The Hindus have learned to
retaliate and no longer feel any compunction in knifing a Musalman. This
spirit of retaliation bids fair to produce the ugly spectacle of
gangsterism against gangsterism.

 How to meet this problem must exercise the minds of all concerned.
There are the simple-minded Hindu Maha Sabha patriots who believe that
the Hindus have only to make up their minds to wipe the Musalmans and
they will be brought to their senses. On the other hand, there are the
Congress Hindu Nationalists whose policy is to tolerate and appease the
Musalmans by political and other concessions, because they believe that
they cannot reach their cherished goal of independence unless the
Musalmans back their demand. The Hindu Maha Sabha plan is no way to
unity. On the contrary, it is a sure block to progress. The slogan of
the Hindu Maha Sabha President— Hindustan for Hindus— is not merely
arrogant but is arrant nonsense. The question, however, is: is the
Congress way the right way? It seems to me that the Congress has failed
to realize two things. The first thing which the Congress has failed to
realize is that there is a difference between appeasement and
settlement, and that the difference is an essential one. Appeasement
means buying off the aggressor by conniving at his acts of murder, rape,
arson and loot against innocent persons who happen for the moment to be
the victims of his displeasure. On the other hand, settlement means
laying down the bounds which neither party to it can transgress.
Appeasement sets no limits to the demands and aspirations of the
aggressor. Settlement does. The second thing the Congress has failed to
realize is that the policy of concession has increased Muslim
aggressiveness, and what is worse, Muslims interpret these concessions
as a sign of defeatism on the part of the Hindus and the absence of the
will to resist. This policy of appeasement will involve the Hindus in
the same fearful situation in which the Allies found themselves as a
result of the policy of appeasement which they adopted towards Hitler.
This is another malaise, no less acute than the malaise of social
stagnation. Appeasement will surely aggravate it. The only remedy for it
is a settlement. If Pakistan is a settlement, it is a proposition worth
consideration. As a settlement it will do away with this constant need
of appeasement and ought to be welcomed by all those who prefer the
peace and tranquillity of a settlement to the insecurity due to the
growing political appetite shown by the Muslims in their dealings with
the Hindus.  


======================

**[/1/](#m01)** See the speech of Sir Mahomad Shaif in the Minorities
Sub-committee of the first R.T.C. (Indian Edition), p. 57.

**[/2/](#m02)** See the speech of Raja Narendranath, Ibid., p. 65.

**[/3/](#m03)** The Musalmans had already been told by Sir Sayad Ahmad
not to join the Congress in the two speeches, one delivered at Lucknow
on 28th December 1887, and the other at Meerut on 16th March 1988. Mr.
Mahomed Ali in his presidential address speaks of them as historic
speeches.

**[/4/](#m04)** Mr. Mahomed Ali in his speech as the President of the
Congress said that this deputation was a "command performance."

**[/5/](#m05)** The. C. P. Legislative Council was established in 1914.

**[/6/](#m06)** For some reason the Pact did not settle the proportion
of Muslim representation in Assam.

**[/7/](#m07)** Government of India Act, 1919, section 67 (2), (*h*).

**[/8/](#m08)** Statutory Commission, 1929, Report, Vol. I, p. 189.

**[/9/](#m09)** Fifth despatch on Indian Constitutional Reform
(Franchises), dated 23rd April 1919, para. 21.

**[/10/](#m10)** The demands are known as Mr. Jinnah's 14 points. As a
matter of fact they are 15 in number and were formulated at a meeting of
.Muslim leaders of all shades of opinion held at Delhi in March 1927,
and were known as the Delhi Proposals. For Mr. Jinnah's explanation of
the origin of his 14 points, see **All-India Register**, 1929, Vol. 1.,
p. 367.

**[/11/](#m11)** Report, Vol. II, p. 71.

**[/12/](#m12)** Notification No. F. 173/31-R in the **Gazette of India
Extraordinary***,* dated 25th January 1932.

**[/13/](#m13)** The Simon Commission had rejected the claim, saying:
"We entirely share the view of the Bray Committee that provision ought
now to be made for the constitutional advance of the N.-W. F. P. . .
.But we also agree that the situation of the Province and its intimate
relation with the problem of Indian defence are such that special
arrangements are required. It is not possible, therefore, to apply to it
automatically proposals which may be suited for provincial areas in
other parts of India." They justified it by saying: "The inherent right
of a man to smoke a cigarette must necessarily be curtailed if he lives
in a powder magazine."—**Report**, Vol.II. paras 120-121.

**[/14/](#m14)** This resulted in the Poona Pact which was signed on
24th September 1932.

**[/15/](#m15)** For the efforts to gel the Muslim part of the Award
revised, see **All-India Register**, 1932, Vol. II, pp. 281-315.

**[/16/](#m16)** The communique is dated Simla July 2, 1935.

**[/17/](#m17)** **Indian Annual Register**, 1938, Vol. I, p. 369.

**[/18/](#m18)** See point No. 3 in Mr. Jinnah's 14 points.

**[/19/](#m19)** These figures relate to the Census of 1921.

**[/20/](#m20)** Montagu-Chelmsford Report, 1918, para 163.

**[/21/](#m21)** The Government of India felt that injustice was done to
the Punjab as well. But as there was no such special reason as there was
in the case of Bengal, namely, the unsettling of the partition, they did
not propose any augmentation in its representation as settled by the
Pact.

**[/22/](#m22)** There is no doubt that this was well understood by the
Muslims who were parties to the Pact. This is what Mr. Jinnah said as a
witness appearing before the Joint Select Committee *appointed* by
Parliament on the Government of India Bill, 1919, in reply to question
No. 3808: "The position of Bengal was this: In Bengal the Muslims are in
a majority, and the argument was advanced that any section or any
community which is in the majority cannot claim a separate electorate:
separate electorate is to protect the minority. But the counter-argument
was perfectly true that numerically we are in a majority but as voters
we are in the minority in Bengal, because of poverty and backwardness
and so on. It was said: Very well, then fix 40 per cent., because if you
are really put to test you will not get 40 per cent. because you will
not be qualified as voters. Then we had the advantage in other
Provinces."

**[/23/](#m23)** Report of the Minorities Sub-Committee of the first R.
T. C. (Indian Edition), p. 96.

**[/24/](#m24)** Mr. Mahomed Ali's formula was for Joint Electorates and
Reserved Seats with this proviso: that no candidate shall be declared
elected unless he had secured at least 40 per cent. of the votes of his
own community and at least 5 or 10 per cent. of the votes of the other
community.

**[/25/](#m25)** Ibid., p. 123.

**[/26/](#m26)** See point No. 15 in Mr. Jinnah's points.

**[/27/](#m27)** For the resolution and the speech of Mr. Barkat Ali
thereon, see the **Indian Quarterly Register,** 1927, Vol. II, pp.
447-48.

**[/28/](#m28)** The unfortunate thing for the Hindus is that they did
not get joint electorates although the Musalmans got the concessions.

**[/29/](#m29)** In the Karachi session of the All-India Muslim League
both Mr. Jinnah and Sir Abdllah Haroon compared the Muslims of India to
the "Sudeten" of the Muslim world and \[=as?\] capable of doing what the
Sudelen Germans did to Czechoslovakia.  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) -- [Dr. Ambedkar's
work](../../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#ambedkar) --
[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html#index) -- [Map
index](../../00maplinks/index.html#index) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
