+++
title = "02 Some Excerpts"

+++
## Some Excerpts

The next generation of political leaders, especially the left-wing that
was to gain control of Congress in the thirties, and complete control in
the fifties, would profess negationism very explicitly. The *radical
humanist* (i.e. bourgeois Marxist) M.N. Roy wrote that Islam had
fulfilled a historic mission of equality and abolition of
discrimination, and that for this, Islam had been welcomed into India by
the lower castes. If at all any violence had occurred, it was as a
matter of justified class struggle by the *progressive forces* against
the *reactionary forces*, meaning the *fedual* Hindu upper castes.

This is a modern myth springing from an incorrect and much too grim
picture of the caste system, a back-projection of modern ideas of class
struggle, and an uncritical swallowing of contemporary Islamic
apologetics, which has incorporated some voguish socialist values. There
is no record anywhere of low-caste people *welcoming the Muslims as
liberators*. Just like in their homeland, the Muslim generals had
nothing but contempt for the common people, and all the more so because
these were idolaters. They made no distinction between rich Pagans and
poor Pagans: in the Quran, Allah had promised the same fate to all
idolaters.

By contrast, there is plenty of testimony that these common people rose
in revolt, not against their high-caste co-religionists, but against the
Muslim rulers. And not only against heavy new taxes (50% of the land
revenue for Alauddin Khilji, whom the negationists hail as the
*precursor of socialism*) and land expropriations, but especially
against the rape and abduction of women and children and the destruction
of their idols, acts which have been recorded with so much glee by the
Muslim chroniclers, without anywhere mentioning a separate treatment of
Hindu rich and Hindu poor, upper-caste Kafir or low-caste Kafir. Even
when some of the high-caste people started collaborating, the common
people gave the invaders no rest, attacking them from hiding-places in
the forests. The conversion of low-caste people only began when Muslim
rulers were safely in power and in a position to reward and encourage
conversion by means of tax discrimination, legal discrimination (win the
dispute with your neighbour if you convert), handing out posts to
converts, and simple coercion. Nevertheless, the myth which M.N. Roy
spread, has gained wide currency.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### M. Habib

Firstly, it was not all that serious. One cannot fail to notice that the
Islamic chroniclers (including some rulers who wrote their own
chronicles, like Teimur and Babar) have described the slaughter of
Hindus, the abduction of their women and children, and the destruction
of their places of worship most gleefully. But, according to Habib,
these were merely exaggerations by court poets out to please their
patrons. One wonders what it says about Islamic rulers that they felt
flattered by the bloody details which the Muslims chroniclers of Hindu
persecutions have left us. At any rate, Habib has never managed to
underpin this convenient hypothesis with a single fact.

Secondly, that percentage of atrocities on Hindus which Habib was
prepared to admit as historical, is not to be attributed to the impact
of Islam, but to other factors. Sometimes Islam was used as a
justification post factum, but this was deceptive. In reality economic
motives were at work. The Hindus amassed all their wealth in temples and
therefore Muslim armies plundered these temples.

Thirdly, according to Habib there was also a racial factor: these
Muslims were mostly Turks, savage riders from the steppes who would need
several centuries before getting civilized by the wholesome influence of
Islam. Their inborn barbarity cannot be attributed to the doctrines of
Islam.

Finally, the violence of the Islamic warriors was of minor importance in
the establishment of Islam in India. What happened was not so much a
conquest, but a *shift in public opinion*: when the urban working-class
heard of Islam and realized it now had a choice between Hindu law
(smrti) and Muslim law (shariat), it chose the latter.

Mohammed Habib's excise in history-rewriting cannot stand the test of
historical criticism on any score. We can demonstrate this with the
example of Sultan Mahmud Ghaznavi (997-1030), already mentioned, who
carried out a number of devastating raids in Sindh, Gujrat and Punjab.
This Ghaznavi was a Turk, certainly, but in many respects he was not a
barbarian: he patronized arts and literature (including the great
Persian poet Firdausi, who would end up in trouble because his patron
suspected him of apostasy, and the Persian but Arabic-writing historian
Albiruni) and was a fine calligraphist himself. The undeniable barbarity
of his anti-Hindu campaigns cannot be attributed to his ethnic stock.
His massacres and acts of destruction were merely a replay of what the
Arab Mohammed bin Qasim had wrought in Sindh in 712-15. He didn't care
for material gain: he left rich mosques untouched, but poor Hindu
temples met the same fate at his hands as the richer temples. He turned
down a Hindu offer to give back a famous idol in exchange for a huge
ransom: *I prefer to appear on Judgement Day as an idol-breaker rather
than an idol-seller.* The one explanation that covers all the relevant
facts, is that he was driven to his barbarous acts by his ideological
allegiance to Islam. There is no record of his being welcomed by urban
artisans as a liberator from the oppressive Hindu social system. On the
contrary, his companion Albiruni testifies how all the Hindus had an
inveterate aversion for all Muslims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Marxists

In *Communalism and the Writing of indian History*, Romila Thapar,
Harbans Mukhia and Bipan Chandra, professors at Jawaharlal Nehry
University (JNU, the Mecca of *secularism* and negationism) in Delhi,
write that the interpretation of medieval wars as religious conflicts is
in fact a back- projection of contemporary religious conflict
artificially created for political purposes. In Bipan Chandra's famous
formula, *communalism is not a dinosaur*, it is a strictly modern
phenomenon. They explicitly deny that before the modern period there
existed such a thing as Hindu identity or Muslim identity. Conflicts
could not have been between Hindus and Muslims, only between rulers or
classes who incidentally also belonged to one religious community or the
other. They point to the conflicts within the communities It is of
course a fact that some Hindus collaborated with the Muslim rulers, but
that also counted for the British colonial rulers, who are for that no
less considered as foreign oppressors. For that matter, in the Jewish
ghetto in Warsaw the Nazis employed Jewish guards, in their search for
absconding Jews they employed Jewish informers, and in their policy of
deportation they even sought the co-operation of the Zionist movement:
none of this can disprove Nazi- Jewish enmity. It is also a fact that
the Muslim rulers sometimes made war among each other, but that was
equally true for Portuguese, French and British colonizers, who fought
some wars on Indian territory: they were just as much part of a single
colonial movement with a common colonial ideology, and all the brands of
colonialism were equally the enemies of the indian freedom movement.
Even in the history of the Crusades, that paradigm of religious war, we
hear a lot of battles between one Christian-Muslim coalition and
another: these do not falsify the over-all characterization of the
Crusades as a war between Christians and Muslims (triggered by the
destruction of Christian churches by Muslims).

After postulating that conflicts between Hindus and Muslims as such were
non-existent before the modern period, the negationists are faced with
the need to explain how this type of conflict was born after centuries
of a misunderstood non-existence. The Marxist explanation is a
conspiracy theory: the separate communal identity of Hindus and Muslims
is an invention of the sly British colonialists. They carried on a
*divide and rule* policy, and therefore they incited the communal
separateness. As the example par excellence, prof. R.S. Sharma mentions
the 19th -century 8-volume work by Elliott and Dowson, *The History of
India as Told by its own Historians*. This work does indeed paint a very
grim picture of Muslim hordes who attack the Pagans with merciless
cruelty. But this picture was not a concoction by the British
historians: as the title of their work says, they had it all from
indigenous historiographers, most of them Muslims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The original source material leaves us in no doubt that conflicts often
erupted on purely religious grounds, even against the political and
economical interests of the contending parties. The negationists' tactic
therefore consists in keeping this original testimony out of view. A
good example is Prof. Gyanendra Pandey's recent book, *"The Construction
of Communalism in Colonial North India"*. As the title clearly says,
Pandey asserts that *communalism* (the Hindu-Muslim conflict) had been
*constructed* by the British for colonial purposes anmd out of colonial
prejuidices, was later interiorized by Indians looking for new,
politically profitable forms of organization in modern colonial society.
This is like saying that anti-Judaism is a construction of modern
capitalists to divide the working class (the standard Marxist
explanation for all kinds of racism), while concealing the copious
medieval testimony of anti-Judaism on undeniably non-capitalist grounds.
Prof. Pandey effectively denies a millenniumful of testimonies to
Islamic persecution of the Indian (*Hindu*) Kafirs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.5 Foreign Support For Indian Negationism

Some foreign authors, influenced by Indian colleagues, have also added a
big dose of negationism to their work on Indian history. For instance,
Percival Spear, co-author (with Romila Thapar) of the *Penguin History
of India*, writes: *"Aurangzeb's supposed intolerance is little more
than a hostile legend based on isolated acts such as the erection of a
mosque on a temple site in Benares."*

........ destroyed temple. He ordered all temples destroyed, among them
the Kashi Vishvanath, one of the most sacred places of Hinduism, and had
mosques built on a number of cleared temple sites. All other Hindu
sacred places within his reach equally suffered destruction, with
mosques built on them; among them, Krishna's birth temple in Mathura,
the rebuilt Somnath temple on the coast of Gujrat, the Vishnu temple
replaced with the Alamgir mosque now overlooking Benares, the
Treta-ka-Thakur temple in Ayodhya. The number of temples destroyed by
Aurangzeb is counted in 4, if not in 5 figures. According to the
official court chronicle, Aurangzeb *"ordered all provincial governors
to destroy all schools and temples of the Pagans and to make a complete
end to all Pagan teachings and practices"*. The chronicle sums up the
destructions like this: *"Hasan Ali Khan came and said that 172 temples
in the area had been destroyed... His majesty went to Chittor, and 63
temples were destroyed... Abu Tarab, appointed to destroy the
idol-temples of Amber, reported that 66 temples had been razed to the
ground."*

In quite a number of cases, inscriptions on mosques and local tradition
do confirm that Aurangzeb built them in forcible replacement of temples
(some of these inscriptions have been quoted in Sitaram Goel: Hindu
Temples, vol.2, along with a number of independent written accounts).
Aurangzeb's reign ws marked by never-ending unrest and rebellions,
caused by his anti-Hindu policies, which included the reimposition of
the jizya and other zimma rules, and indeed the demolition of temples.

Aurangzeb did not stop at razing temples: their users too were levelled.
There were not just the classical massacres of thousands of resisters,
Brahmins, Sikhs. What gives a more pointed proof of Aurangzeb's
fanaticism, is the execution of specific individuals for specific reason
of intolerance. To name the best-known ones: Aurangzeb's brother Dara
Shikoh was executed because of *apostasy* (i.e. taking an interest in
Hindu philosophy), and the Sikh guru Tegh Bahadur was beheaded because
of his objecting to Aurangzeb's policy of forcible conversions in
general, and in particular for refusing to become a Muslim himself.
Short, Percival Spear's statement that Aurangzeb's fanaticism is but a
hostile legend, is a most serious case of negationism.

An example of a less blatant (i.e. more subtle) form of negationism in
Western histories of India, is the India entry in the Encyclopaedia
Brittannica. Its chapter on the Sultanate period (which was much more
bloody than even the Moghul period) does not mention any persecutions
and massacres of Hindus by Muslims, except that Firuz Shah Tughlaq
*"made largely unsuccessful attempts to convert his Hindu subjects and
sometimes persecuted them"*. The article effectively obeys the
negationist directive that *"characterization of the medieval period as
a time of Hindu- Muslim conflict is forbidden"*.

It also contains blissful nonsense about communal amity It also contains
blissful nonsense about communal amity in places where the original
sources only mention enmity. Thus, it says that Bahmani sultan Tajuddin
Firuz extracted tribute payments and the hand of the king's daughter
from the Hindu bastion Vijayanagar after two military campaigns, and
that this resulted in *"the establishment of an apparently amicable
relationship between the two rulers"*. Jawaharlal Nehru considered the
induction of Hindu women in Muslim harems as the cradle of *composite
culture* (his euphemism for Hindu humiliation), but it is worse if even
the venerable Encyclopedia considers the terms of debate as a sign of
friendship. At any rate, the article goes on to observe naively that
*peace* lasted only for ten years, when Vijaynagar forces inflicted a
crushing defeat on Firuz. In this case, the more circumspect form of
negationism is at work: keeping the inconvenient facts out of the
readers' view, and manipulating the terminology.

An American historian's book is introduced thus: *"In this book \[Public
Arenas and the Emergence of Communalism in North India\], Sandra Freitag
examines one of the central problems of modern Indian history, the
Hindu-Muslim conflict, with new and provocative insight. She challenges
long-standing interpretations by defining this conflict as a developing
social process groups, not simply *Hindu* or *Muslim*, in highly
specific local contexts bound together in a changing institutional
order."*

This sophisticated verbiage cannot conceal that the book's approach is
merely the standard secularist version propagated by Indian
establishment historians since decades. There is nothing *new and
provocative* about a book that claims to explain communalism without
touching on its single most important determinant, viz. the doctrine
laid down in Islamic scripture, and that blurs the clear-cut process of
India's communalization by Islam with the help of scapegoats like
*colonialism*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
