+++
title = "02 CHAPTER ONE THE DISPUTE AT SIDHPUR"

+++
**CHAPTER ONE**

**THE DISPUTE AT SIDHPUR**

The Fourth Annual Report of the Minorities’ Commission submitted to the
President of India through the Ministry of Home Affairs on April 19,
1983, carries an account of a dispute over the Jãmi‘ Masjid at Sidhpur
in the Mehsana District of Gujarat. The account raises some significant
questions about certain aspects of Islam as a religion and the character
of Muslim rule in medieval India. We have to go to primary source
materials in order to find satisfactory answers to these questions.

Sidhpur is a Taluka town, sixty-four miles north of Ahmadabad. It is
situated on the left bank of the river Saraswati, fifteen miles upstream
of ANhilwãD PãTan, the old capital of Gujarat before Ahmadabad was
founded in the first quarter of the fifteenth century. “In a part of the
town,” says the Commission’s Report, “is located what is known as
Rudramahãlaya complex. This complex was built by Siddhraj Jayasimha in
the 12th century… This temple seems to have been destroyed partly by
Ulugh Khan in AD 1297-98 and partly by Ahmedshah in AD 1415. Some of the
cubicles and a number of pillars on the Western side of the temple it
would appear were later converted into a mosque.”^([1](#1))

At the dawn of independence in 1947, Sidhpur was in the territory of
Baroda, the princely state ruled by the Maratha house of the GãekwãDs.
“The princely state of Baroda,” proceeds the Report, “had treated the
complex consisting of the mosque and the remnants of the temple as a
monument of historical importance. Subsequently, by virtue of an
agreement between the Trustees and the Archaeological Survey of India on
31st March, 1954, the mosque was declared as a national monument and its
maintenance and protection were taken over by the Archaeological Survey
of India. One of the terms of this agreement was that the mosque would
continue to be used by the Muslims for offering prayers .”^([2](#2))

The Trustees of the Jãmi‘ Masjid, however, became dissatisfied with the
Archaeological Survey which, they complained, was not doing its duty
towards maintenance of the mosque. “Subsequently,” continues the Report,
“a dispute arose between the Trustees of the mosque and the officials of
the Archaeological Department with regard to the maintenance of the
mosque as according to the Trustees, necessary repairs to the mosque
were not being carried out by the Archaeological Department and the
mosque was in danger of falling down. These disputes led to some
litigation in the High Court which, however, ended in a compromise. An
undertaking was given by the Archaeological Department in terms of the
compromise that they would carry out the necessary repairs to the
mosque. It is alleged that the undertaking was not given effect to and
this resulted in further litigation which again ended in a compromise.
Under the fresh compromise terms, the Archaeological Department again
gave an undertaking to carry out the repairs of the mosque and also to
lay out a garden in the courtyard of the mosque. Unfortunately, this
compromise again did not bring about a final settlement between the
Trustees of the mosque and the Archaeological Department. According to
the Muslims, the Archaeological Survey of India, instead of carrying out
repairs to the mosque, started digging operations which exposed the
relics of the temples and also the rich sculptural carvings on the two
wings of the mosque. These exposures appear to have attracted the
attention of the Hindus and they demanded that not only should these
ancient temple relics be preserved but that the mosque should also no
longer be used by the Muslims for offering prayers or they may also be
allowed to worship the Siva Linga discovered during the excavations
within the premises of the mosque.”^([3](#3))

The Minorities’ Commission came into the picture on October 4, 1979 when
it received a letter from the Trustees of the mosque, “conveying the
apprehensions of the Muslims of Sidhpur that the Hindus were trying to
usurp the Jama Masjid.”^([4](#4)) The letter from the Trustees
reported: “On the 6th September, 1979, one Yogeshwar Dutt had illegally
led a huge crowd into the mosque and instigated them to usurp it. He
again entered the mosque on 2nd October, 1979 and demanded that Namaz in
the Jama Masjid should be stopped and also incited the Hindus to
demolish the mosque.”^([5](#5)) The Commission referred the matter to
the Director General of the Archaeological Survey of India and called
for a report.

But before the Commission could receive a reply from the Survey, “Begum
Ayesha Sheikh, MLA, of the Gujarat Assembly wrote to the Chairman,
Minorities’ Commission about the threats to which the local Muslims were
being continually subjected by the majority community and especially the
Jan Sangh and the RSS elements for their use of the Jama Masjid and that
this had created a serious communal tension in the town.”^([6](#6)) The
Commission wrote to the Government of Gujarat on December 7, 1979 and
asked for a factual report. “On 16th January, 1980,” says the
Commission’s Report, “Government of Gujarat denied any RSS hand in the
demand of the local Hindus for conversion of the Jama Masjid at Sidhpur
into a temple as alleged. The State Government further reported that the
dispute between the Muslims and the Hindus about the use of the Jama
Masjid had been going on for quite some time past and that the local
police and State Government were aware of the situation. They also
assured the Commission that there was no possibility of any communal
trouble at Sidhpur.”^([7](#7))

A Hindu-Muslim riot, however, broke out at Sidhpur on March 14, 1980 and
took some toll of limbs and property. “The critical stage,” records the
Commission, “was reached on 14th March, 1980, when a group of Hindus led
by a local Sadhu started Bhajans at the Rudramahalaya. At about 10.00
A.M. a group of boys started closing shops and people started coming
towards the Rudramahalaya. Everything was peaceful till the Muslims
started assembling for their Namaz around 1.00 P.M. By 1.15 P.M. both
Bhajans and Namaz were going on simultaneously. According to reports,
some Muslims from the houses adjoining the Rudramahalaya started
throwing stones on the Hindus. The Hindus retaliated. By this time about
800 to 900 Hindus and about 300 to 400 Muslims had collected. The
police, anticipating trouble, was on the spot along with the Taluka
Magistrate. They burst teargas shells to disperse the crowd. The Muslims
who had to pass through Hindu localities before reaching their houses,
were stoned by the Hindus from housetops and lanes. Six shops were
forced open and looted. Two of them belonged to the Hindus. The jeep of
the Mamalatdar was also burnt and the Mamalatdar himself also sustained
some minor injuries due to the stone throwing. In all 72 persons
sustained injuries during the incident on the 14th March, 1980. The
situation was brought under control by 2.15 P.m. Curfew was immediately
imposed and the situation at Sidhpur remained peaceful for some time
barring some minor incidents.”^([8](#8))

Begum Ayesha Sheikh again wrote to the Commission on March 28, 1980,
reporting the communal trouble that had broken out on March 14. “She
also mentioned that the State Government had been deliberately trying to
play down the gravity of the incident and, therefore, any report
submitted by the State Government would not be fair and impartial. She,
therefore, requested that instead of asking for a report from the State
Government the Minorities’ Commission itself should undertake an
on-the-spot inquiry into the incidents.”^([9](#9))

But before the Commission could decide what to do, another round of
Hindu-Muslim riots took place at Sidhpur on April 8, 1980. “However
again on the 8th April, 1980,” records the Commission, “at about 11.45
A.M. one Muslim was assaulted by three Hindus as a result of which two
Hindus were stabbed by the Muslims. Incidents of assault took place
thereafter in different parts of the town. Curfew was imposed on the 8th
April, 1980, and 42 persons were arrested.”^([10](#10)) On April 14,
“nine important Muslim representatives including one Member of
Parliament met the Chairman and handed over a memorandum on the dispute
and requested the Commission to visit Sidhpur.”^([11](#11))

The Commission, however, could not visit Sidhpur without prior
consultation with the Government of Gujarat. By that time the State had
been placed under Governor’s rule. It had neither an elected Assembly
nor a popular Ministry. Shri K.T. Satarawala, Adviser to the Governor of
Gujarat, came to New Delhi on May 1, 1980 and met the Chairman of the
Commission. After a discussion on the prevailing communal situation at
Sidhpur, it was agreed that the Adviser would send to the Chairman “a
detailed note on the communal incidents which took place during March
and April 1980.”^([12](#12)) The Adviser’s “Note on Rudramahalaya and
Jama Masjid” was duly sent to the Chairman on May 16, 1980.  It was
accompanied by “a map of the area and some photographs.”^([13](#13))

The Note starts by giving a slightly different version of the status of
the Jãmi‘ Masjid under the Baroda State and the frequency of Muslim
prayers in the Masjid. “The erstwhile Baroda State,” says the Note,
“took under protection in 1936-37 the Toranas and other architectural
remains of the Rudramahalaya *excluding the Masjid portion*. After the
merger of the State, the Rudramahalaya and other State protected
monuments were declared as Monuments of National Importance under the
1951 Act. Subsequently, the Jami Masjid being originally a part of the
Rudramahalaya was also declared a monument of National
Importance. However, as it was a monument in religious use, an agreement
under the Ancient Monuments and Sites and Remains Act was entered into
between the Trustees and the Archaeological Survey of India on behalf of
the President of India on the 31st March, 1954. At that time, the
monument was used *for Friday prayers only* and that too by a small
number of persons.”^([14](#14))

Next, the Note provides the background before the dispute arose between
the Survey and the Trustees. “In 1959,” proceeds the Note, “the then
Superintending Archaeologist recommended that the modern buildings
covering the view of the Rudramahalaya and Jami Masjid should be removed
for improving the environs and to throw open the grand edifice to
view. The Superintending Archaeologist recommended the removal of the
intermediate wall also as it was a modern accretion. The proposals were
accepted and the acquisition of buildings was undertaken.”^([15](#15))

It took the Survey ten long years to acquire the modern buildings.
“After compensation was paid,” continues the Note, “the buildings were
handed over to the Survey in 1969. The Joint Director General (later
Director General) inspected the site on 3.6.69 and after discussion with
the Collector, Mehsana, and the Trustees of the Masjid, drew up an
Inspection Note in which he instructed that (i) the demolition of
buildings should be done in one sweep (ii) the compound wall of the
Masjid may be retained with necessary modifications to include the
acquired area and (iii) the architectural remains that may be found in
the clearance operations should be preserved as they are likely to throw
light on the plan of the Rudramahalaya and (iv) a garden should be laid
out in the acquired area.”^([16](#16))

For various reasons, the Survey could start operations at Sidhpur only
after ten more years had elapsed.  “As the Trustees were pressing for
pulling down the acquired houses, the Superintending Archaeologist,
Baroda, inspected the site early in May, 1979 and decided to implement
the decision of the Joint Director General of Archaeology by pulling
down the acquired houses.”^([17](#17)) The operations were started on
May 29, 1980. “As the northern wall was very shabby and in a dilapidated
condition, it had to be repaired after pulling down. The digging of the
acquired area was necessary for the preparation of a garden. He
discussed the operation with the Trustees but before any step to pull
down the compound wall was taken, the Trustees filed a Writ Petition in
the High Court on 12th June, 1979 and an injunction asking the
Archaeological Survey of India to maintain *status quo* in the Masjid
area was issued.”^([18](#18))

The Note gives greater details about the litigation and the compromises
that followed. The Writ Petition No. 1662 of 1979 versus Union of India
was filed by six Trustees of the Jãmi‘ Masjid. They prayed for “(a) an
order or direction permanently restraining the correspondent, his
servants and agents from demolishing the surrounding buildings situated
on the southern side of the land bearing survey No. 37 of Sidhpur town
in Mehsana district in which the ancient Mosque named Jumma Masjid is
situated, without constructing a protecting wall surrounding the said
Masjid; (b) to issue an order or direction directing the respondent to
erect or allow the petitioners to erect a compound wall surrounding the
said survey No. 37 of the town of Sidhpur in Mehsana district; (c) issue
an injunction restraining the respondent, his servants or agents from
demolishing the walls of the buildings on the southern side and northern
side of survey No. 37 which have yet not been demolished by
him.”^([19](#19))

The Survey decided to contest the Writ Petition. “Shri B.L. Nagarch,
Superintending Archaeologist, Western Circle, Baroda, filed an affidavit
in reply in the Gujarat High Court in July, 1979 wherein he stated that
the purpose of demolishing die modern buildings situated around the
Jumma Masjid and Rudramahalaya acquired by the Government of India was
to arrest further damage caused by the modern accretions and natural
causes such as rain and growth of vegetation, that it is the
responsibility of the Department to preserve the Masjid and the
Rudramahal and they have not interfered with the established religious
usage of a portion near the Jumma Masjid and that the Department has
taken clearance work necessary for undertaking structural repairs to the
roof and back wall which is out of plumb and has some cavities. He
further stated that the structures being demolished were not within the
Jumma Masjid but outside the monument, that the acquisition was solely
with a view to undertaking the repairs to the monument and improve the
surroundings by laying a garden. He further stated that the Department
would only demolish the modern wall and not any ancient
structure.”^([20](#20))

The Honourable Judge suggested a compromise as he felt that the
Archaeological Survey was only trying to improve the monument and its
surroundings. “A ‘Compromise’ was then arrived at according to which the
compound walls were to be repaired and a garden was to be laid out in
the courtyard of the Masjid. Its back wall was also to be
repaired.”^([21](#21)) The Trustees withdrew their Writ Petition on July
30, 1979.

The ‘Compromise’, however, did not work. “While digging for examining
the foundation of shrines and the back wall of the Masjid, important
temple remains were found on the west and the north. According to para 3
of ‘Compromise’ when garden operations (digging) were started in the
open courtyard temple remains were found there also.” The Trustees
started “hindering further work.” The Superintending Archaeologist
appealed to the Collector of the District. The Collector called a
meeting at Mehsana on November 30, 1979. “The Trustees were also present
in the meeting. It was agreed that further digging should be stopped and
that measures to preserve the temple remains such as the provision of a
canopy over it could be thought of. It was pointed out that area within
the courtyard for the garden was not used for prayers as could be made
out from the debris etc., that were lying there.”^([22](#22))

This agreement also did not work. “Shri A.S. Quereshi, Advocate for the
Trustees, issued a notice dated the 6th Feb. 1980 to the Superintendent,
Archaeological Department asking the Department to build the compound
walls as per the compromise and *cover up the temple remains*. The
Supdt. Archaeological Deptt. explained in person the importance of the
discoveries made and the need for revision of the compromise in the
interest of preserving the precious cultural heritage of the country. As
Shri Quereshi wanted to visit the site along with Supdt. Archaeological
Deptt. he went to Sidhpur on the 8th March, 1980. At first, he agreed to
the preservation but later he insisted on closing the trenches in his
very presence that day. The Supdt. Archaeological Department ordered
closure of the trenches and construction of compound wall and both the
works were started in his presence.”^([23](#23))

The Hindus of Sidhpur objected to the covering of the temple remains
that had been uncovered. Tension mounted in the town as reports spread
that the Survey was filling up the trenches. “Upto the 14th March, 1980,
a major part of the complex was covered and the northern compound wall
was constructed over some length but then the trouble started and the
labourers refused to work.”^([24](#24)) On March 15, 1980, the Puratatva
Sanskrutik Abhyas and Sansodhan Mandal, an organisation formed by some
Hindus of Sidhpur in January, 1980, filed a Civil Application No. 644 of
1980 against the Union of India and Mr. S.R. Rao, Superintending
Archaeologist. “Their prayer is mainly that the excavated area in the
courtyard of the Masjid should not be filled up and that *status quo*
should be maintained in the excavated area.”^([25](#25)) The High Court
granted a stay and the Archaeological Survey could not proceed further
with the construction of the compound wall.

Yet another attempt at a compromise was made after the riot on March 14
had been controlled. “Soon after the incident,” says the Commission’s
Report, “a series of meetings were held by the District Magistrate with
the representatives of the Muslims and Hindus to work out an amicable
solution. An agreement was reached between the representatives of the
two communities to the effect that the Muslims would forgo their right
of prayer at the Jama Masjid on the following conditions: (a) a suitable
plot of land situated near the railway station is allotted to them for
the construction of an alternative Masjid; (b) pending the construction
of the Masjid by the Muslims on this plot of land, they should be
allowed to offer their Namaz at the Jama Masjid; and (c) the Jama Masjid
should be maintained as a national monument by the Archaeological
Department and should not be open for any other use.”^([26](#26))

But this compromise made by the Muslims of Sidhpur was rejected by some
Muslim organisations at the State level. “However, on the instigation of
some of the Muslim organisations,” proceeds the Report, “the local
Muslim leaders, who had earlier agreed in the presence of the
Distt. Magistrate to the above terms of settlement conveyed their
decision to wait until a decision was taken on the terms of settlement
at the State level. At the same time, some of the Muslim organisations
stepped up their demand for allowing the Muslims to use the Jama Masjid
for Namaz.”^([27](#27))

The Note from the Government of Gujarat gives some more details in this
context. “On the 26th March, 1980, Her Excellency the Governor visited
Sidhpur. She met both Hindus and Muslims and advised them that they
should select five persons and then sit together and find out an
amicable solution. Since both the parties wanted some Government
representative to remain present during the discussion, the Collector
was instructed to help them. The same afternoon i.e. on the 26th March,
both the parties met and the above proposal was put up by the Muslims
and discussed at length. It was decided that they should effect this
agreement before the High Court the next day. Next day, they left for
Ahmadabad but on the intervention of certain organisations such as the
All India Muslim League, Jamat-e-Islami, Gujarat Avkaf and Trust
Federation, they decided to wait till a decision at the Gujarat level
was taken.”^([28](#28))

Finally, eight Muslim leaders joined together to file a further Writ in
the Gujarat High Court on April 5, 1980. The Note gives their names and
designations^([29](#29)) as follows:-

1\. Shri Gulzarsha Ahmedshah Hakim, Managing Trustee of Jumma Masjid,
Sidhpur.  
2. Haji Hussainbhai Habibur Mansuri, Trustee Jumma Masjid Trust,
Sidhpur.  
3. Haji Ibrahim Haji Issak Quoreshi, Vice-President,
Jamiet-ul-Ulema-e-Hind, Branch Sidhpur.  
4. Imtiskhan Mahabubkhan Pathan, Secretary, Jamiet-ul-Ulema-e-Hind,
Sidhpur Branch.  
5. Maulvi Dawoodbhai Haji Suleman, President, Jamiet-ul-Ulma-e-Hind,
Mehsana Distt. Branch-Resident-Patan.  
6. Maulvi Mohammed Ussian Fateh Mohammed, President, Uttar Gujarat
Masjid Bachao Samiti, Village Bhagal, Taluka Palanpur.  
7. Abbas Tajmohammed, Vice-President of Uttar Gujarat Masjid Bachao
Samiti, Village Bhagal, Tal-Palanpur.  
8. Dr. Rehmatulla Ahmedullah Hakim, President, Gujarat Muslim Vakf and
Trust Federation, Ahmadabad.

“Their prayers,” according to the Note, “are: (a) Jumma Masjid should be
declared Masjid open for offering Namaz; (b) To fill up the excavation
at the floor of the ‘Kibla’ (Western) wall and in the courtyard of the
Masjid before 1.5.80; (c) To put a compound wall where it existed before
and it should be of stone and high enough to prevent outside
interference; (d) To cover the entire courtyard with stone slab flooring
and to rebuild muazams quarter with stone slab; (e) To give permission
to the Trustees to have electric points in adequate number.”^([30](#30))

The Muslim Organisations, according to the Note, adopted some other
methods also for pressing their demands. “Some of the organisations
appear to have taken the decision that telegrams should be sent to
Government requesting to allow Muslims to use the Jumma Masjid for Namaz
and accordingly, a large number of telegrams have been received by
Government from the Muslims of Gujarat and Bombay.”^([31](#31))
Again: “The Muslims appear to have also decided to send printed letters
to Government requesting that any compromise or any writings regarding
conversion of Jumma Masjid at Sidhpur into a protected monument will not
be binding on them. Accordingly, more than 2400 printed letters have
been received by Government.”^([32](#32))

Having “considered the totality of the situation in the light of the
pepresentation/memorandum received from the Muslims of Sidhpur and the
report sent by the Adviser to the Governor,” the Commission decided to
visit Sidhpur for an “on-the-spot study of the dispute.”^([33](#33)) But
the visit had to be postponed due to various reasons. “The Commission
was finally able to visit Sidhpur on 2nd November, 1980, when it
inspected the site of the Jama Masjid and also held discussions with
representatives of the Muslims and Hindus at Sidhpur and the State Govt.
officials.”^([34](#34)) The list of persons who “appeared before the
Commission in connection with the dispute,” names 15 Muslims, 7
Officials and 5 Hindus.^([35](#35))

As a result of the discussion the Commission suggested an 8-point
formula for settlement: “(1) The Rudramahalaya complex including the
mosque would be retained as a national monument. (2) The Mosque would be
maintained in its original shape. The sanctity of the mosque would be
ensured by the A.S.I. and the State Government. Also the sancity of the
newly exposed temple on either side of the mosque would be maintained.
(3) The excavations on the western side of the mosque as well as those
in the courtyard on the eastern side of the mosque will be filled up.
Ancient relics found in the present excavations would be removed before
the filling up. The existing Western Qibla wall of the mosque proper
would be restored to its original condition and strengthened. The outer
wall which was covering the two towers on either side containing
sculptures would not be rebuilt. (4) No worship in any form would be
offered by any community within the precincts of the Rudramahalaya
Complex. (5) The A.S.I. would not make any further excavations within
the mosque area formerly enclosed by the compound wall. (6) No gathering
for any religious purpose would be permitted within the Rudramahalaya
complex. (7) The enforcement of these items would be guaranteed by the
State Government and the Central Government. (8) The State Government
would provide at nominal cost an alternative site for the construction
of a new mosque at the Government Dharmashala near the clock tower after
removing all existing cabins and evicting the occupants of the
Dharmashala.”^([36](#36))

The formula was hailed by the then Home Minister and Chief Secretary of
the Government of Gujarat.  They assured the Commission that “they would
be able to bring about a solution of the dispute to the satisfaction of
both the communities on the basis of the above-mentioned
terms.”^([37](#37)) But it did not lead to a final settlement. The
Commission records at the end of its Report on this dispute: “Five
months have elapsed since the Commission visited Sidhpur and settled
most of the differences between the two communities over the use of the
Jama Masjid and the Rudramahalaya complex. The Home Minister and the
representatives of the State Government had extended the assurance to
the Commission that they would be able to bring about a satisfactory
solution to the above dispute on the basis of the terms of settlement
suggested by the Commission within a reasonable span of time. However,
no final settlement seems to have been reached yet.”^([38](#38))

The story as related in the Commission’s report combined with the Note
from the Government of Gujarat tells us a few things about the behaviour
patterns of the different parties involved in the dispute - the Trustees
of the Jãmi‘ Masjid, the Archaeological Survey of India and the
Government of Gujarat. It also gives us a glimpse of the quality and
character of leadership thrown up by the two communities in the dispute
over a place of worship. But what interests us primarily in the present
study is the “temple remains” exposed by the Archaeological Survey of
India in and around the Jãmi‘ Masjid. These “temple remains” point
towards a far more momentous story which has yet to be told.  
 

**II**

A picture of the “temple remains” exposed in the Jãmi’ Masjid area at
Sidhpur has to be pieced together from five sources which we have
arranged according to the extent of details given. First, we have the
Note from die Government of Gujarat. Secondly, we have the reply
received by the Minorities’ Commission from the Archaeological Survey of
India. Thirdly, we have the Annual Reports of the Archaeological Survey
of India for 1979-80 and 1980-81. Fourthly, we have a description in the
Minorities’ Commission’s Report of what its members saw during their
visit to Sidhpur on November 2, 1980. Lastly, we have an article by B.L.
Nagarch included in a commemoration volume brought out by a private
publishing house in 1987. Shri Nagarch was one of the Superintending
Archaeologists at Sidhpur at the time the “temple remains” were
sighted.  
 

**The Note from the Government of Gujarat**

The main purpose of the Note was to narrate the incidents which took
place at Sidhpur during March and April, 1980. It refers to “temple
remains” only when the narration touches them while describing the
dispute between the Trustees of the Jãmi‘ Masjid and the Archaeological
Survey. The narration mentions “temple remains” several time in
different contexts. But we are left wondering whether they are
architectural or sculptural or both.  
 

**The Archaeological Survey of India**

The Minorities’ Commission had called for a report from the Director
General of the Archaeological Survey of India immediately after it
received on October 4, 1979 a letter from the Trustees of the Jãmi’
Masjid stating that the Hindus of Sidhpur were trying to usurp the
Masjid. The date on which the Commission wrote to the Survey is not
given in the Commission’s Report, nor the date on which it received a
reply from the Survey. All we have is one para incorporated in the
Commission’s Report. It says, “The matter was taken up with the
Archaeological Survey of India which reported that ruins of Rudra
Mahalaya Complex and Jama Masjid at Sidhapur, though forming one Complex
were being protected individually under the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Declaration of Places of National
Importance) and were being preserved on the lines they were originally
protected. The dispute arose out of demolition of the surrounding
buildings, while constructing a protective wall around the Masjid, which
exposed some Hindu idols within the precincts of the
mosque.”^([39](#39))

The Annual Report of Archaeological Survey of India for 1979-80
published in 1983 has three entries on what was discovered at Sidhpur.
The first entry is in Chapter IV which deals with “Other Important
Discoveries”, State by State. We find the following entry under Gujarat:

> 7. SCULPTURES, SIDHPUR, DISTRICT MEHSANA - Shri P.K. Trivedi of the
> Western Circle of the Survey, discovered sculptures of Hindu and Jaina
> pantheons, assignable variously from the tenth to eighteenth century
> AD and an inscribed brass image of Vishnu dated Samvat 1485 (AD
> 1429). ^([40](#40))

Next, it has the following two entries in Chapter IX dealing with
“Preservation of Monuments” in different Circles of the Survey:

> 288\. JAMI-MASJID, SIDHPUR, DISTRICT MEHSANA - The dilapidated western
> wall of the mosque is being repaired. While carrying out demolition
> and clearance of wooden structures from the acquired area the remains
> of some earlier structures have been found. The work is in progress.
>
> 289. RUDRAMAHALAYA, SIDHPUR, DISTRICT MEHSANA - The clearance of
> debris after demolition of the modern buildings from the acquired area
> yielded number of loose sculptures, including remains of an earlier
> temple.^([41](#41))

The publication has sixty-four plates carrying one hundred and thirty
photographs. No photograph of what was found at Sidhpur has been
included.

The Annual Report for 1980-81 also published in 1983 has one entry in
Chapter IV dealing with “Other Important Discoveries.” It says:

> 13. MEDIEVAL SCULPTURES, SIDHPUR, DISTRICT MEHSANA - B.L. Nagarch,
> P.K. Trivedi and H. Michael of the Western Circle of the Survey
> noticed sculptures of seated Uma-Mahesvara, a royal worshipping
> couple, a head of Siva (pl. XXXVI A) and a fragment of *Salabhanjika*
> recovered from the Jami Mosque.  All these are assignable to circa
> twelfth century AD.^([42](#42))

The publication has fifty-eight plates carrying one hundred and forty
photographs. Only one photograph, A on plate XXXVI, shows the “Head of
Siva” found at Sidhpur.  
 

**Report of the Minorities’ Commission**

The Report has recorded in eight paras what its members saw with their
own eyes while visiting the site at Sidhpur. Out of them, six paras -
1-2, 5-6, and 8 - relate to “temple remains”. They are as follows:

1\. A portion of the courtyard of the mosque in the east was dug upto a
depth of 10 ft. In a portion of this pit a stone Nandi (bull) was
embedded in the earth. We also saw several pieces of temple architecture
which had been dug up and kept in the pit.

2\. The open site to the North of the mosque was also found similarly
dug up and several temple relics were lying exposed in these pits.

3\. There were two cubicles, one at the Northern and the other one at
the Southern side of the mosque. In the Northern cubicle, there was a
Siva Linga embedded in the earth and an idol carving embedded in the
wall while in the Southern cubicle there was only an idol carving in the
wall but no Siva Linga.

5\. The Northern and Southern wings of the mosque which had hitherto
been covered up were now lying exposed obviously as a result of removal
of the covering material on these two wings disclosing rich temple
carvings.

6\. The foundation of the Northern wing was also lying exposed and it
also revealed rich temple carvings.

8. A portion of the ground on the Western side of the mosque was also
found dug up and this was found to contain some temple relics as well as
the stone slabs which had been removed from the outer wall of the
mosque.^([43](#43))

It may be mentioned that by the time the Commission came to Sidhpur, a
major part of the excavations had been covered up. The Note from the
Government of Gujarat states that, “upto the 14th March, 1980, a major
part of the complex was covered and the northern compound wall was
constructed over some length…”^([44](#44))  
 

**Article by B.L. Nagarch**

B.L. Nagarch is a trained archaeologist familiar with the technical
language used for describing details of Hindu temples. He also knows how
to identify and describe various sculptures and decorative designs. As
the major part of his article is devoted to “temple remains”, we have to
cite him at some length and under several sections.  
 

**1. The Buried Temples**

“For carrying out repairs to the bulged western wall of the masjid and
overhanging foundation of the south-western shrine, it was necessary to
examine the foundation by excavating. Ornamental plinth of a pre-Solanki
temple (Period-I) was found in the course of excavation for underpinning
overhanging foundation of south-western shrine. This plinth (jagatî)
consists of a *bhiTTa, kapota* decorated with *kuDûs, karNikã,
tamãla-paTTikã* (frieze decorated with *tamãlapatras*), plain *khura,
kumbha* decorated with half diamond designs and plain *kalaša* (Pl. I).
The dislodged courses of the western wall of the masjid below the ground
level were also revealed during the course of examination of its
foundation by excavation. A Jar *in situ* was also exposed over the
plinth of this pre-Solanki temple.

“The debris near the entrance of masjid was removed. The hidden plinth
of north-western shrine was exposed as a result of excavation for
examining its foundation. During the course of examination of the
foundation of this north-western shrine, the plinth of another
pre-Solanki temple was found (Pl. II). The stone flooring of the plinth
showed the use of clamps and dowels for binding the stones together. The
mouldings of this plinth show from bottom upwards *bhiTTa, kapota*
decorated with *kuDûs, antarapatra, karNikã, antarapatra, tamãlapaTTikã*
carved with *tamãla-patras, khura, kumbha* decorated with half diamond
designs, *kalaša* and *kapota* decorated with *kuDûs*.

“Another exquisitely carved temple attached to the aforesaid pre-Solanki
temple (I) was laid bare in the north-west corner outside the mosque
while excavating for gardening (Pl. III). The plinth of this temple
shows from bottom upwards *bhiTTa, kapota* decorated with *kuDûs,
antarapatra, karNikã, antarapatra, tamãla-paTTikã* carved with
*tamãla-patras, narathara* and *diamonds* in panels. Only the plinth of
the maNDapa of this temple has survived. The sanctum of this temple is
missing. The door-sill of the sanctum door-way is fortunately *in situ*.
The *mandãraka* carved with spiral lotus scroll is flanked on either
side by a bold *kîrtimukha*. A panel on the right of the *kîrtimukha* on
the right depicts worship of GaNeša (Plate-IV).  Four-armed GaNeša is
seated in a niche. He is flanked on the right by a standing male and on
the left by a standing female attendant. The niche is flanked on the
right by a standing female standing in *tribhañga* and carrying *kaTi*
and *kalaša* and on the left by two female attendants, each standing in
*tribhañga* and carrying *kaTi* and upraised in praise of god (*prašansã
mudrã*). GaNeša carries chopped off *parašu, padma* and *modaka-pãtra*.
He wears a *karaNDamukuTa, hãra* and *sarpayajñopavîta*.

“A panel on the left of the *kîrtimukha* on the left shows niche
containing an image of a four-armed Kubera seated in *lalitãsana* with
his consort. He is flanked on the right by a female *chaurî*-bearer
standing in *tribhañga* and holding a *chaurî* by her right hand. The
niche is flanked on the right by two female attendants, each standing in
*tribhañga* and on the left by a male attendant standing in *tribhañga*.
Kubera and his consort wear each a *karaNDamukuTa*. Kubera holds a
purse. His belly has been chopped off.

“A beautifully carved panel shows a fighting scene (Period-IA) with
warriors holding swords in their hands, a horse rider and an elephant
(Pl. V). Another panel on *narathara* depicts a fighting scene with
three warriors holding swords, a galloping horse and a running camel.

“Other noteworthy (Pl. VI) among the scenes carved on the *narathara* is
a hunting scene wherein a man holding a bow and arrow is seen shooting
an arrow at the band of seven deers. (Pl. VII).

“A small shrine of IndrãNî opposite the aforesaid temple IA
(pre-Solanki), was also laid bare during excavation for gardening after
demolishing modern buildings (Pl. VIII). This shrine is composed of two
ornamented pilasters and is surmounted by a *chhadya* carved with lotus
petals. Each of the pilasters shows from bottom upwards *kumbhikã*,
decorated with half-diamond design, plain *kalaša*, shaft showing
square, octagonal and circular sections carved with a human figure,
*kîrtimukha* with pearls coming out, *bharaNî* consisting of *karNîkã*
and *padma* surmounted by vase and foliage motif. The human figure on
the right pilaster is a female standing in *tribhañga* and carrying
*kaTi* and *prašansã mudrã*. Above this is carved the name of the
sculptor VoDa deva in Devanãgarî characters. The human figure on the
left pilaster is a dancing male. Above this is carved the name of the
sculptor as Dadã.

“Four-armed IndrãNî is seated in *lalitãsana* and carries *varadãksha,
modakapãtra*, lotus-stalk and *kamaNDalu*. She wears *karaNDamukuTa,
vaikakshayaka, hãra, keyûras, valayas, nûpuras* and a *sãrî* fastened by
a *mekhalã*. The mount elephant is carved below. On the pedestal is
inscribed the name of the sculptor in Devanãgarî characters (Pl. IX).

“The mouldings of the plinth of north-western shrine with friezes of
sculptures carved on a number of them, were exposed in course of removal
of debris and digging for gardening. They show from bottom upwards
*bhiTTa, bhiTTa*, plain *jãDaMba, antarapatra, karNikã, antarapatra,
grãsapaTTi, gajathara, narathara, khura, kumbha,* decorated with friezes
of sculptures and bejewelled *kalaSa* (Pl. X).  Carvings on the plinth
and parapet of the *sabhãmaNDapa* of north-west shrine were also
revealed during clearance of debris. The full view of the *sabhãmaNDapa*
of north-west shrine was exposed after removing the rubble-and-mud
compound wall (Pl. XI). The plinth of temple II which served as base for
northwest shrine was also revealed (Pl. XII).

“The open area in front of the prayer hall of the masjid with shabby
pavement where shrubs and trees were growing and debris had accumulated
and which was not used for prayer, was excavated for laying out a
garden. While excavating for garden in the eastern part of open
courtyard in front of the prayer hall, the sculpture of an elephant and
remains of a temple were found. The ornamented plinth of this temple
shows from bottom upwards *jãDaMba* decorated with bold lotus-scroll,
*karNikã, kapota* decorated with *kuDûs* and *grãsapaTTi* (Pl. XIII).
The plinth shows that the temple above it was *pañcharatha* in plan. An
underground passage below the plinth of this temple (Period-II) also
came to light. Well polished stones have been used for the construction
of this underground passage. Besides the sculptures of the elephant
mentioned above, a human figure and lotus designs were also found by the
side of the beautifully carved plinth of the temple. This temple found
during excavation for gardening operation is perhaps of the time of
Mûlarãja (Period-II).”^([45](#45))  
 

**2. Smothered Sculptures**

“When the bulged portion of the western wall of the masjid was being
dismantled, it was brought to light that this wall was a double wall.
When the outer wall was dismantled the debris including sculptural and
architectural fragments filled in between the inner and outer wall came
out. There was a difference of one metre between the inner and outer
wall and all this space was filled with debris. It could now be seen
that the inner wall was built out of the *vedikã* pilasters and other
ruins of Rudramahãlaya. When the outer wall was removed, a number of
hidden sculptures of the south-west and north-west shrine, which were
previously hidden due to wall, were also exposed to view (Pl. XIV).
Noteworthy among the sculptures of the south-western shrine are:

1\. A standing *apsaras*.  
2. A standing ascetic.  
3. Four-armed VaruNa standing in *tribhañga*.  
4. Four-armed Vãyu standing in *tribhañga*.  
5. A standing ascetic.  
6. A standing naked ascetic.  
7. Two-armed dancing female-deity holding a sword and a chopped head.  
8. Two-armed female-deity holding *añkuša* and *kapãla*.  
9. A standing ascetic.  
10. A standing female with her right hand upraised and left hand in
kaTi.  
11. A niche-shrine on the northern *bhadra* (central projection)
containing an image of eight-armed ChãmuNDã standing in *tribhañga*.

“Noteworthy among the sculptures of the north-western shrine are: 

1\. A chopped niche.  
2,3. A standing bearded ascetic holding a dagger in his right hand.  
4. Four-armed standing NiRriti with a serpent canopy above his head.  
5. Four-armed standing Yama with his head and hands chopped off.  
6. A standing ascetic holding a *kamaNDalu* in his left hand.  
7. A standing ascetic wearing a *kaupîna*. His right hand is upraised.  
8. Two-armed dancing female-deity. A dancing dwarf male attendant is
seen on her right.  
9. Two-armed standing female-deity.  
10. A standing ascetic.  His right hand is upraised and he holds a knife
by his left hand.  
11. Two-armed dancing female-deity.  
12. A niche-shrine on the southern *bhadra* containing an image of
sixteen-armed Šiva with his right foot upraised and placed on a lotus. A
warrior with a sword is shown below the lotus. Šiva holds *sarpa,
khaTvãñga* and *kheTaka* in his surviving hands. He is
multi-headed.”^([46](#46))  
 

**3. Inside the Qibla Wall of the Masjid**

“While the bulged and out of plumb western wall of the Jami Mosque was
being dismantled the following sculptures and architectural members
embedded inside the wall came to light:-

1\. An elephant rider.  
2. A beautiful head of Šiva.  
3. A dancing *gaNa*.  
4. A bust of a four-armed bearded male-deity.  
5. A bearded male drummer.  
6. Fragments of an elephant.  
7. Three busts of *Šãlabhañjikã* bracket figures.  
8. An image of four-armed dancing Siva (NaTarãja).  
9. Fragments of an *ãmalaka*.  
10. Fragments of *chandrikã*.  
11. Fragments of *SaMvarNã* roof of the *maNDapa*.  
12. Fragments of *šhikhara* decorated with *chaitya-gavãkshas*.  
13. Fragments of *vedikã*, *kakshãsana* and *rãjãsana*.

“Among the sculptures recovered from the western wall of the mosque
noteworthy is a head of Siva wearing elaborately carved *jaTãmukuTa*.
The expression of his face with half open eyes, gracefully carved nose
and prominent chin is serene (Pl. XVI). It measures 40 x 25 x 25
cms.”^([47](#47))  
 

**4. Converted Shrines**

“During the course of dismantling of the western wall of the mosque, two
of the three shrines which were converted into mosque, were also exposed
to view. The debris filled inside them was removed. The shrine on the
southern side has inside it a circular *yonipaTTa* fixed into its floor.
The *šivalinga* above this *yonipaTTa* is missing. The rear wall of this
shrine has niches composed of three pilasters and each surmounted by a
small pediment of *chaitya* arches. One of the niches contains seated
*Umã-Mahešvara* on the mount bull and the other contains a donor couple
(probably King Siddharãja Jaisingh and his queen). The bearded male
(Siddharãja Jaisingh) is shown standing with folded hands in an attitude
of supplication. His queen is standing on his left. On the southwestern
corner is a small water cistern for storage of water (Plate-XVI).

“The ceiling of the shrine is elaborately carved. The architrave of the
ceiling is carved with *padmalatã* and cut-triangles. The ceiling is
carved with a *kîrtimukha* at each corner. This domical ceiling has four
concentric courses of lotuses. The centre of the dome is carved with a
full-blown lotus. It has an elaborately carved door-way. The ceiling of
the antarãla is carved with fine full blown lotuses. The shrine measures
2.08 x 2.15 x 3.07 mtrs.

“The northern shrine measures 2.19 x 2.02 x 2.95 mtrs. internally. 

“The architrave of the ceiling is elaborately carved with lotus scroll
and cut-triangles. Each of the corners of the ceiling is carved with a
*kîrtimukha*. The domical ceiling consists of three courses of lotus
courses of concentric circles. At the centre of the domical ceiling is
carved a full blown lotus. There is a *chandrašilã* in front of the
shrine.

“The shrine has an elaborately carved doorway which has been badly
damaged. The ceiling of the *antarãla* is carved with five full blown
lotuses.

“The northern shrine has inside its sanctum a Šivaliñga installed on a
*yonipaTTa*. The rear wall of the sanctum is carved with two niches, one
of which contains a donor, a royal couple (probably Siddharãja Jaisingh
with his wife). A female is seen holding a parasol above the head of the
bearded king the head of whose wife has been chopped off. The pilasters
of this niche are highly ornamented. The other niche contains an image
of a queen standing in *tribhañga*. Her both hands and head have been
chopped off. She is flanked on either side by two female attendants
standing in *tribhañga*. (Pl. XVIII). Both of these sculptures are of
white marble. The other images which are at present kept in the sanctum
are:

1\. Bust of a dancing *apsaras*, her male attendant holding a parasol
above her head is depicted on her left.  Her right breast has been
Chopped off. It measures 45 x 17 x 12 cms.

2\. Šiva NaTarãja inside a niche with a *makara toraNa*. The niche is
flanked on either side by a standing male attendant. It measures 48 x 58
x 25 cms.

3\. A stone slab carved with a niche composed of two circular pilasters
and surmounted by a small pediment of *chaitya*-arches. The niche is
carved with an elaborate door from which a woman is seen coming out and
catching hold of a child in her right hand. Her head has been chopped
off. The niche is flanked on either side by a dwarf male attendant. It
is made of white sand-stone and measures 70 x 60 x 42 cms.

4\. Four-armed dancing NaTarãja inside a niche, carrying indistinct
*parašu, khaTvãñga* and *kapãla*. It is made of white sand-stone and
measures 40 x 55 x 8 cms.

5\. Head of a deity wearing *karaNDamukuTa*. It is made of white
sand-stone and measures 20 x 15 x 15 cms.

6\. A dancing male. It measures 35 x 27 x 7 cms.  Made of white
sand-stone.

7\. Head of Yama wearing *karaNDmukuTa*. He has long moustaches,
protruding teeth, bulging eyes, and is bearded. It measures 27 x 15 x 7
cms.

8\. Bust of a bearded male drummer measuring 20 x 19 x 20 cms.

9\. Head of an *apsaras* measuring 20 x 20 x 20 cms.

10\. Bust of a dancing *apsaras*. It measures 40 x 15 x 20 cms.

11\. A dancing male inside a small niche. At the left end of this slab
is carved a beautiful head of an *apsaras* whose hair are very
elaborately arranged. It is made of white sand-stone and measures 40 x
40 x 25 cms.

12\. A stone slab carved with a dancing male. On his right is carved a
bearded male drummer whose head has been partly chopped off. It is made
of white sand-stone and measures 32 x 35 x 12 cms.

13. A bearded male dancing. Both his legs have been chopped off. He has
moustaches. It measures 52 x 35 x 20 cms. It is made of white
sand-stone. He wears earlobes.”^([48](#48))

The article by B.L. Nagarch is accompanied by eighteen plates of
photographs and a plan of the Rudramahãlaya complex. The photographs
show the “temple remains”, sculptural and architectural, discovered in
and around the Jãmi‘ Masjid. The plan shows three unexcavated zones
where it is most likely that many more “temple remains” are lying
buried, waiting to be exposed some day by the excavator’s spade.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) *Fourth Annual Report of the Minorities’ Commission* for the
Period 1.1.1980 to 31.3.1981, New Delhi, 1983, p. 130.

[²](#2a) Ibid., pp. 130-31.

[³](#3a) Ibid., p. 131.

[⁴](#4a) Ibid., p. 129. 

[⁵](#5a) Ibid., p. 133.

[⁶](#6a) Ibid., pp. 133-34. It may be noted that no Jana Sangh existed
at that time, the party having merged itself in the Janata Party in May,
1977.

[⁷](#7a) Ibid., p. 134.

[⁸](#8a) Ibid., p. 132.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., p. 134.

[¹⁰](#10a) Ibid., p. 132.

[¹¹](#11a) Ibid., p. 134.

[¹²](#12a) Ibid.

[¹³](#13a) Ibid., p. 140.

[¹⁴](#14a) Ibid., p. 141.  Emphasis added.

[¹⁵](#15a) Ibid., pp. 141-42.

[¹⁶](#16a) Ibid., p. 142.

[¹⁷](#17a) Ibid.

[¹⁸](#18a) Ibid.

[¹⁹](#19a) Ibid., pp. 149-50.

[²⁰](#20a) Ibid., p. 150.

[²¹](#21a) Ibid., p. 143.

[²²](#22a) Ibid.

[²³](#23a) Ibid., Emphasis added.

[²⁴](#24a) Ibid., p. 144.

[²⁵](#25a) Ibid., p. 151.

[²⁶](#26a) Ibid., pp. 132-33.

[²⁷](#27a) Ibid., p. 133.

[²⁸](#28a) Ibid., p. 146.

[²⁹](#29a) Ibid., pp. 151-52.

[³⁰](#30a) Ibid., p. 152.

[³¹](#31a) Ibid., p. 146.

[³²](#32a) Ibid., p. 147.

[³³](#33a) Ibid., pp. 134-35.

[³⁴](#34a) Ibid., p. 135.

[³⁵](#35a) Ibid., p. 139.

[³⁶](#36a) Ibid., pp. 136-37.

[³⁷](#37a) Ibid., p, 137.

[³⁸](#38a) Ibid., p. 138.

[³⁹](#39a) Ibid., P. 9.

[⁴⁰](#40a) *Indian Archaeology 1979-80 - A Review*, p. 99.

[⁴¹](#41a) Ibid., P. 148.

[⁴²](#42a) *Indian Archaeology 1980-81 -A Review*, p. 90.

[⁴³](#43a) *Fourth Annual Report*, pp. 135-36.

[⁴⁴](#44a) Ibid., p. 144.

[⁴⁵](#45a) Recent Archaeological, Discoveries from Rudramahãlaya and
Jãmi Masjid, Sidhpur’, *Kusumãñjali: Shri Sivarãmamûrti Commemoration
Volume*, Delhi, 1987, Vol. II, pp. 396--97.

[⁴⁶](#46a) Ibid., pp. 397-98.

[⁴⁷](#47a) Ibid., pp. 398-99.

[⁴⁸](#48a) Ibid., pp. 399-400.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
