+++
title = "18 APPENDIX 1 MUSLIM DYNASTIES IN INDIA’S HISTORY"

+++
**APPENDIX 1**

**MUSLIM DYNASTIES IN INDIA’S HISTORY**

Muslim dynasties which figure in the history of India are divided, by
modern historians of medieval India into two categories - Imperial and
Provincial. Dynasties which ruled from Delhi/Agra are called Imperial
Dynasties, whatever might have been the extent of their domain or power.
On the other hand, dynasties which ruled independently of Delhi/Agra are
labelled as Provincial Dynasties, even though some of them overshadowed
the contemporary Imperial Dynasties in terms of territory controlled, or
power wielded, or both.

Strangely enough, the Yamînîs of Ghazni and the Shanshabãnîs of Ghûr are
not included in any of the two categories. They are supposed to be
foreign dynasties having their seats outside India proper and being
interested in expanding their domain in Islamic lands to their west and
north as well. Medieval Muslim historians, however, do not look at the
Yamînîs and the Shanshabãnîs in that way; they regard both of them as
inextricably entwined with the history of India. We agree with the
medieval Muslim historians. Firstly, Afghanistan was very much a part of
India not only in the days of these dynasties but till as late as the
disintegration of the Mughal empire in the eighteenth century. Secondly,
the so-called Indian dynasties were prevented from intervening in the
larger world of Islam not by any lack of willingness on their part but
because, starting with the rise of the Mongols in the first quarter of
the thirteenth century, the powers that arose in Persia and Transoxiana
made it difficult for them to do so.

In any case, there is nothing Indian about any of the Muslim dynasties,
no matter from where they functioned. All of them were equally foreign
in terms of inspiration and behaviour, even if not always in terms of
blood. A bandit who breaks into my house with sword in hand and occupies
it by means of brute force, does not become a member of my family simply
because he lives under my roof and fattens on my food; he remains a
bandit, no matter how long the occupation lasts. He never acquires moral
or legal legitimacy. Nor does that member of my family who takes to the
ways of the bandit retain the ties which once bound us together; I am
fully within my rights to look at him also as one of the bandit team. I
am not impressed at all if the bandit believes in a right acquired by
conquest or bestowed by a being named Allãh, and quotes from a book he
deems as divine. Nor am I prepared, like Jawaharlal Nehru and his
degenerate secularist clan, to consider the bandit a member of my
family, simply because he drags into his bed my sister or daughter or
some other female from my household. I am not called upon to recognize
his right to rule over me, and hesitate in throwing him out as soon as I
can muster the strength to do so. I am, therefore, treating as foreign
to India, more so to the intrinsic spirit of Indian culture, all Muslim
dynasties which figure in the Islamic invasion of or rule over this
country or any of its parts.

A brief descriptions of these dynasties together with the number of
rulers which each of them had, is given below. Each king who figures in
our citations, epigraphic or literary, is being given his number in the
order of dynastic succession together with his reign-period.^([1](#1))
That should suffice to place him and his doings in a proper historical
perspective.

The dynasties have been listed in a chronological order, that is, with
reference to the time at which they arose. There are several dynasties
and many rulers who do not figure in our citations. That does not mean
that none of them can be credited with the pious performance of
destroying Hindu places of worship. For all we know, those dynasties and
kings figure in histories which have remained inaccessible to us,
particularly the provincial and local histories and the biographies of
individual kings and commanders. The doings of sufis in this particular
context are being taken up in subsequent volume of this series.

India had suffered the first attack from Islamic imperialism as early as
634, only two years after the death of the prophet of Islam at Medina;
it was a naval expedition sent to the coast of Maharashtra in reign of
Caliph ‘Umar. This as well as many other expeditions mounted in
subsequent years were repulsed from the coasts of Gujarat and Sindh, and
the borders of Makran, Kabul and Zabul; in some of them the invaders
suffered great slaughter and their military commanders were either
killed or had to be ransomed out.

It was only in 712 that an Islamic invasion succeeded in occupying
Sindh, Multan and some parts of the Punjab. Though the invaders led
several raids into the interior, particularly towards Malwa and Gujarat,
the episodes were shortlived and the invaders were soon locked up in two
garrison towns-Multan and Mansurah-by the Indian counter-at-tacks
mounted from Delhi, Kanauj, Rajasthan, Malwa and Gujarat.  Meanwhile,
another thrust into Balkh which took place at the same time as that into
Sindh resulted in the destruction of a renowned Buddhist Vihãra and the
forcible conversion of the Pramukha family, the latter-day Barkamids of
Baghdad.

Zabul (region around Ghazni) had defeated several Muslim invasions since
653 when Seistan became a base for Islamic armies. It, however, fell in
871 before an assault by the newly founded Saffãrid Dynasty of Persia,
and was lost for ever to India as a result of its population being
converted *en masse* to Islam. The Saffãrids were followed by the
Sãmãnids of Bukhara; one of their governors occupied Ghazni in 963. It
was from this base that North India was overwhelmed in stages, and
passed under Muslim occupation towards the close of the twelfth century.

In subsequent centuries, Islamic invasions surged forward into Central
and South India and established several centres of Muslim power. More
centres of Muslim power arose in North India as well whenever the Muslim
dynasties at Delhi/Agra suffered a decline. The Indian people and
princes fought the invaders at every step and rose in revolt, again and
again, for more than five hundred years.  Finally, the war of resistance
was transformed into a war of liberation and Islamic dominance
disappeared from most parts of India during the eighteenth century. If
British imperialism had not intervened and saved some remnants of
Islamic imperialism, the Muslim invasion of India would have become a
story found only in books of history, and India would have been left
with no “Muslim problem” as in the case of Spain which also had been
invaded and occupied by Muslims for several centuries.  
 

**Muslim Dynasties**

The Muslim dynasties which functioned from Sindh and Ghazni undertook
destruction of Hindu temples *extensively* whenever and wherever they
succeeded in raiding or occupying Indian territory. The same pattern was
followed by the Muslim dynasties established at Delhi/Agra. Their hold,
however, did not extend beyond major cities and towns. An *intensive*
destruction of temples was undertaken by the Muslim dynasties which
arose in the provinces-Sindh, Kashmir, Bengal, Avadh, Malwa, Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh. There is no truth in the
assumption that the provincial dynasties were lenient to Hindus and
their places of worship because they had to depend upon Hindu support
against the imperial dynasties. The truce, if it took place at all, was
temporary in most cases.  
 

**I. The Caliphate (632-1258)**

It was a republican institution created at Medina soon after the death
of Prophet Muhammad. The first four caliphs were elected. The fifth
caliph, however, inaugurated monarchical rule which was held
successively by two families. The Caliphate, therefore, had three
phases.  
 

**(A) The “Rightly-Guided” Caliphs (632-661)**

There were four of them who ruled over an expanding empire from Medina
and Kufa. Only one of them figures in our citations:

3\. ‘Usmãn (646--656)

It was during his reign that one of his military commanders, Abd
ar-Rahmãn bin Samûrah, succeeded in occupying Seistan and parts of Zabul
for a short time in 653.  
 

**(B) The Ummayads (661-749)**

This dynasty, founded by the fifth caliph, had fourteen kings who ruled
from Damascus. Only one of them figures in our citations:

6\. Al-Walîd I (705-715)

It was during his reign that one of his generals, Muhammad bin Qãsim,
succeeded in occupying Sindh and some parts of the Punjab between 712
and 715.

Another general, Qutaibah bin Muslim al-Bãhîlî, operated mostly in
Khurasan and Transoxiana which were cradles of Hindu culture at that
time but not parts of India proper. He is also credited with the
conquest of Balkh where he destroyed a famous Buddhist Vihãra.  
 

**(C) The Abbãsids (750-1258)**

This dynasty succeeded the Umayyads and moved the seat of the Caliphate
to Baghdad. Starting with the nineteenth caliph it had thirty-seven
rulers, the last of whom was killed by Halãkû, the Mongol conqueror, in
1258. After the reign of the eighth caliph, Mu’tãsim (833-842), of this
dynasty, the rulers were non-entities and power passed into the hands of
Turkish dynasties which rose one after another. Only two of them figure
in our citations:

2\. Al-Mansûr (754-775)

It was in his reign that his governor of Sindh, Hashãm bin ‘Amrû
al-Taghlabî, led an expedition to Kandahar on the west coast of India in
756.

3\. Al-Mahdî (775-785)

He sent, a naval expedition to the coast of Saurashtra in 776.  
 

**II. The Saffãrid Dynasty of Seistan (871-900)**

This Persian-Turkish dynasty arose when the Abbãsid Caliphate had
weakened. It occupied Zabul and Sindh which included Multan at that
time. It had only 2 rulers both of whom figure in our citations:

1\. Yã’qûb bin Laith (871-875)  
2. ‘Amrû bin Laith (875-900)  
 

**III. The Qarãmitah Dynasty of Multan (980-1175)**

After the Saffãrids lost their hold on Sindh, Multan separated from the
province and became an independent Muslim kingdom. By 980 it had become
a stronghold of the Qarãmitah sect of the Isma‘ilîs. Jalam bin Shaibãn
who figures in our citations cannot be placed in any dynastic
succession, nor assigned a reign-period. The only thing we know about
him is that he destroyed the image of the famous Ãditya Temple at Multan
and killed its priests.  
 

**IV. The Yamînî or Ghaznivid Dynasty (977-1186)**

The Saffãrid dominions in Khurasan, Seistan and Zabul had been taken
over by the Sãmãnids, a dynasty which had arisen more or less at the
same time as the Saffãrids and had its seat at Bukhara. Alptigîn, the
Sãmãnid governor of Khurasan, rebelled, occupied Ghazni in 963 and
declared independence. The dynasty founded by him proved incompetent and
the throne was seized in 977 by Subuktigîn, a manumitted slave of
Alptigîn. Subuktigîn became the founder of the Ghaznivid Dynasty which
came to be known as the Yamînî Dynasty as well when the caliph at
Baghdad was mighty pleased with the iconoclastic exploits of
Subuktigîn’s son, Mahmûd, and conferred on him the appellation of
Yamînu’d-Daulah.

The Yamînî Dynasty had 18 rulers, the last two of whom functioned from
Lahore after Ghazni was occupied by the Seljûks. Five of these rulers
figure in our citations.

1\. Amîr Subuktigîn (977-997)  
2. Sultãn Mahmûd (997-1030)  
5. Sultãn Mas‘ûd I (1030-1042)  
11. Sultãn Ibrãhîm (1059-1099)  
12. Sultãn Mas‘ûd III (1 099-1151)  
 

**V. The Shanshabãnî or Ghûrid Dynasty (1149-1206)**

This dynasty arose in the Ghûr region of Afghanistan and had its seat at
Firuz Koh. To start with, the rulers were tributaries of the Ghaznivids.
They started becoming independent as the Ghaznivids got involved in a
struggle with the Seljûks and suffered a decline. We have counted the
Ghûrid rulers from Alãu’d-Dîn Jahãnsûz who stormed and burnt down Ghazni
in 1149. Ghazni was, however, occupied by the Seljûks soon after and,
later on, by the Guzz Turks. It was only in 1175 that the Ghûrids
succeeded in reoccupying it.

The Ghûrid king, Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn Muhammad bin Sãm, who had succeeded his
uncle Alãu’d-Dîn Jahãnsûz at Firuz Koh, appointed his younger brother,
Shihãbu’d-Dîn Muhammad bin Sãm, as the governor of Ghazni. Shihãbu’d-Dîn
(1175-1206) occupied Sindh and Multan, ousted the last Ghaznivid ruler
from Lahore, defeated the Chauhãns of Ajmer and the GãhaDvãDs of Kanauj,
and extended his conquests upto the borders of Bengal. His conquests
were consolidated mainly by his able general, Qutbu’d-Dîn Aibak. Another
general of his, Ikhtiyãru’d-Dîn Bakhtiyãr Khaljî, ousted the Senas of
Bengal from Lakhnauti and led an unsuccessful expedition into Assam and
Bhutan. Meanwhile, Shihãbu’d-Dîn had become the king of Ghûr on the
death of his brother in 1203 and styled himself as Muizzu’d-Dîn Muhammad
bin Sãm. He is popularly known as Muhammad Ghûrî, and regarded as the
founder of Muslim rule in India. He was murdered in 1206 and the
Shanshabãnî dynasty came to an end.

Muhammad Ghûrî, Qutbu’d-Dîn Aibak, and Ikhtiyãru’d-Dîn Bakhtiyãr Khaljî
figure in our citations.  
 

**VI. The Khwãrizmian Dynasty (1121-1231)**

This powerful dynasty had its seat at Khwãrizm (modern Khiva in the
Turkmenian Republic of the erstwhile U.S.S.R). It had 6 rulers. It was
overthrown by Chingiz Khãn, the Mongol conqueror, in 1220 when its fifth
ruler died in flight. The sixth and the last ruler, Jalãlu’d-Dîn
Mankbarnî, who figures in our citations, escaped to Sindh in 1222 and
tried to establish a new kingdom. He had, however, to leave in 1223 via
Makran and wandered to various places in Iran and Iraq till he was
killed by the Kurds in 1231.  
 

**VII. The Mamlûk or Slave Dynasties of Delhi (1206-1290)**

These were the three dynasties founded successively by Qutbu’d-Dîn
Aibak, Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish and Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn Balban, all of whom were
manumitted slaves. With their seat at Delhi, the three dynasties had 10
rulers. The founder of the first dynasty, Qutbu’d-Dîn Aibak, figures in
our citations mostly as a viceroy of Muhanmmad Ghûri, though he ruled as
a sultãn also from 1206 to 1210. The third ruler Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish
(1210-1236), the founder of the second Mamlûk Dynasty, also figures in
our citations. He was a slave of Qutb’d-Dîn Aibak and became king after
ousting Aibak’s son. He extended his sway over the whole of North India
by garrisoning a number of cities and towns and led expeditions against
centres of Rãjpût power in Rajasthan, Bundelkhand and Malwa. He is
regarded as the real builder of Muslim power in India, though
Afghanistan, Sindh and a large part of the Punjab had, meanwhile, passed
under Mongol occupation.  
 

**VIII. The Khaljî Dynasty of Delhi (1290-1320)**

It succeeded the third and the last Mamlûk Dynasty and had only 3
rulers. All of them figure in our citations:

1\. Jalãlu’d-Dîn (1290-1296)  
2. Alãu’d-Dîn (1296-1316)  
3. Mubãrak Shãh (1316-1320)

With his seat at Delhi, Alãu’d-Dîn extended Muslim hegemony or rule over
Gujarat, Rajasthan, Malwa, Maharashtra, Telingana, Karnataka and Tamil
Nadu by subduing or overthrowing one Rãjpût dynasty after another. The
expedition to Gujarat was led by his brother and general, Ulugh Khãn,
while those to Maharashtra, Telingana, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu were
commanded by his slave, Malik Kãfûr. He himself was in charge of
expeditions to Rajasthan and Malwa.  
 

**IX. The Tughlaq Dynasty of Delhi (1320-1412)**

This dynasty which took over at Delhi from the Khaljîs had 10 rulers,
though its power declined steeply after the death of the third in 1381
and more or less disappeared after the invasion of Tîmûr in 1398. Five
rulers of this dynasty figure in our citations:

1\. Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn Tughlaq (1320-1325)  
2. Muhammad bin Tughlaq (1325-1351)  
3. Fîrûz Shãh (1351-1388)  
4. Tughlaq Shãh bin Fîrûz Shãh (1388-1389)  
5. Nasîru’d-Dîn Muhammad Shãh (1389-1394)

Muhammad bin Tughlaq had reconquered South India which had slipped out
of the Muslim stranglehold after the eclipse of the Khaljîs. But he
lived to see the disintegration of his southern domain. Soon after, the
Muslim Bahmanî Sultanate rose in the Deccan and the Hindu Vijayanagara
Empire in the South.  
 

**X. The Shãh Mîr Dynasty of Kashmir (1339-1561)**

Islamic power prevailed in Kashmir because the latter-day Hindu Rãjãs
had employed a large number of Muslims in their army and administration.
Most of these Muslims were refugees sent out by the Mongol invasion of
Islamdom in the thirteenth century, even though some of them strutted
around as Sayyids and Sufis. The founder of the Shãh Mîr Dynasty had
only to stage a *coup d’etat*. The dynasty had 14 rulers of whom two
figure in our citations:

6\. Sikandar Butshikan (1389-1413)  
12. Fath Shãh (1489-1499 and 1505-1516)  
 

**XI. The Bahmanî Dynasty of the Deccan (1347-1527)**

The founder of this dynasty consolidated a widespread rebellion against
Tughlaq rule in the Deccan, and proclaimed himself a sultãn. It had its
seat at Gulbarga before it moved to Bîdar in 1422. It had 15 rulers. The
last five of them were kings only in name because power at Bidar passed
into the hands of the Barîd Shãhî Dynasty and elsewhere into those of
four other dynasties-the Nizãm Shãhîs of Ahmadnagar, the ‘Ãdil Shãhîs of
Bijapur, the Imãd Shãhîs of Berar and the Qutb Shãhîs of
Golconda-towards the close of the fifteenth century. Six Bahmanî rulers
figure in our citations:

1\. Alãu’d-Dîn Hasan (1347-1358)  
2. Mujãhid Shãh (1375-1378)  
5. Fîrûz Shãh (1379-1422)  
6. Ahmad Shãh Walî (1422-1435)  
7. Alãu’d-Dîn Ahmad Shãh II (1436-1458)  
10. Muhammad Shãh II (1463-1480)  
 

**XII. The Muslim Dynasty of Gujarat (1392-1572)**

The founder of this dynasty was a Rãjpût who was converted to Islam in
the reign of Fîrûz Shãh Tughlaq. It had 10 rulers before Gujarat was
conquered by the Mughals in 1527. Six of them figure in our citations:

1\. Muzaffar Shãh I (1392-1410)  
2. Ahmad Shãh I (1411-1443)  
4. Qutbu’d-Dîn Ahmad Shãh II (1451-1458)  
5. Mahmûd BegDhã (1458-1511)  
6. Muzaffar Shãh II (1511-1526)  
7. Bahãdur Shãh (1526-1537)  
 

**XIII. The Sharqî Dynasty of Jaunpur (1394-1479)**

It was founded by a favourite eunuch of Fîrûz Shãh Tughlaq soon after
the latter’s death, and was overthrown by Bahlûl Lodî, the founder of
the Lodî Dynasty of Delhi/Agra. One of its 6 rulers figures in our
citations.

4\. Mahmûd bin Ibrãhîm (1440-1457).  
 

**XIV. The Khaljî Dynasty of Malwa (1435-1531)**

Malwa had become independent of Delhi under the Ghûrî Dynasty founded in
1390. It had 4 rulers when it was overthrown by the Khaljî Dynasty in
1435. The second dynasty also had 4 rulers. Two of them figure in our
citations:

1\. Mahmûd Shãh I (1435-1469)  
2. Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn (1469-1500)  
 

**XV. Lodî Dynasty of Delhi/Agra (1451-1526)**

The Tughlaq Dynasty had been succeeded at Delhi by the Sayyid Dynasty
which ruled form 1412 to 1451. It was a weak dynasty and its last ruler
invited Bahlûl Lodî, his governor of the Punjab, to take over. The
second Lodî ruler shifted the capital from Delhi to Agra in order to be
better able to dominate and expand into Central India. Of the 3 rulers
of the Lodî Dynasty two figure in our citations:

2\. Sikandar Lodî (1489-1517)  
3. Ibrãhîm Lodî (1517-1526)  
 

**XVI. The Nizãm Shãhî Dynasty of Ahmadnagar (1490-1630)**

This dynasty was founded by one of the Bahmanî governors who was a
Brahmin convert from Maharashtra. It had 11 rulers till its kingdom was
annexed by the Mughals. One of them figures in our citations:

4\. Murtazã Nizãm Shãh (1565-1588)  
 

**XVII. The ‘Ãdil Shãhî Dynasty of Bijapur (1490-1686)**

Founded by another of the Bahmanî governors, it had 9 rulers till the
kingdom was conquered by the Mughals. One of them figures in our
citations:

5\. ‘Alî I ‘Ãdil Shãh (1557-1580)  
 

**XVIII. The Qutb Shãhî Dynasty of Golconda (1507-1687)**

Founded by a third Bahmanî governor, it had 7 rulers till it was
overthrown by the Mughals. Four of them figure in our citations:

1\. Qulî Qutb Shãh (1507-1543)  
3. Ibrãhîm Quth Shãh (1550-1580)  
4. Muhammad Qulî Qutb Shãh (1580-1612)  
6. Abdu’llãh Qutb Shãh (1626-1672)  
 

**XIX. The Mughal Dynasty of Agra/Delhi (1526-1857)**

Founded by a new Islamic invader, Zahîru’d-Dîn Bãbar, this dynasty had
21 rulers. But after 1712 when its seventh ruler died, the Mughal kings
became playthings in the hands of powerful ministers and court factions.
The Dynasty received a shattering blow from the invasion of Nãdir Shãh
in 1739. After the death of its fourteenth ruler, Muhammad Shãh, in
1748, its empire disintegrated very fast. In due course, Mughal rule
became more or less confined to the Red Fort at Delhi where, too, the
king lived at the mercy of the Marathas and, later on, the British. Nine
Mughal rulers figure in our citations:

1\. Bãbur (1526-1530)  
2. Humãyûn (1530-1538 and 1556)  
3. Akbar (1556-1605)  
4. Jahãngîr (1605-1628)  
5. Shãh Jahãn (1628-1658)  
6. Aurangzeb (1658-1707)  
7. Bahãdur Shãh (1707-1712)  
11. Farrukh Siyar (1713-1719)  
14. Muhammad Shãh (1720-1748)  
 

**XX. The Sûr Dynasty of Agra/Delhi (1540-1556)**

This dynasty rose to power by overthing the second Mughal king, Humãyûn,
and was in turn overthrown by him. It had four rulers, the last one of
whom did not belong to the bloodline. Its first two rulers figure in our
citations:

1\. Sher Shãh (1540-1545)  
2. Islãm Shãh (1545-1554)  
 

**XXI. The Karrãnî Dynasty of Bengal (1563-1576)**

This dynasty arose when Sulaimãn Karrãnî, the governor of Bihar from the
days of Sher Shãh Sûr, moved to Gaur in Bengal after the death of Islãm
Shãh Sûr and declared himself an independent king of Bengal, Bihar and
Orissa. Soon after, he moved his capital to Tandah. There were three
rulers in this line, of whom the first, Sulaimãn, (1563-1573), figures
in our citations.  
 

**XXII. The Mughal Sûbãhdãrs of Bengal (1717-1757)**

The Mughal governors of Bengal (which included Bihar and Orissa also)
became independent for all practical purposes after the passing away of
Bahãdur Shãh, the Mughal emperor, in 1712. Murshid Qulî Khãn I who had
become Sûbãhdãr in 1717 nominated his son-in-law, Shujãu’d-Dîn, to
succeed him. The capital of Bengal had meanwhile been moved from Dacca
to Murshidabad. Murshid Qulî Khãn II who figures in our citations was
Shujãu’d-Dîn’s son-in-law and was made the deputy governor in 1728 with
his seat at Dacca. This first line of the independent Sûbãhdãrs of
Bengal was overthrown in 1739 by Alîvardî Khãn whose grandson and
successor, Sirãju’d-Daulah, was defeated by the British in 1757 in the
Battle of Plassey.  
 

**XXIII. Abdãlî or Durrãnî Dynasty of Afghanistan (1747-1818)**

The dynasty arose when, on the death of Nãdir Shãh the Persian
adventurer, one of his generals, Ahmad Khãn Abdãlî, styled himself as
Ahmad Shãh Durr-i-Durrãn (Pearl of the Age) and set up an independent
principality in Afghanistan in 1747. With his seat at Qandhar he led
seven invasions into the Punjab and farther afield. In one of his
invasions (1762), he blew up the Harimandir at Amritsar, filled up the
sacred tank with the debris, and desecrated the holy site by
slaughtering cows on it. He died in 1773 and figures in our citations.  
 

**XXIV. Muslim Usurpers in Mysore (1761-1799)**

There were only two of them, Hyder ‘Alî (1761-1781) and his son, Tîpû
Sultãn (1782-1799). The second who died fighting the British in 1799,
figures in our citations.  
 

**XXV. Sufis or Warrior Saints**

Fourteen sufis or warrior saints figure in our citations. The list of
this type of iconoclasts should have been much larger. But we could not
get hold of the appropriate histories, most of which are in private
collections. The histories that are printed these days are quite often
edited in order to eschew “controversial materials”.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) The dates given in the descriptions that follow are of the
Christian Era.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


