+++
title = "20 APPENDIX 3 MEANING OF THE WORD “HINDU”"

+++
**APPENDIX 3**

**MEANING OF THE WORD “HINDU”**

In the present study we have used the expression “Hindu temples” to
cover Brahmanical as well as Buddhist Jain, and Sikh temples. This
sounds contrary to current usage in the world of scholarship as well as
politics. But the history of the word “Hindu” supports our case. It was
only in the nineteenth century that Western Indologists and Christian
missionaries separated the Buddhists, the Jains, and the Sikhs from the
Hindus who, in their turn, were defined as only those subscribing to
Brahmanical sects. The missionaries invented another category, the
Animists, which they employed in order to separate the tribals from the
Hindus of their definition. It will, therefore, be worthwhile to survey
the history of the word “Hindu”, and see what it has meant, at what
stage, and to whom.

A close study of literary and epigraphic sources shows that the word
“Hindu” has appeared in our indigenous languages and popular parlance in
a comparatively recent period, keeping in view the long span of our
history. We do not find this word in any indigenous language prior to
the establishment of Islamic rule in the thirteenth century. Even after
that, the word was used rather sparsely in the local literature.
Monier-Williams who compiled his famous dictionary from a large range of
Sanskrit literature, could not find any indigenous root for this word.
He says explicitly that the word is derived “from the Persian Hindû”.
Dictionaries of all indigenous languages say the same. So also the
dictionaries of European languages.

The word Hinduism” has been added to our vocabulary at a still more
recent stage. It has been contributed by the discipline of Indology in
die modern West. And the word gained wide currency in this country
simply because the leaders of our national reawakening in the second
half of the nineteenth century, espoused it as expressive of our
national identity as well as our spiritual and cultural greatness. These
leaders, down to Mahatma Gandhi, were not prepared to concede that
Hinduism did not include Buddhism, or Jainism, or, for that matter,
Sikhism.

Of course, some scholars of Hindutva have tried to trace the word
“Hindu” to *Saptasindhu* which is mentioned in the Rigveda on several
occasions. They want this word to have an indigenous as well as an
ancient ring. The intention is understandable. But the excercise has
remained forced, if nor far-fetched. Firstly, it does not notice that
the expression used in the Rigveda is not *Saptasindhu* but
*Saptasaindhvah*. Secondly, it ignores the fact that the Rigveda is not
quite clear whether the expression stands for a country, or for a
people, or simply for seven rivers in the Punjab. The expression seems
to mean different things in different contexts. Thirdly, it does not
explain why the change from “Sindhu” to “Hindu” took such a long time to
surface in our indigenous languages. Lastly, and more significantly, it
has not taken into account the fact that our countrymen were never known
as Hindus in Southeast Asia in the pre-Islamic period, although they had
a large presence there since centuries before the birth of Christ.

Going back to the pre-Islamic period in our own country, we find that
our ancestors shared in common a name for their homeland. That was
*Bhãratavarša*, which comprised at that time the present-day Seistan,
Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Nepal, and Bangladesh. They also shared in
common a name for the spiritual-cultural complex to which they
subscribed. That was *Sanãtana Dharma*, which covered Brahmanism,
Buddhism, Jainism, and also what is now known as Animism or tribal
religion. But there is no evidence, literary or epigraphic, that they
shared in common a name for themselves as a people. Some PurãNas say
that Bhãratavarša is the land of the *bhãratî santatih*. The expression,
however, is found nowhere else in the vast literature which has come to
us from those times. In any case, this much is quite certain that our
ancestors in those times did not use the word “Hindu” for describing
themselves collectively. Hiuen Tsang who visited this country between AD
630 and 645 says that while the word “Shin-tu” (Chine-se for “Hindu”)
could be heard outside our borders, it was unknown within the country.

Nor do we have a record of how our people identified themselves when
they travelled abroad. It is not at all in doubt that they travelled a
lot, and all the time. They were frequent visitors to far-off places in
all directions, by land as well as sea. They went out individually as
well as in groups. They adventured as sailors, as merchants, as princes,
as monks, as priests, as scholars, as craftsmen, and in several other
capacities. They had established many flourishing settlements in
Southeast Asia, Australia, New Zealand, the Pacific Islands, and Central
and South America towards the east, and in Iran, West Asia, East and
North Africa, and Europe towards the west. Central Asia, China, Korea,
and Japan were as familiar to them as their own homeland. But the
literature which describes their voyages, or the epigraphs which testify
to their presence abroad, do not yield any generic or national name by
which they were known or made themselves known to the local people in
foreign countries.

There is, therefore, no running away from the fact that the word “Hindu”
occurs for the first time in the Avesta of the ancient Iranians who used
this word for designating this country as well as its people. They did
not have to coin this word out of thin air. It was simply their way of
pronouncing the word “Sindhu”, the name of the mighty river which has
always been a major landmark for travellers to this country from the
north and the west. To start with, the word seems to have been used for
provinces and the people in the vicinity of the Sindhu. But in due
course, it was extended to cover all parts of this country and all its
people. The word also spread to countries to the north and west of Iran.
The ancient Greeks were quite familiar with the words “Indus” and
“Indoi” - their way of pronouncing “Sindhu” and “Sindhîs”. The ancient
Arabs, Turks (Šakas, KuSãNas, etc.), Mongolian (HûNas, Kirãtas, etc.)
and the Chinese were also familiar with the word, sometimes in their own
variations on it such as “Shin-tu”. It may thus be said that the word
“Hindu” had acquired a national connotation, since the days of the
Avesta, although in the eyes of only the foreigners. At the same time,
it may be noted that the word was oblivious of the fact that “Hindus”
were organized in numerous castes, and subscribed to many religious
sects.

There is also evidence that at some stage in their history the ancient
Iranians started using the word “Hindu” in more than a purely
descriptive sense. The word seems to have acquired for them a derogatory
meaning as well. Scholars are not quite certain, nor in complete
agreement, about the nature of differences that developed between the
Vedics of this country and the Avestans of Iran. The two people had had
much in common, and for a long time, in the realm of language, religion,
rituals, and ethical norms. It is surmised that the rift appeared with
the rise of Zarathustra (Zoroaster) as a religious reformer in the
region round Bãhlîka (Balkh), and became bitter by the time the
Archaeminid Dynasty rose to power in Iran. Zorastrianism became the
state religion of Iran, and the Iranians started looking down upon the
Hindus as worshippers of *“dev”* (Skt. deva), their word for demon. They
were using the word *“Ahura”* (Skt. Asura) for their own Deity.

The Iranians are known to have become more hostile to the Hindus as
Buddhism spread in Khorasan and Central Asia, and the temples dedicated
to *dev* were overshadowed by those dedicated to *“budd”* or *“but”* -
their name for the Buddha statues. By the time the Ishmized Arabs
appeared on the scene, the “black-faced Hindu” had become known to the
Iranians as the but-prast (worshipper of the *budd* or *but*) par
excellence. In fact, the word “Hindu” had become synonymous with the
word *“but-prast”* in the Persian language which had developed out of
ancient Pehlevi. Every Hindu place of worship was now being described as
well despised as a *but-khãna*, house of *budd*. There were several
other pejoratives which went with the word “Hindu” in Persian parlance.
They have lived in Persian lexicons down to our own times. What is
relevant in the present context is that the word “Hindu” had acquired a
religious connotation also prior to the Islamic invasions, although in
the language of only the Iranians. It may be noted again that the
Iranians were oblivious of the fact that the worshippers of *dev* and
*but* were divided in many religious denominations.  
 

**II**

Of course, the Arab soldiers of Allãh and his Prophet did not have to
depend on the Iranians for defining the Hindu as an idolater. They had
their own patent word, *“mushrik”*, which the Qur’ãn had applied to the
idolaters of Arabia. They also continued to use their own word in
serious works on history and theology. But as the Islamized Arabs and
Turks came to borrow heavily from Persian language and culture, they
picked up the word *“but-prast”*, and used it more and more frequently
for the hated Hindu. In due course, this word came to predominate in the
Islamic parlance vis-a-vis the people of this country. And what must
have sounded painfully surprising as well as supremely profane to
Iranian ears, the Muslims started using the word *“ãtish-prast”*
(fire-worshipper) also for the worshippers of the dev and the but. Thus
the Hindu stood defined and despised as the “crow-faced *kãfir*, the
“wicked *mushrik”*, the “blind *but-prast”*, and the “accussed
*ãtish-prast”*, in the lexicons of Islam.

The story of how the armies of Islam advanced in different stages in
different parts of this country, and what they did to the Hindus and
their places of worship, has been documented in detail by many medieval
Muslim chroniclers. They tell us that the soldiers of Allãh were rather
fast in reaching for their swords and spears whenever and wherever they
heard the word *“budd”* or *“but”*. Buddhist temples, monasteries, and
monks thus became their prime targets, as is witnessed by the Buddhist
ruins and Muslim monuments built with Buddhist temple materials, all
along the trail of Islamic invasions. The pertinent point in the present
context, however, is that nowhere in the voluminous Muslim chronicles do
we find the natives of this country known by a name other than Hindu.
There were some Jews, and Christians, and Zoroastrians settled here and
there, particularly along the West Coast. More people belonging to these
communities continued to come from time to time throughout the period
covered by the Muslim chronicles. We find that people belonging to these
communities are always identified as such - *ahl-i-Yahûd* or *Banû
Isrãîl, ahl-i-NaSãra or Isãî*, and *ahl-i-Majûs* or *Ãtish-prast*. The
chronicles distinguish these communities from the Muslims on the one
hand, and from the natives of this country on the other. It is only when
they come to the natives that no more distinctions are noticed; all
natives are identified as *ahl-i-Hunûd*-Hindu!

We know from numerous indigenous sources that at the time the Islamic
invaders appeared on the scene, the natives of this country subscribed
to numerous ways of worship. They knew and made themselves known as
belonging to this or that religious sect or sub-sect. But the Muslim
chronicles notice no Buddhists, no Jains, no Šaivites, no Šaktas, no
VaiSNavas, nor members of any other sect or sub-sect-neither at the
beginning of Islamic conquests, nor during the period of Muslim rule,
nor yet when Muslim domination draws towards its end. In all their
narratives, all natives are attacked as Hindus, massacred as Hindus,
plundered as Hindus, converted forcibly as Hindus, captured and sold in
slave markets as Hindus, and subjected to all sorts of malice and
molestation as Hindus.

The Muslims never came to know, nor cared to know, as to which temple
housed what idol. For them all temples were Hindu *but-khãnas*, to be
desecrated or destroyed as such. They never bothered to distinguish the
idol of one God or Goddess from that of another. All idols were broken
or burnt by them as so many *buts*, or deposited in the royal treasury
if made of precious metals, or strewn at the door-steps of the mosques
if fashion from inferior stuff. In like manner, all priests and monks,
no matter to what school or order they belonged, were for the Muslims so
many “wicked Brahmans” to be slaughtered or molested as such. In short,
the word “Hindu” acquired a religious connotation for the first time
within the frontiers of this country. The credit for this turn-out goes
to the Muslim conquerors. With the coming of Islam to this country all
schools and sects of Sanãtana Dharma acquired a common denominator -
Hindu!

We also know that at the time of Islamic invasions, the natives of this
country stood organised in an hierarchy of many classes, castes, and
sub-castes. But the invaders noticed no KSatriyas, no Vaišyas, no
Šûdras, nor any other class or caste distinctions. The only people they
singled out for special mention were the Brahmans. But it was not
because they knew or recognized them as a distinct caste; it was simply
because the Brahmans were for them the “mine of *kufr* (infidelism) and
*shirk* (idolatry)”, the “misleaders of mankind”, the “greatest enemies
of Allãh and his Prophet”, and the “magicians who ensured that Hindus
burn for ever in the blazing fire of hell”. Nor did the Muslims
distinguish between high-caste and low-caste *kãfirs* while killing
them, or converting them by force, or plundering their properties, or
capturing them as well as their women and children for enslavement, or
reducing them to the status of *zimmîs* for imposing harsh disabilities
and discriminatory taxes on them. In Muslim eyes, all natives
constituted an undifferentiated society, a solid mass in which no
constituent was distinct from another. Once again, it goes to the credit
of the Muslim conquerors that the word “Hindu” acquired a national
connotation within the borders of this country. The only natives who
stood out of the ken were those who had converted to Islam, willingly or
unwillingly.

The next thing that happened during the period of Muslim conquest and
rule, was far more significant and fraught with far-reaching
consequences. I am not in a position to determine more precisely the
period during which the natives of this country espoused the word
“Hindu” for themselves, and invested it with pride; that needs a study
of contemporary Indian literature which I have not undertaken. All I can
say at present is that by the time the Islamic sword swept over the
South, and the Vijayanagara Empire took shape, the word “Hindu” was no
more a hated word for the natives as it was for the foreign invaders.

A Kanarese inscription discovered in the Fort of Penugonda (now in
Andhra Pradesh) and dated in Šaka saMvat 1276 (AD 1354) describes Bukkã
I of Vijayanagars as *hindurãya-suratrãNa
pûrva-pašchima-samudrãdhipati*, that is, the Sultãn among the Hindu
kings, and lord of the eastern and western seas.^([1](#1)) Next, we have
the Satyamangalam (North Arcot District, Tamil Nadu) Copper Plate
inscription of Devarãya II dated Šaka saMvat 1346 (AD 1424) in which
verse 8 says that “Through the wind (*which was produced*) by the
flapping of the ears of the elephants on the field of battle, the
Tulushka (ie Musalman) horsemen experienced the fate of cotton (ie were
blown away)”. Then follows the verse which applauds the king as “the
Sultãn among the Hindu kings as described by the bards”.^([2](#2)) Two
more inscriptions of Devarãya, dated AD 1427 and 1428, award him the
same honorific.^([3](#3)) The fact that bards were using the word
“Hindu” as a word of praise, leaves little doubt that the word was
pulsating with great pride. A Jain inscription found at Sadri in Jodhpur
District of Rajasthan, and dated Vikrama saMvat 1496 (AD 1441) is still
more specific. It says that KumbhakarNa of Mewar “received the title
*HiMdu-suratrãNa* by defeating the (Muslim) Sultãns of Dhillî and
Gûrjaratrã”.^([4](#4))

Some more inscriptions are worth citing in this context. They are being
taken up in a chronological order. The Somalpuram Grant of Vijayanagara
king VirûpãkSa dated Šaka saMvat 1389 (AD 1467). It describes the king
(“in the glowing fire of whose valour, the Turushkas were scorched up”)
as “elevated by the titles such as *hindurãya-suratrãNa”*.^([5](#5)) In
the Hempe inscription of Krishnadevarãya, dated Šaka saMvat 1430 (AD
1508), the *hindurãya-suratrãNa* is described as “the destroyer of rogue
tigers”.^([6](#6)) The hint is more than clear: rogue tigers are the
Muslim invaders. The same description of him is found in his Udayambakam
Grant dated Šaka saMvat 1450 (AD 1528)^([7](#7)) two years before he
died. In an inscription found at the holy city of Gaya in Bihar, the
Vijayanagara king Acyutadevarãya is eulogised as *“hindurãya-suratrãNa*,
the firm establisher of the Hindu kingdom”.^([8](#8)) His Unamanjeri
Plate issued in Šaka saMvat 1462 (AD 1540) calls him not only
*hindurãya-suratrãNa* but also *induvaMša-šikhãmaNi* (the jewel in the
crown of the lunar dynasty).^([9](#9)) The same applause is reserved for
Sadãšivarãya in his Kanuma Grant dated Šaka saMvat 1470 (AD 1548), and
the British Museum Plates dated Šaka saMvat 1478 (AD 1556).^([10](#10))

Thus by the middle of the fourteenth century, the word “Hindu” had
dropped the derogatory associations imposed on it by the ancient
Iranians and the Islamic invaders, and acquired a lot of lustre in the
eyes of our own countrymen. Native heroes such as MahãrãNã Kumbhã, and
Krishnadevarãya, who defeated the Islamic onslaught, were hailed as
Hindu heroes in subsequent centuries. Padmanãbha uses the word “Hindu”
for glorification of the Chauhãn harm of Jalor in his epic poem,
*KãnhaDade Prabandha*, which he composed in AD 1455. It will not be long
before MahãrãNã Pratãpa SiMha of Mewar becomes renowned as
*hindu-kula-kamala-divãkara*, the Sun which brings bloom to the lotus
that is the Hindu nation. Chhatrapati Shivãji, who turned back the tide
of Islamic invasion and inaugurated the war of liberation from Islamic
imperialism, will be hailed all over Bhãratavaršã as the saviour of
*Hindu Dharma* and protector of its significant symbols - *gaubrãhmaNa,
šikhã-sûtra, devamûrti-devãlaya*, and so on. So also Guru Gobind Singh,
and Mahãrãjã Chhatrasãl.

And the word “Hindu” stood sanctified when Sanãtan Dharma became known
as Hindu Dharma. Numerous saint-poets arose in all parts of
Bhãratavarša, sang hymns in praise of Hindu Dharma, and reminded their
co-religionists that they were inheritors of a great and vast spiritual
vision. The “law” of Islam threatened death to those who said that a
religion other than Islam could also be true. But that did not deter
Sant Kabir and Guru Nanak from proclaiming that Hindu Dharma was as good
as any other. Guru Teg Bahadur defied the “law” of Islam at the very
seat of its might, and offered his head in defence of his *tilaka*
(religious mark on the forehead) and *janêû* (sacred thread).  
 

**III**

Islamic imperialism had inflicted deep wounds on Hindu religion,
culture, society, polity, economy, and environment. The wounds needed
time to heel. All the same, Hindus had survived the Islamic onslaught,
and come out of it with renewed pride in their spiritual and cultural
traditions. The word “Hindu” had become an honoured word, and denoted,
nationally as well as religiously, the natives of this country as a
whole except those who had been forced or lured into the fold of Islam.

The gravest injury which Hindus had suffered at the hands of Islam was
the destruction of their temples and monasteries, and the slaughter of
BrãhmaNas and Buddhist monks. Temples and monasteries were not mere
places of worship and meditation; they were seats of higher learning as
well. BrãhmaNas and Buddhist monks were not only priests and spiritual
practitioners; they were also leaders of larger Hindu thought. Thus
Hindus had been hit in the solar plexus. They were still capable of
marshalling plenty of heroism (*kSãtra*); but their capacity for a
broader vision (*brãhmaNya*) had suffered a steep decline. Even so,
Islamic imperialism had failed to disarm the Hindus ideologically.

Islam has been, and remains till today, not much more than a system of
glorified terrorism in spite of all its tom-tom about Allãh and the Book
from high heaven. The only way it has ever known, either of breaking
resistance to its onward march or of imposing its own cock-and-bull
stories on a conquered people, has been that of brute force. It has
never learnt the art of legitimizing itself in the eyes of the conquered
people by selling to them some high-sounding scholarship. In fact, its
own stock of ideas has remained less than limited, and its scholarship
has been sterile and hide-bound. Nor has it ever tried to understand how
other societies and cultures function and flourish. Forcible conversion
is the only method it has known for pulling the conquered people out of
their cultural moorings. In this country, it had remained incapable of
searching for the sources of Hindu inspiration, or acquiring any
worthwhile knowledge of how Hindu Society and culture had functioned
down the ages. It could never earn even a semblance of legitimacy in the
eyes of Hindus at large, or shake any significant section of Hindus out
of their ancestral moorings.

It is difficult to say how Hindus would have fared if a new imperialism
from the West had not arrived on the scene at the very time when Islamic
imperialism was on its last legs. The new imperialism had three faces -
Christian, British, and Communist. It was far more competent than
Islamic imperialism in terms of both means and methods. But the
deadliest weapon it wielded was a new type of scholarship which it used
in progressive stages for disarming the Hindus ideologically.

This scholarship was a many-splendoured mansion - Anthropology,
Sociology, Historiography, Linguistics, Comparative Religion, Indology,
German Idealism, French Positivism, British Utilitarianism, Soviet
Marxism-Leninism, and the rest. It had some fascinating facets. Its
essential theme, however, was only a variation on the Christian
missionary lore in as much as it believed and had proved to its own
satisfaction that the white man’s world was the centre of the universe,
that the white man’s civilization was the highest achievement in human
history, and that the white man had to shoulder the heavy burden of
civilizing the rest of mankind which was seen as wallowing in varying
stages of barbarism. But simply because this scholarship had surfaced in
the same area and at the same time as Modern Science, it had come to
pretend that it also shared the scientific spirit. Marxism-Leninism was
the culmination of this masquerade.

This is not the occasion to go into details of how the latter-day
imperialism mobilized this scholarship for mounting an unprecedented
assault on the Hindu intellectual elite. What we are concerned with in
the present context is the portrait of Hindus and Hinduism which this
scholarship proceeded to paint. The salient features of the portrait
which emerged at the end of the operation were as follows:

> 1\. The old and the most sacred scripture of the Hindus, the Rigveda,
> provides impeccable evidence that a race of blood-thirsty barbarians,
> who worshipped equally blood-thirsty gods and who styled themselves as
> Aryans, invaded this country in the second millenium BC, slaughtered
> or enslaved all those natives who could not escape to the far South or
> forests and mountain fastnesses in the North, and settled down to live
> on the fat of this fertile land for all time to come.
>
> 2\. With a view to perpetuate their stranglehold on the country and
> its native people, the Aryans created a caste system in which they
> themselves constituted the higher castes - BrãhmaNas, KSatriyas, and
> Vaišyas- while they reduced the conquered populace to the status of
> Šûdras and outcaste untouchables.
>
> 3\. At the same time, the Aryans concoted a priestcraft, presided over
> by the wily Brahmins and couched in the complex Sanskrit literature,
> in order to legitimize and safeguard the caste system.
>
> 4\. Whatever veneer of culture the Aryans managed to acquire, was
> borrowed by them from the native people whom the Sanskrit literature
> had shamelessly described as Dãsas, Dasyus, Asuras, Nãgas, RãkSasas,
> and the rest.
>
> 5\. That veneer of culture also took no time to come off when, at a
> subsequent stage, the custodians of Brahminism destroyed the shrines
> and slaughtered the saints of Buddhism and Jainism, simply because
> these rationalist and humanitarian religions questioned the iniquities
> and cruelties of the caste system and pleaded for a just and
> equalitarian social order.
>
> 6\. But as the people’s protest against the primitive superstitions,
> the puerile priestcraft, and the cruel caste system of Brahminism
> continued to grow, Brahminism disguised itself in a number of
> new-sounding cults- Šaivism, Šãktism, VaiSNavism, etc.-and concocted a
> new series of Sanskrit literature - the PurãNas and the Dharmašãstras
> - in order to hoodwink the people and ensure the continuity of the
> caste system, with the crafty Brahmins sitting at its top and
> cornering unequal privileges as well as rich profits.
>
> 7\. Thus the essence of Brahminism alias Hinduism has been, and
> remains, the economically exploitative, socially oppressive, and
> culturally moribund caste system, no matter how many heaven-tearing
> philosophies it stocks in its shop in order to hide the fraud.
>
> 8\. Hinduism alias Brahminism has continued, and will continue, to
> suppress, or sidetrack, or subvert by means of its sly syncretism,
> every single idea, religious or secular, which threatens the caste
> system and the domination of the deceitful Brahmins.
>
> 9\. Speaking scientifically and in a historical perspective, *Hindus
> proper* are only the high castes in the present-day “Hindu society”,
> and describing the rest of the people as Hindus is a dirty swindle.
>
> 10\. Hindus alias the high caste descendants of the Aryan invaders
> have joined, and will continue to join, hands with any and every
> reactionary ideology and force - feudalism, capitalism, colonialism,
> American imperialism, etc. - in order to safeguared the caste system
> and its own stranglehold on the toiling masses of India.

We have presented in simple and straight language the lore which
Christian, British and Communist imperialists came to sell with varying
degrees of sophistication, in a large number of tomes, treatises, and
articles in learned journals published by prestigious publishing houses
such as the Oxford University Press. In any case, by now the so-called
Dalit Movement is retailing this lore in the way we have summarized it,
without being questioned by any of its highbrow hawkers.

The word “Hindu” was thus not only robbed of all the pride and prestige
it had acquired over the past several centuries, but also made
synonymous with foreign invaders who had committed no end to crimes
against the native people. The word no more designated the vast majority
of this country’s population; on the contrary, it became the hallmark of
a small minority which had conspired to masquerade as the majority. The
Buddhists, the Jains, the Sikhs, and the Animists (new name for those
subscribing to tribal religions) were taken out of the fold of Hinduism
at one fell sweep. Finally, the “Dravidian South” was given a call to
revolt against everything associated with the word “Hindu” - religion,
culture, language, etc.

This was the lore which was taught in school and college textbooks of an
educational system which had been designed and was being controlled by
the British establishment and the Christian missions. This was the lore
which was given the pride of place in Communist pamphlets and
periodicals which started to proliferate from the ‘twenties of this
century onwards. And this was the lore by mouthing which a section in
the Indian National Congress started strutting around as “progressive”,
“radical”, “revolutionary”, "socialist", and the rest. Pandit Jawaharlal
Nehru became the leader of this section after a brief visit to the
Soviet Union in 1927. And he started fancying himself as a great
historian when his *Glimpses of World History and Discovery of India*,
which revelled in this lore, were hailed as classics by the prestigious
press in this country and abroad.

Meanwhile, Muslim historians of the Marxist schools had polished up a
subsidiary thesis. Their main purpose was to salvage Islam from its
blood-soaked history, and present the medieval Muslim rule in India as a
native dispensation. Mohammad Habib of the Aligarh Muslim University
came out with the thesis that the Islamic invaders had destroyed Hindu
temples not in obedience to the tenets of Islam but out of their lust
for loot. This thesis was lapped up immediately by Pandit Nehru and his
progressive host in the Congress. Pandit Sunderlal picked up the hint
and painted Islam and the medieval Muslim rule in glorious colours. The
finishing touches were given by M.N. Roy who propounded that Islam had
come to India for completing the social revolution which Buddhism had
started but failed to accomplish because Brahminism had responded with
fire and sword.

But the word “Hindu” had not yet become a dirty word. It still covered
the Buddhists, the Jains, and the Sikhs except for some separatist
fringes which had imbibed the monothestic theology of the
Muslim-Christian combine or the Leftist lore. Stalwarts of Hindu
re-awakening - Swami Dayananda, Bankim Chandra, Vivekananda, Sri
Aurobindo - had seen through the Christian and the British game and
given a strong lead which had not yet been exhausted. Mahatma Gandhi was
still alive and was saying that “if Brahmanism does not revive, Hinduism
must perish”, that the caste system had provided strength to Hindu
society during difficult times, and that “I will not like to live in an
India which has ceased to be Hindu”.  
 

**IV**

The word “Hindu” started being brought into contempt on some scale in
the truncated Hindu homeland with the rise of Pandit Nehru to supreme
power in the post-independence period. He was a combined spokesman of
all imperialist ideologies which had visited this country in the past -
Islamic, Christian, British, and Communist. Small wonder that he placed
the Ministry of Education in the hands of a Muslim-Marxist combine
headed by Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. Christian missions were given full
facilities to educate the Hindus, and convert as many of them as they
could manage. The missionary apparatus started building itself anew,
after a period of panic experienced by it when the British Raj was
drawing to its end.  Meanwhile, Mohammad Habib had come out with another
thesis (1954), namely, that the so-called Muslim conquest of India was
really a “turn of public opinion” or an “urban revolution” in which the
Indian “working class” had preferred the *shariat* in place of the
*smiriti*, and the Turks in place of the Thukuris. Nehru approved the
thesis in a Preface. At the same time, he patronized the Communist Party
of India, so that it very soon became a formidable force. All this was
being done by him in the name of Secularism, which concept he had picked
up from the modern West and perverted to mean the opposite of what it
meant there.

Nehru’s daughter, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, carried her father’s game much
farther. In her fight for a monopoly of power, she split the Congress
Party, and made a common cause with the Communists. Well-known
Communists and fellow-travellers were given positions of power in the
ruling Congress Party, in the Government at the Centre as well in the
States, and in prestigious institutions all over the country. The
Muslim-Marxist combine of “historians” had already captured the Indian
History Congress during the days of Pandit Nehru, and many honest
historians had been hounded out of it. Now this combine was placed in
control of the Indian Council of Historical Research and entrusted with
extensive patronage. The combine took over the National Council of
Educational Research and Training also, and laid down the guidelines for
producing school textbooks on various subjects. The Jawaharlal Nehru
University was created and financed on a fabulous scale in order to
collect Communist professors from all over the country, and form them
into a frontline brigade for launching all sorts of anti-Hindu
campaigns.

The smokescreen for this Stalinist operation was provided by the slogan
of Secularism which nobody was supposed to question, or examine as to
what it had come to mean. Its meaning had to be accepted ex-cathedra,
and as laid down by the Muslim-Marxist combine. In the new political
parlance that emerged, Hinduism and the nationalism it inspired, became
blackned as “Communalism”. Small wonder that the word “Hindu” started
becoming a dirty word in the academia as well as the media. The Sikhs
had already opted out of the Hindu fold. The Jains started saying more
and more loudly that they were not Hindus. The climax came when the
Ramakrishna Mission and the Arya Samaj petitioned the High Courts for
obtaining the status of non-Hindu religions. An article in the
Constitution which gave certain concessions to non-Hindu educational
institutions was being cited in defence of this volte-face. But that was
only an excuse. The real reason was that nobody who thought he was
somebody was prepared to be known as a Hindu any more.

The Bharatiya Jana Sangh had been launched by some Hindus who were
already shying away from the word “Hindu”, and opting for the word
“Bharatiya”. It was taken over in due course by a pompous Nehruvian, and
whoever objected to the coup was hounded out, or silenced. The party was
now trying frantically to prove its Secular credentials. It was mortally
afraid of being called a Hindu party, and frequently displayed its
Muslim membership. Its tragedy was that the authentic Secularists were
not prepared to accept its claims, although it had invited every
stalwart of Secularism to use its platforms for delivering lectures on
the sanctified subject. Again, the climax came when, under pressure from
the newly-formed Janata Party of which the Bharatiya Jana Sangh had
became a constituent, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) also got
ready to consider dropping of the word “Hindu” from its constitution.
One wonders how things would have turned out if the Janata Party
government had not fallen before the critical session of the RSS could
be held. In any case, leaders of the Bharatiya Janata Party, the
reincarnation of the Bharatiya Jana Sangh, could be heard saying till
recently that they could no more afford to be known as Hindus (*ab apnê
ãpko Hindû kahnê sê kãm nahîñ chalêgã*)!

That is the history of the word “Hindu”, down to our own times. In the
present work we have disregarded that part of its history which tells
how imperialist ideologies have manipulated its meaning, and retained
that part which tells how it came to signify everything dust is native
and natural to this country - the people, the social fabric, the
cultural complex, and the vast spiritual vision. So far as honest
historians are concerned, the word “Hindu” has covered, and continues to
cover, all religions which took birth in this country, and the
expression “Hindu temples” stands for temples where people subscribing
to these indigenous religions worship.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) *Epigraphia Indica*, Vol. VI (1900-01), p. 327, footnote 2. A
pun on the Muslim title “sultãn” can also be detected. The word has been
Sanskritized to “suratrãNa” which may mean “defender of the Gods” as
well as “defended by the Gods”.

[²](#2a) Ibid., Vol. III (1894--95), p. 40.

[³](#3a) Ibid., Vol. XIII (1915-16), p. 5, and Vol. XVII (1923-24), p.
111.

[⁴](#4a) Appendix volume to Vols. XIX-XXIII, pp. 109-10.

[⁵](#5a) Ibid., Vol. XVII (1920-21), p. 203.

[⁶](#6a) Ibid., Vol. I (1892), p. 365.

[⁷](#7a) Ibid., Vol. XIV (1917-18), p. 173.

[⁸](#8a) Ibid., Vol. XXXIII (1959-60), pp. 114-15.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., Vol. III (1894-95), p. 148.

[¹⁰](#10a) Ibid., Vol.  XIV (1917-18), p. 345. and Vol. IV (1896-97), p.
2.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


