+++
title = "16 14 Encounter with Mahatma Gandhi"

+++
**14**  
**Encounter with Mahatma Gandhi**

The next dialogue between Hinduism and Christianity was the longest in
duration and the richest in content. The spokesman for Hinduism was
Mahatma Gandhi. Christianity was represented by many men and women from
India and abroad. Some of them occupied high positions in the worldwide
Christian mission.

The dialogue started in 1893 when Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi reached
South Africa as a barrister and discovered that the Christians who
befriended him were looking forward to his conversion. It ended on
December 24, 1947 when Mahatma Gandhi, the father figure in independent
India, offered Christmas greetings to Christians in India and abroad,
wishing them well and hoping that they “will pursue the path of
sacrifice and martyrdom shown by Jesus Christ.” At the same time he
asked his Christian countrymen to shed fears about their future in
independent India.

Gandhiji was brought up in an atmosphere of religious tolerance. He had
accompanied his mother and father to the Vaishnava Haveli and the
temples of Shiva and Rama. Everywhere they worshipped with equal
reverence. Jain monks “would pay frequent visits to my father” and talk
with him “on subjects religious and mundane.” So did Muslim and Parsi
friends of his father who “listened to them with respect, and often with
interest”^([1](#1))

Small wonder that when he saw the behaviour of Christian missionaries
for the first time, he “developed a sort of dislike” for Christianity.
He was a school student at Rajkot. “In those days,” he writes,
“Christian missionaries used to stand in a corner near the high school
and hold forth, pouring abuse on Hindus and their gods. I could not
endure this. I must have stood there to hear them once only, but that
was enough to dissuade me from repeating the experience.” His dislike of
Christianity deepened when he heard about the doings of a “well-known
Hindu” convert. “It was the talk of the town,” he continues, “that, when
he was baptised, he had to eat beef and drink liquor, that he also had
to change his clothes and that thenceforward he began to go about in
European costume including a hat. These things got on my nerves. Surely,
thought I, a religion that compelled one to eat beef and drink liquor
and change one’s own clothes did not deserve the name. I also heard the
news that the new convert had already begun abusing the religion of his
ancestors, their customs and their country. All these things created in
me a dislike for Christianity.”^([2](#2))

By the time Gandhiji read the Bible for the first time, he had developed
an eager and reflective interest in religion. Towards the end of his
second year in England, he read Sir Edwin Arnold’s *The Song Celestial*
and *The Light of Asia*. The first work is the famous English
translation of the Gita. The second narrates the life of the Buddha. The
Gita “struck me as one of priceless worth.” As regards the life of the
Buddha, “once I had begun it I could not leave off.” Around the same
time, he read Madame Blavatsky’s *The Key to Theosophy* which “disabused
me of the notion fostered by missionaries that Hinduism was rife with
superstition.” So he welcomed a copy of the Bible sold to him by a
Christian friend who was a vegetarian and who did not drink. “I began
reading it,” writes Gandhiji, “but I could not possibly read through the
Old Testament. I read the book of Genesis, and the chapters that
followed invariably sent me to sleep. But just for the sake of being
able to say that I had read it, I plodded through the other books with
much difficulty and without the least interest or understanding. I
disliked reading the book of Numbers.”^([3](#3))

The New Testament, however, “produced a different impression, especially
the Sermon on the Mount which went straight to my heart.” This first
impression proved to be his last also. In years to come, he continued to
identify “true Christianity” with the Sermon on the Mount and exclude
everything else in Christian theology to the chagrin of Christian
missionaries who could neither disown the Sermon nor stop at it. “My
young mind,” continues Gandhiji, “tried to unify the teaching of the
*Gita, The Light of Asia* and the Sermon on the Mount. That renunciation
was the highest form of religion appealed to me greatly.”^([4](#4))

Gandhiji came in contact with some believing Christians during his stay
in South Africa and had an opportunity to reflect on Christian theology.
Mr. A. W. Baker, the attorney of Gandhiji’s client in Pretoria “was a
staunch lay preacher” and “one of the Directors of the South Africa
General Mission.” He showed interest in the religion of Gandhiji who
confessed that though he was a Hindu, he did not “know much of Hinduism”
and “knew less of other religions.” Mr. Baker invited Gandhiji to the
daily meetings of his missionary coworkers and promised to give him
“some religious books to read.”^([5](#5)) Gandhiji was somewhat
intrigued and asked himself, “What… can be the meaning of Mr. Baker’s
interest in me? What shall I gain from his religious co-workers? How far
should I undertake the study of Christianity? How was I to obtain
literature about Hinduism? And how was I to understand Christianity in
its proper perspective without thoroughly knowing my own religion?” He
came to the conclusion that “I should make a dispassionate study of all
that came to me, and deal with Baker’s group as God might guide me” and
that “I should not think of embracing another religion before I had
fully understood my own.”^([6](#6))

He started attending the meetings where the “prayers did not last for
more than five minutes.” He was introduced to Mr. Baker’s “co-workers”
one of whom was Mr. Coates who “loaded me with books, as it were.” The
books were a mix of the stale and the stimulating. At the end, “the
arguments in proof of Jesus being the only incarnation of God and the
Mediator between God and man left me unmoved.” But Mr. Coates “was not
the man to accept defeat.” One day, “He saw, round my neck, the
Vaishnava necklace of Tulasi-beads” and said, “come, let me break the
necklace.” Gandhiji told him, “No, you will not. It is a sacred gift
from my mother.”^([7](#7)) Mr. Coates “could not appreciate my argument,
as he had no regard for my religion.” He was convinced that “salvation
was impossible for me unless I accepted Christianity which represented
the truth, and that my sins would not be washed away except by
intercession of Jesus, and that all good works were useless.”^([8](#8))

Another Christian group which Gandhiji met at this time was that of the
Plymouth Brethren who proclaimed that “as we believe in the atonement of
Jesus, our own sins do not bind us.”^([9](#9)) One of the Brothers
“proved as good as his word.” He “committed transgressions” and remained
“undisturbed by the thought of them.” Gandhiji was relieved to know that
“all Christians did not believe in such a theory of atonement” and
assured Mr. Coates that “the distorted belief of a Plymouth Brother
could not prejudice me against Christianity.”^([10](#10)) 

By now Mr. Baker “was getting anxious about my future.”^([11](#11)) He
took Gandhiji to the Wellington Convention of Protestant Christians.
Gandhiji’s colour created some problems for him in the hotel and the
dining room but Mr. Baker “stood by the guests of a hotel.” The
Convention lasted for three days and Gandhiji “appreciated the
devoutness of those who attended it.” But he “saw no reason for changing
my belief in my religion.” He found it impossible “to believe that I
could go to heaven or attain salvation only by becoming a Christian.” He
made a frank confession of his doubts to his Christian friends who “were
shocked.”^([12](#12))

The Convention helped Gandhiji to make up his mind about Christianity.
He adhered to these views for the rest of his life. “My difficulties,”
he writes, “lay deeper. It was more than I could believe that Jesus was
the only incarnate son of God, and that only he who believed in him
would have everlasting life. If God could have sons, all of us were his
sons. If Jesus was like God or God Himself, their all men were like God
and could be God Himself. My reason was not ready to believe literally
that Jesus by his death and by his blood redeemed the sins of the world.
Metaphorically there might be some truth in it. Again, according to
Christianity only human beings had souls, and not other living beings,
for whom death meant complete extinction, while I held a contrary view.
I could accept Jesus as a martyr, as an embodiment of sacrifice and a
divine teacher, but not as the most perfect man ever born. His death on
the cross was a great example to the world, but that there was anything
like a mysterious or miraculous virtue, in it my heart could not accept.
The pious lives of Christians did not give me anything that the lives of
men of other faiths had failed to give. I had seen in other lives just
the same reformation that I had heard of among the Christians.
Philosophically there was nothing extraordinary in Christian principles.
From the point of view of sacrifice, it seemed that the Hindus greatly
surpassed Christians. It was impossible for me to regard Christianity as
a perfect religion or the greatest of all religions.”^([13](#13))

At the same time, Gandhiji felt greatly dissatisfied with Hinduism as he
saw it. He could not understand how “untouchability could be a part of
Hinduism.” As not only his Christian but also Muslim friends were trying
to convert him, he wanted to know more about Hinduism. He presented his
problem to Raychandbhai, his mentor in India, and “corresponded with
other religious authorities in India.”^([14](#14)) Raychandbhai assured
him that “no other religion has the subtle and profound thought of
Hinduism, its vision of the soul, or its charity.” Thus Gandhiji “took a
path which my Christian friends had not intended for me.”^([15](#15))

He continued to read books written by Christians and also to correspond
with Christian friends in England. He found that some exponents of
Christianity did not adhere to Christian theology and took a broader and
deeper view of Jesus and his message. He started moving away from
Christianity as preached by the missionaries. The missionaries, however,
refused to give him up as a bad job and when he moved to Durban, “Mr.
Spencer Walton, the head of the South Africa General Mission, found me
out”^([16](#16))

The approach this time was softer. Mr. Walton never asked Gandhiji to
embrace Christianity. He became Gandhiji’s friend and introduced him to
Mrs. Walton. Gandhiji liked them both for their “humility, perseverance
and devotion to work.”^([17](#17)) At the suggestion of some other
Christian friends, Gandhiji started attending the Wesleyan Church every
Sunday. But he found the sermons “uninspiring” and the congregation
“worldly-minded people who went to church for recreation and in
conformity to custom.”^([18](#18)) On occasions, he fell into an
“involuntary doze” and felt ashamed. He was relieved when he found that
his neighbours in the Church “were in no better case.”^([19](#19))
Finally he gave up attending the Church.

Gandhiji had a standing invitation from a Christian family to join them
for lunch every Sunday. “Once we began to compare,” he writes, “the life
of Jesus with that of Buddha. ‘Look at Gautama’s compassion,’ said I.
‘It was not confined to mankind, it was extended to all living beings.
Does not one’s heart overflow with love to think of the lamb joyously
perched on his shoulders? One fails to notice this love for all living
beings in the life of Jesus.’ The comparison pained the lady.” The
contact came to an end soon after because Gandhiji tried to teach her
son the superiority of vegetarian food over meat-eating. The lady felt
dismayed and told Gandhiji that “my boy is none the better for your
company.” He took the hint and stopped the Visits.^([20](#20))

Gandhiji had become a famous man by the time he left South Africa for
good in 1915 and started working in India. He had not yet emerged as the
Mahatma, nor risen to the supreme command of the national movement for
freedom from British rule. Christian missionaries regarded him as a
friend because of his proclaimed admiration for Jesus. Early in 1916 he
was invited to address a Missionary Conference at Madras on the subject
of Swadeshi. After having defined Swadeshi as “that spirit in us which
restricts us to the use and service of our immediate surroundings to the
exclusion of the more remote”, he said that “in order to satisfy the
requirements of the definition, I must restrict myself to my ancestral
religion.”^([21](#21)) He advised the missionaries to “serve the spirit
of Christianity better, by dropping the goal of proselytising but
continuing their philanthropic work.” He told them that Christ’s
message, “Go Ye Unto All the World”, had been “narrowly interpreted” and
that “in every case, a conversion leaves a sore behind it.” At the same
time he held up Hinduism as the embodiment of the Swadeshi spirit. That
was the secret, he said, of its being the most tolerant
religion.^([22](#22))

Christian missionaries had been propagating that the Reform Movement in
Hinduism as well as Gandhiji’s doctrine of Satyagraha were influenced by
the principles of Christianity. The proposition was presented to
Gandhiji by Rev. Wells Branch in the latter’s letter dated May 9, 1919.
He wrote back on May 12 that “I do not think either has anything to do
with Christian teaching.” He held “modern civilisation and modern
education” as responsible for the Reform Movement. As to satyagraha, he
said that “it is an extended application of the ancient
teaching.”^([23](#23)) In the same letter he rejected the “exclusive
divinity of Jesus” while praising the Sermon on the Mount. Rev. Branch
had come to believe that there were many “secret followers of Jesus” in
India who were not coming out in the open because they feared
persecution from Hindu society. Gandhiji replied, “I have moved among
thousands upon thousands of Indians but I have not found any secret
followers of Jesus.”^([24](#24))

Thus by the time M. K. Gandhi emerged as Mahatma Gandhi and took command
of the national movement for freedom in 1920, he had studied and
reflected upon all aspects of Christianity and formed his views on them.
He had watched the working of Christian missions from close quarters and
understood their role vis-a-vis Hindu religion and culture. In years to
come he would identify himself as a *sanAtanI* Hindu fully satisfied
with his ancestral faith. He would explain and elaborate his views on
Christianity and Christian missions and defend the principles and
practices of Hinduism which the missionaries held in contempt. But
because he admired Jesus as a great teacher, he would continue to arouse
fond hopes in Christian hearts.  
Meanwhile, he had changed from a loyal citizen of the British Empire to
its uncompromising opponent. The weapon he forged for fighting the
British Raj in India was non-violent non-cooperation. The struggle for
freedom was combined with a programme for socioeconomic reconstruction
in which the abolition of untouchability was a major plank. His
campaigns involved him in conflict not only with the British Government
of India but also with Hindu orthodoxy.

While he was in Sabarmati Jail he was interviewed by a representative of
*The Manchester Guardian* some time before March 18, 1922. *The Hindu*
of Madras published the interview on August 15, 1922. The interviewer
tried to pin him down by saying that non-cooperation was “contrary to
Christ’s teaching.” Gandhiji replied, “Not being a Christian I am not
bound to justify my action by Christian principles.”^([25](#25))

While he was still in jail, the *Young India* of February 8, 1923
published an interesting item which deserves to be reproduced in full:

Rev. Dr. Macarish, elected head of the Presbyterian Church Synod which
recently met at Orillia in Canada referred to the incidental commercial
advantages of religious missions in the following words:

“One cry in the country had long been markets, wider markets, and since
the introduction of the Fordney Bill, that cry has been louder and more
insistent than ever. If the farmers and manufacturers desire to create a
market, they would do well to get in touch with foreign missions, and we
are assured that it would not be long till they received their money
back with liberal interest.

“Although the missionary went to the foreign fields to win souls for
Jesus, the results of his labours also meant the extension of commerce.
Trade would follow the banner of the Cross, as readily as it would the
Union jack, the Stars and Stripes, or any of the other national emblems,
and usually it cost a good deal less.

“It cost British Government £225,000,000 to make the Union jack float
over Pretoria; yet it is doubtful if the South African war did as much
to promote trade, as missions there had previously done. In the past,
the missionaries had been the best advertisers of heathen countries. Dr.
John G. Paton did more to advertise the South Sea Islands than the
sandal-wood traders ever did, and who ever did more to advertise Africa
than Livingston?

“Fifty years ago, it was said that when a missionary had been abroad for
twenty years, he was worth £50,000 to British commerce; and it was
probably not extravagant to say that one of our missionaries in India or
China to-day was worth a similar sum to any great industrial centre in
this country.”

Gandhiji had launched his programme for abolition of untouchability soon
after he came out of jail. He had made it clear to all concerned that
untouchability was a Hindu problem and that Hindus alone should
participate in the movement for its abolition. But Christian missions
tried to jump into the fray. He received a letter from Mr. George Joseph
of Travancore asking whether he could join the satyagraha at Vykom which
was going on for securing to the Harijans the right to travel on certain
roads and enter Hindu temples for worship. Gandhiji advised him on April
6, 1924 to “let the Hindus do the work” and referred him to the Nagpur
resolution of the Congress which “calls upon the Hindu members to remove
the curse of untouchability.” At the same time he drew Mr. Joseph’s
attention to the untouchability practised by the Syrian
Christians.^([26](#26)) He also told the Hindus not to seek the support
of non-Hindus in the Vykom satyagraha. “If you are fighting as an
enlightened against the bigoted Hindu,” he wrote to K. Madhavan Nair on
May 6, 1924, “it is your bounden duty not only not to seek but
respectfully to reject all support from non-Hindus.”^([27](#27)) He was
aware that Christian missionaries were not above exploiting the
situation to the disadvantage of Hinduism.

A “retired Indian police officer” in England wrote in *The Manchester
Guardian* that Christian missionaries had done commendable work for the
uplift of Harijans. Gandhiji thought that the article deserved his
comment. He wrote a Note under the heading ‘Ignorance’ in the *Young
India* of July 13, 1924. “The writer brings up for commendation,” he
said, “the Christian work among untouchables; I must not enter into the
merits of Christian work in India. The indirect influence of
Christianity has been to quicken Hinduism into life. The cultured Hindu
society has admitted its grievous sin against the untouchables. But the
effect of Christianity upon India in general must be judged by the life
lived in our midst by the average Christian and its effect upon us. I am
sorry to have to record my opinion that it has been disastrous. It pains
me to have to say that the Christian missionaries as a body, with
honourable exceptions, have actively supported a system which has
impoverished, enervated and demoralised a people considered to be among
the gentlest and the most civilized on earth.”^([28](#28))

Gandhiji had the leisure to read and look through a large number of
books, mostly on religion, while he was in Sabarmati jail. Some of these
books had been sent to him by Christians in India and abroad, who wanted
to enlighten him about Christianity. Commenting on these books in the
*Young India* of September 4, 1924, he wrote, “I must confess that
whilst I recognized their kind motive, I could not appreciate the
majority of books they sent. I wish I could say something of their gifts
that would please them. But that would not be fair or truthful if I
could not mean it. The orthodox books on Christianity do not give me any
satisfaction. My regard for the life of Jesus is indeed very great...
But I do not accept the orthodox teaching that Jesus was or is God
incarnate in the accepted sense or that he was, or is the only son of
God. I do not believe in the doctrine of appropriation of another’s
merit… I do not take the words ‘Son’ and ‘Father’ and ‘the Holy Ghost’
literally… Nor do I consider every word in the New Testament as God’s
own word. Between the Old and the New there is a fundamental difference.
Whilst the Old contains some very deep truths, I am unable to pay it the
same honours I pay the New Testament. I regard the latter as an
extension of the Old and in some matters rejection of the Old. Nor do I
regard the New as the last word of God... I would therefore respectfully
urge my Christian friends and well-wishers to take me as I am. I respect
and appreciate their wish that I should think and be as they are even as
I respect and appreciate a similar wish on the part of my Mussalman
friends. I regard both the religions as equally true with my own. But my
own gives me full satisfaction. It contains all that I need for my
growth. It teaches me to pray not that others may believe as I believe
but that they may grow to their full height in their own
religion.”^([29](#29)) He added, “That which I would not have missed was
the *Mahabharata* and the Upanishads, the *Ramayana* and the
*Bhagavata*.”^([30](#30))

Mahadev Desai has recorded in his Diary dated November 3, 1924 that a
Swiss missionary met Gandhiji and apologised for his broken English.
Gandhiji put him at ease by telling him that English was a foreign
tongue for him also. The missionary told him, “Every one knows you all
over Europe. In Germany and Switzerland, you are quite a name because
you are an excellent Christian.” Gandhiji laughed and said, “But I am
not a Christian.” The missionary persisted, “But you follow Christian
principles in life faithfully.” Gandhiji pointed out, “Yes, that is
true. But those principles are found in my religion as well.” The
missionary “was a little put out” but insisted, “But in Christianity
specially so.” Gandhiji observed, “That is doubtful. I think all
religions enjoin certain general commandments – ‘speak the truth’, ‘harm
nobody’, etc. But personally my own religion gives me peace; if I got it
from any other I would certainly embrace that religion.” The missionary
“did not seem to appreciate this remark”, and left.^([31](#31))

The *Navajivan* dated December 7, 1924 recorded an interview which
Gandhiji gave to two American professors. One of them asked, “Do you
believe in Christ as the Saviour of humanity through His vicarious
suffering?” Gandhiji replied, “I am not much impressed with the
concept.” The professor enquired, “Are you shocked?” Gandhiji said, “No,
not shocked either… I do not believe at all that one individual can wash
off the sins of some other and grant him redemption. It is a
psychological fact that one individual may feel pained at the sins and
sorrows of another and the consciousness that the former is grieved may
lead to the moral uplift of the latter. But I cannot accept the idea
that one man die for the sake of the sins of millions and save
them.”^([32](#32))

The missionary machine, however, kept grinding in the same old grooves.
Its campaign among the Harijans kept on maligning Hinduism. Gandhiji was
pained. “Lots of people,” he said at the Antyaja Conference on January
16, 1925, “will come and tell you that your Hindu religion is all wrong,
as you are not allowed to go to school or enter the temple. To such
people you should say, ‘We shall settle accounts with our Hindu brothers
; you may not come between us as you may not intervene in quarrel
between father and son or among relatives.’ And you should remain
steadfast to your religion... Many Christian friends ask me to turn
Christian. I tell them there is nothing wrong with my religion. Why
should I give it up? I have joined the *Antyajas* and if for that reason
Hindus persecute me, do I cease to be a Hindu? Hinduism is meant for me
and my soui.”^([33](#33))

Mahadev Desai records in his Diary dated May 30, 1925 that when Gandhiji
was in Darjeeling he was invited by Miss Roland, a Christian missionary,
to address an audience at the “Bengali teaching school” for
missionaries. About “a hundred or hundred and fifty European men and
women were present.”^([34](#34)) He said, “Conversion to a religion is
like passing one’s Entrance Examination, standing at the gateway to
Heaven. Whether you accept one religion or another is of no consequence.
All that God wants us to say is whether what we profess with our lips,
we but believe in our hearts. There are thousands of men and women in
India who do not know Jesus or his amazing sacrifice, but are far more
God-fearing than many a Christian who knows the Bible and feels he
follows the decalouge.” He had no use for nominal Christians. “In my
humble opinion,” he continued, “a man is not ‘converted’ the moment he
renounces his own faith and embraces another. I can quote a number of
examples of Indians and Zulus who have turned Christians, but have not
the faintest idea of the law of love or the sacrifice of Jesus or his
message.”^([35](#35))

He acknowledged “the debt we owe to missionaries for service to
vernacular languages and literatures- Gujarati, Marathi and Bengali.” He
mentioned Pope and Taylor for what they did for Tamil and Gujarati. “But
in this,” he said, “you have touched but a fringe. You will serve India
best when you pick up the poorest of Indians and that only when you
identify yourselves with them.”^([36](#36)) He regretted what Bishop
Heber had said about these poor people - Where every prospect pleases,
and man alone is vile. “He was wrong. Let God forgive him,” Gandhiji
added.^([37](#37))

During the same visit to Bengal, Gandhiji was invited to speak before a
meeting of missionaries held at the Y.M.C.A. in Calcutta on June 28,
1925. He started by telling them of his association with Christians
since his student days in London. “In South Africa,” he said, “where I
found myself in the midst of inhospitable surroundings, I was able to
make hundreds of Christian friends.” He made them laugh when he told
them, “There was even a time in my life when a very sincere friend of
mine, a great and good Quaker, had designs on me. He thought that I was
too good not to become a Christian. I was sorry to have disappointed
him. One missionary friend of mine in South Africa still writes to me
and asks me, ‘How is it with you?’ I have always told this friend that
so far as know, it is well with me.”^([38](#38))

Next, he told them about his meeting with Kali Charan Banerjee. “In
answer to promises made,” he said, “to one of these Christian friends of
mine, I thought it my duty to see one of the biggest of Indian
Christians, as I was told he was, - the late Kali Charan Banerjee. I
went over to him - I am telling you of the deep search that I have
undergone in order that I might leave no stone unturned to find out the
true path - I went to him with an absolutely open mind and in a
receptive mood, and I met him also under circumstances which were most
affecting. I found that there was much in common between Mr. Banerjee
and myself. His simplicity, his humility, his courage, his truthfulness,
all these things I have all along admired. He met me when his wife was
on her death-bed. You cannot imagine a more impressive scene, a more
ennobling circumstance. I told Mr. Banerjee, ‘I have come to you as a
seeker’, - this was in 1901 –‘I have come to you in fulfilment of a
sacred promise I have made to some of my dearest Christian friends that
I will leave no stone unturned to find out the true light.’ I told him
that I had given my friends the assurance that no worldly gain would
keep me away from the light, if I could but see it. Well, I am not going
to engage you in giving a description of the little discussion that we
had between us. It was very good, very noble. I came away, not sorry,
not dejected, not disappointed, but I felt sad that even Mr. Banerjee
could not convince me.”

Passing on to his present position, he said, “Today my position is that
though I admire much in Christianity, I am unable to identify myself
with orthodox Christianity. I must tell you in all humility that
Hinduism as I know it, entirely satisfies my. soul, fills my whole being
and I find a solace in the Bhagavad Gita and Upanishads that I miss even
in the Sermon on the Mount. Not that I do not prize the ideal presented
therein, not that some of the precious teachings in the Sermon on the
Mount have not left a deep impression upon me, but I must confess to you
that when doubts haunt me, when disappointments stare me in the face,
and when I see not one ray of light on the horizon I turn to the
Bhagavad Gita, and find a verse to comfort me; and I immediately begin
to smile in the midst of overwhelming sorrow. My life has been full of
external tragedies and if they have not left any visible and indelible
effect on me, I owe it to the teaching of the Bhagavad
Gita.”^([39](#39))

His love of Hinduism did not mean disrespect for other religions. “I
must add,” he said, “that I did not stop at studying the Bible and the
commentaries and other books on Christianity that my friends placed in
my hands; but I said to myself, if I was to find my satisfaction through
reasoning, I must study the scriptures of other religions also and make
my choice. And I turned to the Koran. I tried to understand what I could
of Judaism as distinguished from Christianity. I studied Zoroastrianism
and I came to the conclusion that all religions were right, but every
one of them imperfect - imperfect naturally and necessarily, - because
they were interpreted with our poor intellects, sometimes with our poor
hearts, and more often misinterpreted. In all religions, I found to my
grief, that there were various and even contradictory interpretations of
some texts…”^([40](#40))

He chided the missionaries for misrepresenting Hinduism. “You, the
missionaries,” he said, “come to India thinking that you come to a land
of heathens, of idolaters, of men who do not know God. One of the
greatest of Christian divines, Bishop Heber, wrote the two lines which
have always left a sting with me: ‘Where every prospect pleases, And man
alone is vile.’ I wish he had not written them. My own experience in my
travels throughout India has been to the contrary. I have gone from one
end of the country to the other, without any prejudice, in a relentless
search after truth, and I am not able to say that here in this fair
land, watered by the great Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Jumna, man is
vile. He is not vile. He is as much a seeker after truth as you and I
are, possibly more so… I tell you there are many such huts belonging to
the untouchables where you will certainly find God. They do not reason
but they persist in their belief that God is. They depend upon God for
His assistance and find it too. There are many stories told through the
length and breadth of India about these noble untouchables. Vile as some
of them may be, there are noblest specimens of humanity in their
midst.”^([41](#41))

And this nobility was not confined to the ‘untouchables’ of India. “No.
I am here to tell you,” he continued, “that there are non-Brahmins,
there are Brahmins who are as fine specimens of humanity as you will
find in any place on the earth. There are Brahmins today in India who
are embodiments of self-sacrifice, godliness, and humility. There are
Brahmins who are devoting themselves body and soul to the service of
untouchables, but with execration from orthodoxy. They do not mind it,
because in serving pariahs they are serving God. I can quote chapter and
verse from my experience. I place these facts before you in all humility
for the simple reason that you may know this land better, the land to
which you have come to serve. You are here to find out the distress of
the people of India and remove it. But I hope you are here also in a
receptive mood and, if there is anything that India has to give, you
will not stop your ears, you will not close your eyes and steel your
hearts, but open up your ears, eyes and, most of all, your hearts to
receive all that may be good in the land. I give you my assurance that
there is a great deal of good in India. Do not flatter yourselves with
the belief that a mere recital of that celebrated verse in St. John
makes a man a Christian. If I have read the Bible correctly, I know many
men who have never heard the name of Jesus Christ or have even rejected
the official interpretation of Christianity will, probably, if Jesus
came in our midst today in the flesh, be owned by him more than many of
us. I therefore ask you to approach the problem before you with
open-heartedness, and humility.”^([42](#42))

Gandhiji told the missionaries that they stood isolated from the people
of India because they “come to India under the shadow, or, if you like,
under the protection of a temporal power, and it creates an impassable
bar.”^([43](#43)) He said that he was not impressed by the “statistics
that so many orphans have been reclaimed and brought to the Christian
faith.” He asked them to identify themselves with the masses and find
out what the masses need most. “You cannot,” he said, “present the
hungry and famished masses with God. Their God is their
food.”^([44](#44))

A missionary asked him, “Do you definitely feel the presence of the
living Christ within you?” Gandhiji replied, “If it is the historical
Jesus, surnamed Christ, that the inquirer refers to, I must say I do
not.: If it is an adjective signifying one of the names of God, then I
must say I do feel the presence of God - call him Christ, call him
Krishna, call him Rama. We have one thousand names of God, and if I did
not feel the presence of God within me, I see so much of misery and
disappointment every day that I would be a raving maniac and my
destination would be the Hooghly.”^([45](#45))

An Englishmen “defended Bishop Heber’s song on the ground that the song
did not refer to Indians but to Christians” and that “they described
themselves in their songs very often as the worst of sinners.” Gandhiji
“put his defence out of court.” He quoted “those parts of the song which
said that India, Africa and such other countries were inviting the
Christians to spread their light in these lands, and that it was there
that nature’s prospect pleased but only man was vile, because the
heathen was worshipping wood and stone in his blindness.” At the end he
asked, “Is it not strange, that a song written ages ago is still sung in
Christian circles?”^([46](#46))

On August 12, 1925 Gandhiji delivered another speech before the Y.M.C.A.
at Calcutta. He started by giving an account of his association with
Christianity and Christians. He mentioned Principal S. K. Rudra and C.
F. Andrews as among his best friends. Coming to the duty of Indian
Christians, he said, “In my humble opinion a Christian Young Indian owes
a double duty - to those whose religion he has given up and to those
whose religion he has adopted… The Indian Christian’s duty to the
religion he has given up is to retain all the good that belongs to it
and impart it to the new he has taken. Contrarily, he takes the best of
the new religion and transmits it to those whom he has left or who have
banished him. But that never happens in a majority of cases. With deep
grief that has to be noted. And in Madras you go to different quarters
altogether, but by no means a congenial surroundings. You will find
there vice double-distilled and no gain on either side.”^([47](#47))

Instead, the Indian Christians had invited a double tragedy. They did
not mix with Indians, and Europeans would not mix with them. “I tried to
talk,” he said, “as I kept walking on the Ellisbridge \[in Ahmedabad\]
to young girls walking to their seminary. They did not even return my
salaams. I attended a service also. You will be surprised to see that I
was sitting in a corner hoping to exchange a word - without avail, not
even a glance. Excuses there may be, but that should not be the case.
You cut yourself away from your kith and kin…”^([48](#48))

Another great mistake the converts to Christianity were making was to
neglect their native languages and try to learn the English language
alone. “They are passing through schools and colleges,” he said, “like
so many pieces of a machine - but they don’t think, don’t originate,
forget their mother tongue. They try to learn the English language,
succeed in making a hash of it, and trying to think in a foreign tongue,
become paralysed… There is something radically wrong in a system which
has brought about such helplessness.” He commanded to them the example
set by Madhusudan Datta who had “enriched his mother tongue” and Kali
Charan Banerjee and S. K. Rudra who had retained their Indianness after
becoming Christians. “If the Indian Christians,” he concluded, “want to
serve their country, are to serve the religion they profess, it will be
necessary to revise a great deal of what they are doing
today.”^([49](#49))

He was happy when the speakers who preceded him at a congregation of the
Baptist Church on August 20, spoke in their mother tongue. “The man who
discards his mother tongue,” he said, “gives up thereby his parents, his
friends, his neighbours and his country as well. The man who is capable
of snapping such ties of love becomes unfit for doing any good to
humanity or to anybody whatever. And the man unfit to serve the world is
unfit to know or serve God.”^([50](#50))

He upheld the same spirit of Swadeshi in other spheres of life. “During
my travels,” he continued, “I find a general belief that to turn a
Christian is to turn European; to become self-willed, and give up
self-restraint, use only foreign cloth, dress oneself in European style
and start taking meat and brandy. But I think the fact is, if a person
discards his country, his customs and his old connections and manners
when he changes his religion, he becomes all the more unfit to gain a
knowledge of God. For, a change of religion means really a conversion of
the heart. When there is a real conversion, a man’s heart grows. But in
this country one finds that conversion brings about deep disdain for
one’s old religion and its followers, i.e., one’s old friends and
relatives. The next change that takes place is that of dress and manners
and behaviour. All that does great harm to the country. In my view your
object in changing your religion should be to bring about the prosperity
of your country.”^([51](#51))

He told them that conversion should not mean license in conduct. He drew
their attention to what the Bible teaches about one’s conduct towards
one’s neighbours. “Christian friends tell me,” he said, “that when the
change their faith, there remains no need for them to observe any
restraint. They say, ‘You can do anything you like when you become a
Christian.’ I respectfully say that this is a wrong notion. I shall give
you an instance to prove my contention. There is a common belief that
while some food is forbidden and some allowed in Hinduism, once you
become a Christian, you get a license to eat anything you like and drink
even liquor. Hence there are a lot of Christians who disregard their
neighbour’s feelings and do what they like at the cost of hurting them.
But I was told the other day that the Bible condemns such
conduct.”^([52](#52))

A student doing post-graduate studies in the U. S.A. wrote to Gandhiji
asking for his “frank evaluation of the work of Christian missionaries
in India.” He wanted to know if “Christianity has some contribution to
make to the life of India” and if India could “do without Christian
missionaries.” Gandhiji said, “In my opinion Christian missionaries have
done good to us indirectly. Their direct contribution is probably more
harmful than otherwise. I am against the modem methods of proselytising.
Years’ experience of proselytising both in South Africa and India has
convinced me that it has not raised the general moral tone of converts
who have imbibed the superficialities of European civilization, and have
missed the teaching of Jesus. I must be understood to refer to the
general tendency and not to brilliant exceptions. The indirect
contribution, on the other hand, of Christian missionary effort is
great. It has stimulated Hindu and Mussalman religious research. It has
forced us to put our house in order. The great educational and curative
institutions of Christian missions I also count among indirect results,
because they have been established, not for their own sakes, but as an
aid to proselytizing.”^([53](#53))

A Christian Indian domiciled in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) but studying in
the U.S.A. sent to Gandhiji a number of questions on behalf of students
associated with the Y.M.C.A. One of the question was, “What is your
attitude towards the teachings of Jesus Christ?” Gandhiji published his
reply in the *Young India* of February 25, 1926: “They have an immense
moral value for me, but I do not regard everything said in the Bible as
the final word of God or exhaustive or even acceptable from the moral
standpoint. I regard Jesus Christ as one of the greatest teachers of
mankind, but I do not consider him to be the ‘only son of
God’.”^([54](#54))

An English translation of Gandhiji’s autobiography was being serialised
in the *Young India* from December 3, 1925 onwards. When the account of
his first encounter with Christianity appeared in the weekly, he
received a letter from Rev. H. R. Scott, “at present stationed at
Surat.” Gandhiji published the letter in the *Young India* of March 4,
1926. “I was the only missionary in Rajkot during those years (from 1883
to 1897),” wrote Rev. Scott, “and what you say about Christian
missionaries in Rajkot standing at a corner near the High school and
pouring abuse on Hindus and their gods fills me with painful wonder. I
certainly never preached ‘at a corner near the High school’; my regular
preaching station was under a banyan tree in the Pan Bazar; and I
certainly never ‘poured abuse on Hindus and their gods.’ That would be
strange way to win a hearing from Hindus. Then you say that a well-known
Hindu was baptised at that time, and that ‘he had to eat beef and drink
liquor, and to change his clothes, and go about in European clothes,
including a hat.’ No wonder that such a story got on your nerves, if you
believed it. Well, I have been over 42 years in India, and I have never
heared of such a thing happening; and indeed I know it to be quite
contrary to what all missionaries with whom I am acquainted teach and
believe and practise. During my time in Rajkot I baptised a number of
Brahmins and Jain sadhus. They certainly had not to ‘eat beef and drink
liquor’, either at the time of baptism or at any other time... I know of
course that this kind of story is told about converts to Christianity in
Kathiawad and elsewhere in India. It is obviously the wilful invention
of people who wish to prevent the spread of Christianity in India and
hope thereby to frighten young Hindus who show an inclination to learn
the truth about Christianity, and no doubt it has had its results in
deterring many such honest inquirers as yourself. But surely you must
have had many opportunities since then of discovering that that
particular libel is without foundation, and as a sincere lover of truth
you cannot lend the great weight of your authority to perpetuate such a
wilfully malicious misrepresentation of Christian
missionaries.”^([55](#55))

Gandhiji commented, “Though the preaching took place over forty years
ago the painful memory of it is still vivid before me. What I have heard
and read since has but confirmed that impression. I have read several
missionary publications and they are able to see only the dark side and
paint it darker still. The famous hymn of Bishop Heber’s ‘Greenland’s
icy mountains’ - is a clear libel on Indian humanity. I was favoured
with some literature even at the Yervada prison by well-meaning
missionaries, which seemed to be written as if merely to belittle
Hinduism. About beef-eating and wine-drinking I have merely stated what
I have heard and I have said as much in my writing. And whilst I accept
Mr. Scott’s repudiation, I must say that though I have mixed freely
among thousands of Christian Indians, I know very few who have scruples
about eating beef or other flesh meats and drinking intoxicating
liquors. When I have gently reasoned with them, they have quoted to me
the celebrated verse ‘Call thou nothing unclean’ as if it referred to
eating and gave a licence for indulgence. I know many Hindus eat meat,
some eat even beef and drink wines. They are not converts. Converts are
those who are ‘born again’ or should be. A higher standard is expected
of those who change their faith, if the change is a matter of heart and
not of convenience.”^([56](#56))

Gandhiji started giving a series of lectures on the New Testament to the
students of the Gujarat National College at Ahmedabad from July 24, 1926
onwards. Some Hindus did not like it. He was accused of being a “secret
Christian”. They feared that reading the Bible to young boys was likely
to influence them in favour of Christianity. “We need not dread, upon
our grown-up children,” wrote Gandhiji in the *Young India* of September
2, 1926, “the influence of scriptures other than our own. We libralize
their outlook upon life by encouraging them to study freely all that is
clean. Fear there would be when someone reads his own scriptures to
young people with the intention secretly or openly of converting them.
He must be biased in favour of his own scriptures. For myself, I regard
my study of and reverence for the Bible, the Koran and other scriptures
to be wholly consistent with my claim to be a staunch *sanatani* Hindu.
He is no *sanatani* Hindu who is narrow, bigoted and considers evil to
be good if it has the sanction of antiquity and is to be found supported
in any Sanskrit book. I claim to be a staunch *sanatani* Hindu because
though I reject all that offends my moral sense, I find the Hindu
scriptures to satisfy the need of the soul. My respectful study of other
religions has not abated my reverence for or my faith in Hindu
scriptures. They have indeed left their deep mark upon my understanding
of Hindu scriptures. They have broadened my view of life. They have
enabled me to understand more clearly many obscure passages in the Hindu
scriptures.”^([57](#57))

“The charge of being a Christian in secret,” he continued, “was not new.
It is both a libel and a compliment - a libel because there are men who
can believe me to be capable of being secretly anything, i.e. for fear
of being that openly. There is nothing in the world that would keep me
from professing Christianity or any other faith the moment I felt the
truth of and the need for it. Where there is fear there is no religion.
The charge is a compliment in that it is a reluctant acknowledgement of
my capacity for appreciating the beauties of Christianity.”^([58](#58))

Gandhiji’s great regard for Jesus was misunderstood by some Christians.
W. B. Stover wrote to him, “You have taken the Lord Christ for your
leader and guide. There is none better.” Gandhiji replied, “You do not
mind my correcting you. I regard Jesus as a human being like the rest of
the teachers of the world. As such he was undoubtedly great. But I do
not by any means regard him to have been the very best. The
acknowledgement of the debt which I have so often repeated that I owe to
the Sermon on the Mount should not be mistaken to mean an
acknowledgement of the Orthodox interpretation of the Bible or the life
of Jesus. I must not sail under false colours.”^([59](#59))

Gandhiji had a discussion with some missionaries on July 29, 1927. The
questions asked by the missionaries and the replies given by him were
reproduced in the *Young India* of August 11, 1927. He opened the
discussion with an introduction on how he looked at the history of
religion. “Christianity,” he said, “is 1900 years old, Islam is 1300
years old. Who knows the possibility of either? I have not read the
Vedas in the original but have tried to assimilate their spirit and have
not hesitated to say that though the Vedas may be 13,000 years old - or
even a million years old, as they well may be, for the word of God is as
old as God Himself - even the Vedas must be interpreted in the light of
our experience. The powers of God should not be limited by the
limitations of our understandings.”

Next, he commented on the role of the missionaries as teachers of
religion and said, “To you who have come to teach India, I therefore
say, you cannot give without taking. If you have come to give rich
treasures of experiences, open your hearts out to receive the treasures
of this land, and you will not be disappointed, neither will you have
misread the message of the Bible.” The missionaries asked, “What then
are we doing? Are we doing the right thing?” Gandhiji replied, “You are
doing the right thing the wrong way. I want you to compliment the faith
of the people instead of undermining it... Whilst a boy I heard it being
said, that to become a Christian was to have a brandy bottle in one hand
and beef in the other. Things are better now, but it is not unusual to
find Christianity synonymous with denationalisation and Europeanisation.
Must we give up our simplicity, to become better people? Do not lay the
axe at our simplicity.”^([60](#60))

The missionaries posed their problem, “There are not only two issues
before us, viz., to serve and to teach, there is a third issue, viz.,
evangelizing, declaring the glad tidings of the coming of Jesus and his
death in redemption of our sins. What is the right way of giving the
right news? We need not undermine the faith but we may make people lose
their faith in lesser things.” Gandhiji’s reply was sharp. “It would be
poor comfort to the world,” he said, “if it had to depend upon a
historical God who died 2,000 years ago. Do not then preach the God of
history, but show Him as He lives today through you... It is better to
allow our lives to speak for us than our words”^([61](#61))

The missionaries then asked, “But what about animistic beliefs? Should
they not be corrected?”^([62](#62)) Gandhiji told them not to concern
themselves “with their beliefs but with asking them to do the right
thing.” Finally, the missionaries came out with their dogma, “How can we
help condemning if we feel that our Christian truth is the only
reality?” Gandhiji saw the implied intolerance and said, “If you cannot
feel that the other faith is as true as yours, you should feel at least
that the men are as true as you. The intolerance of Christian
missionaries does not, I am glad to say, take the ugly shape it used to
take some years ago. Think of the caricature of Hinduism, which one
finds in so many publications of the Christian Literature Society. A
lady wrote to me the other day saying that unless I embraced
Christianity all my work would be nothing worth. And of course that
Christianity must mean what she understands as such. Well, all I can say
is that it is a wrong attitude.”^([63](#63))

Gandhiji had received a letter from an American lady who described
herself as “a lifelong friend of India.” He reproduced it in the *Young
India* of October 20, 1927. “Believing that Christ was a revelation of
God,” she wrote, “Christians of America have sent to India thousands of
their sons and daughters to tell the people of India about Christ. Will
you in return kindly give us your interpretation of Hinduism and make a
comparison of Hinduism with the teachings of Christ?” Gandhiji
commented, “I have ventured at several missionary meetings to tell
English and American missionaries that if they could have refrained from
‘telling’ India about Christ and had merely lived the life enjoined upon
them by the Sermon on the Mount, India instead of suspecting them would
have appreciated their living in the midst of her children and directly
profited by their presence. Holding this view, I can ‘tell’ American
friends nothing about Hinduism by way of ‘return’. I do not believe in
people telling others of their faith, especially with a view of
conversion. Faith does not admit of telling. It has to be lived and then
it becomes self-propagating.”^([64](#64))

Coming to Hinduism, he wrote, “Believing as I do in the influence of
heredity, being born in a Hindu family, I have remained a Hindu. I
should reject it, if I found it inconsistent with my moral sense or my
spiritual growth. On examination, I have found it to be the most
tolerant of all religions known to me. Its freedom from dogma makes a
forcible appeal to me in as much as it gives the votary the largest
scope for self-expression. Not being an exclusive religion, it enables
the followers of the faith not merely to respect all the other
religions, but it also enables them to admire and assimilate whatever
may be good in the other faiths. Non-violence is common to all
religions, but it has found the highest expression and application in
Hinduism. (I do not regard Jainism or Buddhism as separate from
Hinduism.) Hinduism believes in the oneness not of merely all human life
but in the oneness of all that lives. Its worship of the cow is, in my
opinion, its unique contribution to the evolution of humanitarianism. It
is a practical application of the belief in the oneness and, therefore,
sacredness of all life. The great belief in transmigration is a direct
consequence of that belief. Finally, the discovery of the law of
varnashrama is a magnificent result of the ceaseless search for
truth.”^([65](#65))

Gandhiji was on a visit to Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) in November 1927. The
*Young India* dated December 8, 1927 reported his speech at the
Y.M.C.A., Colombo. “Gandhiji then took,” said the report, “the case of
modem China as a case in point. His heart, he said, went out to young
China in the throes of a great national upheaval, and he referred to the
anti-Christian movement in China, about which he had occasion to read in
a pamphlet received by him from the students department of the Young
Women’s Christian Association and the Young Men’s Christian Association
of China. The writers had put their own interpretation upon the
anti-Christian movement, but there was no doubt that young China
regarded Christian movements as being opposed to Chinese
self-expression.” To Gandhiji the moral of this anti-Christian
manifestation was clear. He proceeded to advise the Ceylonese
Christians. “The deduction,” he said, “I would like you all to draw from
this manifestation is that you Ceylonese should not be torn from your
moorings, and those from the West should not consciously lay violent
hands upon the manners, customs and habits of the Ceylonese in so far as
they are not repugnant to fundamental ethics and morality. Confuse not
Jesus’ teachings with what passes as modern civilization, and pray do
not do unconscious violence to the people among whom you cast your
lot. It is no part of that call, I assure you, to tear the lives of the
people of the East by its roots. Tolerate whatever is good in them and
do not hastily with your preconceived notions, judge them. Do not judge
lest you be judged yourselves.”^([66](#66))

He ended with a message for the Buddhists who were members of the
Y.M.C.A. and present in the meeting, “To you, young Ceylonese friends, I
say: Don’t be dazzled by the splendour that comes to you from the West.
Do not be thrown off your feet by this passing show. The Enlightened One
has told you in never-to-be-forgotten words that this little span of
life is but a passing shadow, a fleeting thing, and if you realize the
nothingness of all that appears before your eyes, the nothingness of
this material case that we see before us ever changing, then indeed
there are treasures for you up above, and there is peace for you down
here, peace which passeth all understanding, and happiness to which we
are utter strangers. It requires an amazing faith, a divine faith and
surrender of all that we see before us… Buddha renounced every worldly
happiness, because he wanted to share with the whole world his happiness
which was to be had by men who sacrificed and suffered in search of
truth.”^([67](#67))

Gandhiji had a discussion with members of the Council of International
Fellowship who stayed in his Ashram in January 1928. The discussion was
reported in the *Young India* of January 19. Coming to questions about
conversions, he said, “I would not only not try to convert but would not
even secretly pray that anyone should embrace my faith… Hinduism with
its message of ahimsa is to me the most glorious religion in the world -
as my wife to me is the most beautiful woman in the world - but others
may feel the same about their own religion. Cases of real honest
conversion are quite possible. If some people for their inward
satisfaction and growth change their religion, let them do so. As
regards taking our message to the aborigines, I do not think I should go
and give my message out of my own wisdom. Do it in all humility, it is
said. Well I have been an unfortunate witness of arrogance often going
in the garb of humility. If I am perfect, I know that my thought will
reach others. It taxes all my time to reach the goal I have set to
myself. What have I to take to the aborigines and the Assamese hillmen
except to go in my nakedness to them? Rather than ask them to join my
prayer, I would join their prayer. We were strangers to this sort of
classification – ‘animists’, ‘aborigines’, etc., - but we have learnt it
from English rulers. I must have the desire to serve and it must put me
right with people. Conversion and service go ill together.”^([68](#68))
A member asked, “Did not Jesus Himself teach and preach?” Gandhiji
replied, “We are on dangerous ground here. You ask me to give my
interpretation of the life of Christ. Well, I may say that I do not
accept everything in the gospels as historical truth. And it must be
remembered that he was working amongst his own people, and said he had
not come to destroy but to fulfil. I draw a great distinction between
the Sermon on the Mount and the Letters of Paul. They are a graft on
Christ’s teaching, his own gloss apart from Christ’s own
experience.”^([69](#69))

As Gandhiji’s view of the Christian missions became known, the
controllers of missions felt concerned. Here was a man whose very
humility was putting Christianity in the wrong. John R. Mott was a
leading American evangelist and fabulous fund-raiser for the Protestant
missions. He came and met Gandhiji on March 1, 1929 and tried to fathom
him. The interview was published in the *Young India* of March 21, 1929.
After discussing some generalities such as the future of India, etc.,
Mr. Mott came to the question he had travelled all the way to pose
before Gandhiji. He asked, “What then is the contribution of
Christianity to the national life of India? I mean the influence of
Christ as apart from Christianity, for I am afraid there is a wide gulf
separating the two at present.” Gandhiji replied, “Aye, there is the
rub. It is not possible to consider the teaching of a religious teacher
apart from the lives of his followers. Unfortunately, Christianity in
India has been inextricably mixed up for the last one hundred years with
the British rule. It appears to us as synonymous with the materialistic
civilization and imperialistic exploitation by the strong white races of
the weaker races of the world. Its contribution to India has been
therefore largely of a negative character. It has done some good in
spite of its professors. It has shocked us into setting our own house in
order.”^([70](#70))

Mr. Mott asked if Christians can help in the removal of untouchability.
Gandhiji informed him that the “removal of untouchability is purely a
question of the purification of Hinduism” and “can only be effected from
within.” Mr. Mott insisted that “Christians would be a great help to you
in this connection.” He cited Rev. Whitehead, Bishop of the Church of
England, who had made “some striking statements about the effect of
Christian mass movements in ameliorating the condition of the
untouchables in the Madras Presidency.” Gandhiji said, “I distrust mass
movements of this nature. They have as their object not the upliftment
of the untouchables, but their ultimate conversion. This motive of mass
proselytisation lurking at the back in my opinion vitiates missionary
effort.”^([71](#71))

Mr. Mott now came to the point. “There are some who believe,” he said,
“that the untouchables would be better off if they turned Christians
from conviction, and that it would transform their lives.” Gandhiji was
equally clear. “I am sorry,” he said, “I have been unable to discover
any tangible evidence to confirm this view. I was once taken into a
Christian village. Instead of meeting among the converts with that
frankness which one associates with a spiritual transformation, I found
an air of evasiveness about them. They were afraid to talk. This struck
me as a change not for the better but for the worse.”^([72](#72))

Mr. Mott asked Gandhiji, “Do you disbelieve in all conversion?” Gandhiji
replied, “I disbelieve in the conversion of one person by another.” Mr.
Mott repeated the age-old missionary slogan, “Is it not our duty to help
our fellow-beings to the maximum of the truth we may possess, to share
with them our deepest spiritual experience?” Gandhiji observed, “I am
sorry I must again differ with you, for the simple reason that the
deepest spiritual truths are always unutterable. That light to which you
refer transcends speech. It can be felt only through the inner
experience. And then the highest truth needs no communicating, for it is
by its very nature self-propelling. It radiates its influence silently
as the rose its fragrance without the intervention of a
medium.”^([73](#73))

Finally, Mr. Mott tried the last weapon in his armoury. “But even God,”
he said, “sometimes speaks through his prophets.” Gandhiji replied,
“Yes, but prophets speak not through the tongue but through their lives.
I have however known that in this matter I am up against a solid wall of
Christian opinion.” Mr. Mott came down and said, “Oh no, even among
Christians there is a school of thought - and it is growing.- which
holds that authoritarian method should not be employed but that each
individual should be left to discover the deepest truths of life for
himself. The argument advanced is that the process of spiritual
discovery is bound to vary in the case of different individuals
according to their varying needs and temperament. In other words they
feel that propaganda in the accepted sense of the term is not the most
effective method.” Gandhiji welcomed the statement adding, “That is what
Hinduism certainly inculcates.”^([74](#74)) The interview ended on a
pleasant note, though it did not satisfy Mr. Mott. He came for two more
rounds some years later.^([75](#75))

A Christian missionary from Vizagapatam, Mr. Abel, interviewed Gandhiji
on May 1, 1929. “Is not Jesus Christ the only sinless one?” he asked.
“What do we know”, said Gandhiji, “of the whole life of Christ? Apart
from the years of his life given in the four gospels of the New
Testament - we know nothing of the rest of his life. As a man
well-versed in the Bible you ought to have known that.”^([76](#76))

February 23, 1931 was Gandhiji’s day of silence. He wrote a note to Dr.
Thronton, a Christian missionary, in reply to some points the latter has
raised. “If the missionary friends,” he said, “will forget their
mission, viz., of proselytising Indians and of bringing Christ to them,
they will do wonderfully good work. Your duty is done with the ulterior
motive of proselytising. I was the first to raise a note of warning in
this respect… Help certainly you have (brought), viz., what comes
through contact with you and in spite of you, i.e., the spirit of
inquiry about the shortcomings of our own religion. You did not want us
to pursue the inquiry because you saw immorality where we saw
spirituality. When I go to your institutions I do not feel I am going to
an Indian institution. This is what worries me.”^([77](#77))

Gandhiji gave an interview to the press in Delhi on March 21, 1931.
“Asked if he would favour the retention of American and other foreign
missionaries when India secured self-government”, Gandhiji was reported
to have said, “If instead of confining themselves purely to humanitarian
work and material service to the poor, they do proselytising by means of
medical aid, education, etc., I would certainly ask them to withdraw.
Every nation’s religion is as good as any other. Certainly India’s
religions are adequate for her people. We need no converting
spirituality.”^([78](#78))

This raised a furore in missionary circles in India and abroad. Gandhiji
wrote an article, ‘Foreign Missionaries’, in the *Young India* of April
23, 1931 in which he was pained to note that “Even George Joseph, my
erstwhile co-worker and gracious host in Madura, has gone into hysterics
without condescending to verify the report.” He said that what was
reported in the press was “what a reporter has put into my
mouth.”^([79](#79)) He corrected the press report to read as follows:
“if instead of confining themselves to purely humanitarian work such as
education, medical services to the poor and the like, they use these
activities of theirs for the purpose of proselytising, I would certainly
like them to withdraw. Every nation considers its own faith to be as
good as that of any other. Certainly the great faiths held by the people
of India are adequate for her people. India stands in no need of
conversion from one faith to another.”^([80](#80))

He proceeded to “amplify the bald statement”, which, one must say, was
not much of an improvement on his earlier statement. He made no
concession to conversion by “modem methods” which “has nowadays become a
business like any other.” He was reminded of “a missionary report saying
how much it cost per head to convert and then presenting a budget for
the ‘next harvest’.” He also asked some very pertinent questions: “Why
should I change my religion because a doctor who professes Christianity
as his religion has cured me of some disease or why should the doctor
expect or suggest such a change whilst I am under his influence? Is not
medical relief its own reward and satisfaction? Or why should I whilst I
am in a missionary educational institution have Christian teaching
thrust upon me?” He did not rule out conversion but gave his own meaning
to it. “Conversion in the sense of self-purification, self-realization,”
he wrote, “is the crying need of the hour. That, however, is not what is
meant by proselytising. To those who would convert India, might it not
be said, ‘physician heal thyself’?”^([81](#81)) On the same day he
cabled a summary of his article to *The Daily Herald* of London.

The Christian opinion, however, was far from satisfied by his article.
On April 11, 1931, James P. Rutnam of Ceylon put some questions to him.
“in this great struggle for Swaraj,” he asked, “are we not fighting for
liberty, liberty to worship our God as we please, liberty to convince
our fellows who are willing to be convinced by our fellows who can
convince us? Is India so bigoted as to think that within her are
confined all the riches of the world, all the treasures of knowledge and
human experience?”^([82](#82)) Gandhiji was painfully surprised at this
persistent misunderstanding. He wrote another article, ‘Foreign
Missionaries Again’, in the *Young India* of May 7, 1931. After
explaining that he included Christianity among the religions of India,
he said, “The attack has therefore surprised me not a little especially
because the views I have now enunciated have been held by me since 1916,
and were deliberately expressed in a carefully written address read
before a purely missionary audience in Madras and since repeated on many
a Christian platform. The recent criticism has but confirmed the view,
for the criticism has betrayed intolerance even of friendly criticism.
The missionaries know that in spite of my outspoken criticism of their
methods, they have in India and among non-Christians no warmer friend
than I. And I suggest to my critics that there must be something wrong
about their methods or, if they prefer, themselves when they will not
brook sincere expression of an opinion different from theirs. In India
under swaraj I have no doubt that foreign missionaries will be at
liberty to do their proselytising, as I would say, in the wrong way; but
they would be expected to bear with those who, like me, may point out
that in their opinion the way is wrong.”^([83](#83))

He had to return to the theme on May 5, 1931 when he received a long
letter from Rev. B. W. Tucker. The missionary was “in full agreement
with you in your protest against the methods employed by Christian
missions in their efforts to gain proselytes through education, medical
services and the like.”^([84](#84)) He also welcomed Gandhiji’s
assurance that a swaraj government will not create “any legal enactment
compelling missionaries to withdraw if they failed to give up their
proselytising activities.” But he registered a protest “against the
implications of your statement that the religions of India are adequate
for her.”^([85](#85)) Gandhiji wrote a short comment emphasizing that he
still adhered “to the statement to which Rev. Tucker takes exception and
which is, ‘Religions of India are adequate for her’.” He also made it
clear that “What is resisted is the idea of gaining converts and that
too not always by fair and open means.”^([86](#86)) He followed up by
yet another article, ‘Missionary Methods in India’, in the *Young India*
of June 6, 1931. A retired Deputy Collector had written to him citing
various sources, including Indian Census Report for 1911, and stating
that missionaries were using material inducements for gaining
converts. “That collection of quotations from named sources,” wrote
Gandhiji, “should, instead of offending missionaries, cause an inward
search. I have several other similar articles, some from Christian
Indians. The writer will excuse me for withholding them. The controversy
ought not to be prolonged.”^([87](#87))

Three months later when Gandhiji was in London for attending the Second
Round Table Conference, he was invited on October 8., 1931 to speak at
the Conference of Mission Societies in Great Britain and Ireland. He
started by trying to remove the misunderstanding created by the recent
controversy about the place of Christian missions in India after
attainment of independence. He ruled out “legislation to prohibit
missionary enterprises.” But he maintained firmly his position about
proselytisation. He said, “The idea of converting people to one’s faith
by speech and writing, by appeal to reason and emotion and by suggesting
that the faith of his forefathers is a bad faith, in my opinion, limits
the possibilities of serving humanity.”^([88](#88)) He admitted his
indebtedness to “Christian influence for some of my social work” such as
a “fierce hatred of child marriage.” But he made it clear that “Before I
knew anything of Christianity I was an enemy of
untouchability.”^([89](#89))

Rev. Godfrey Philips of London Missionary Society posed a question
before Gandhiji. “I wish we could understand one another better,” he
said, “with regard to what is happening amongst the ‘untouchables’ in
connection with Christian missions... We have found in our experience
that when the ‘untouchable’, the outcaste, is down and out, we can do
nothing permanent except by implanting in his inmost heart something
that has vitalizing power - in our experience that is fellowship with
God in Christ.”^([90](#90)) Gandhiji replied that “in my own humble
opinion it is an erroneous way” and that as “the rose would not have to
speak, neither would the Christian missionary have to speak.” If the
Christian missionary believes that “before he can come to the help of
the untouchables, he must bring the message of God, or the message of
the Bible, to the untouchables, how much more than to a man like me?”
Gandhiji emphasised that “after having mixed with tens of thousands of
untouchables”, he was convinced that they do not understand the
missionary’s language. “They understand me better,” he said, “because I
speak their language. I speak to them about their degraded condition. I
do not speak about God. I feel that I take the message of God to them in
this particular manner just as to a starving man I take the message of
God through the bread I give him. I have no axe to grind. I must not
exploit him, I just give him the bread. If I want to convey God to the
humble untouchable I must take Him the way that he needs.”^([91](#91))

The next question, put by Rev. C. E. Wilson of the Baptist Missionary
Society, was sharp. “Does Mr. Gandhi,” he asked, “mean that it is not
right for us to go to India or any place and try to make people
disciples, to teach the supreme truth of Jesus Christ, if we believe him
to be the highest that we know? Mr. Gandhi has been preaching to us
today. Does he mean to exclude all preaching?”^([92](#92)) Rev. W. H. G.
Holmes of the Ok ford Mission at Calcutta told an anecdote about the
plight of untouchables which he had himself seen. He was extending
support to Rev. C. E. Wilson. “Would we be right,” he asked, “in going
to teach them about this Father, who I told them loved them as dearly as
he loved us, and would Mr. Gandhi encourage them to let us have land to
build on in order to teach these people?”

Gandhiji replied, “Yes, I would, on one condition that you will teach
them the religion of their forefathers through the religion they have
got. Don’t say to them: ‘The only way to know the Father is our way.’…
Show the ‘untouchables’ the Father as He appears in his own
surroundings. Unless you are satisfied that we do not know the Father at
all, and then of course it is your duty to say – ‘What you know as
Father is no Father at all. What you believe comes from Satan.’ I
sometimes receive letters saying that I am a good man, but that I am
doing the devil’s work. I feel I adore the same Father though in a
different form. I may not adore him as ‘God’. To me that name makes no
appeal, but when I think of Him as Rama, He thrills me. To think of God
as ‘God’ does not fire me as the name Rama does. There is no poetry in
it. I know that my forefathers have known him as Rama. They have been
uplifted by Rama, and when I take the name of Rama, I arise with the
same energy. It would not be possible for me to use the name ‘God’ as it
is written in the Bible. It is contrary to experience. I should not be
attracted. I should not be lifted to the truth. Therefore my whole soul
rejects the teaching that Rama is not my God.”^([93](#93))

A member of the Conference “referred to the command for Christians to go
out to all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature.” Gandhiji
said that “if the questioner believed that these were the inspired words
in the Bible, then he was called upon to obey implicitly - why did he
ask a non-Christian for his interpretation?” The meeting ended with the
President, Rev. W. Paton declaring that “Mr. Gandhi had made it
abundantly clear that the issue between him and the Christian missionary
movement lay much deeper than was supposed.”^([94](#94))

On his way back from London on board S. S. Pilsana, Gandhiji gave a talk
on Christ on Christmas Day, 1931. “I shall tell you,” he said, “how, to
an outsider like me, the story of Christ, as told in the New Testament,
has struck. My acquaintance with the Bible began nearly forty years ago,
and that was through the New Testament. I could not then take much
interest in Old Testament which I had certainly read, if only to fulfil
a promise I had made to a friend whom I happened to meet in a hotel. But
when I came to the New Testament and the Sermon on the Mount, I began to
understand the Christian teaching and the teaching of the Sermon on the
Mount echoed something I had learnt in childhood and something which
seemed to be a part of my being and which I felt was being acted up to
in the daily life around me.”

He had no u se, for the Jesus of history. “I may say,” he continued,
“that I have never been interested in a historical Jesus. I should not
care if it was proved by someone that the man called Jesus never lived,
and that what was narrated in the Gospels was a figment of the writer’s
imagination. For the Sermon on the Mount would still be true for me.”
Finally, he came to Christianity as practised by Christians and as
preached by the missionaries. “Reading, therefore, the whole story in
that light,” he concluded, “it seems to me that Christianity has yet to
be lived, unless one says that where there is boundless love and no idea
of retaliation whatsoever, it is Christianity that lives. But then it
surmounts all boundaries and book-teaching. Then it is something
indefinable, not capable of being preached to men, not capable of being
transmitted from mouth to mouth, but from heart to heart. But
Christianity is not commonly understood that way.”^([95](#95))

One of the Hindu practices which Christians regard as gross superstition
and sin is idol-worship. A Christian, F. Mary Barr, sought Gandhiji’s
opinion about it. In his letter dated November 30, 1932, Gandhiji wrote,
“What must not be forgotten about me is that I do not consider
idol-worship to be a sin, but I know that in some form or other it is a
condition of our being. The difference between one form of worship and
another is a difference in degree and not in kind. Mosque-going or
Church-going is a form of idol-worship. Veneration for the Bible, the
Koran, the Gita and the like is idol-worship and even if you don’t use a
book or a building but draw a picture of divinity in your imagination
and attribute certain qualities, it is again idol-worship and I refuse
to call the worship of one who has a stone-image a grosser form of
worship… it would be both arrogant and ignorant to look down upon such
worship as superstition... All this is a plea for a definite recognition
of the fact that all forms of honest worship are equally good and
equally efficient for the respective worshippers. Time is gone for the
exclusive possession of right by an individual or a group.”^([96](#96))

Gandhiji had received a letter dated November 17, 1932 from Chas.
Peacock stating that he was an Indian Christian who wanted to work for
the removal of untouchability in Andhra “without surrendering my
Christ... and without trying to change his religion.” He replied on
December 10, 1932 stating that “Christians who have no desire to
proselytise can render substantial help to the Anti-untouchability
Movement by working under or with the ordinary Hindu organisations.” At
the same time he added, “I observe from the correspondence I am
receiving from Christian friends that the Hindu movement has quickened
the conscience of Indian Christians and they are impatient to get rid of
the taint in their midst.”^([97](#97)) It was a hint that Mr. Peacock
would do better to work for the removal of untouchability prevalent
among Christians and leave Hindu untouchables to the Hindus.

He made the point abundantly clear in an interview to the Associated
Press of India on January 2, 1933. He had received a letter from Colombo
informing him that “non-Hindus consisting of a Buddhist, a Roman
Catholic lady, a Christian and a few Muslims” had offered “what has been
misnamed satyagraha” in order to secure-temple-entry for Hindu
untouchables. “I have no hesitation whatsoever,” he told the press
correspondent, “in saying that this could not be justified under any
circumstances. It would be a most dangerous interference if non-Hindus
were to express their sympathy by way of direct action. Indeed, I go as
far as to say that direct action can be offered \[only\] by those caste.
Hindus who are entitled to enter the temple in regard to which such
action is taken, and who being entitled, believe in temple
entry.”^([98](#98)) In a letter to Horace Alexander written on January
5, 1933 he pointed out, “I get now and then piteous letters from
Christian Indians who, being born of untouchable parents, are isolated
from the rest of their fellows.”^([99](#99a))

Gandhiji received a letter from Amritlal Thakkar, a Malabar Christian,
stating that “the Christian Harijan in Travancore is, in matter of
civic, or social rights and in abject poverty, absolutely the same as
his Hindu Harijan brother.” He wrote in the *Young India* of March 18,
1933, that ‘Christian Harijans’ should be a contradiction in terms
because untouchability was regarded as a special curse of Hinduism. “The
present movement,” he said “is automatically helping Christian Harijans,
but I should be surprised if advantage is not being taken of the
movement to drive out untouchability from the Church.”^([100](#100))

The epic fast which Gandhiji had undertaken in order to oppose the
separation of Harijans from Hindu society as intended by Ramsay
MacDonald’s Communal Award, brought him many letters from the West. A
majority of them were “full of goodwill and appreciation of it and the
motive lying behind it.” But some letters were critical of the fast. One
of them which Gandhiji published in full in the *Harijan* dated July 22,
1933, was from America and downright denunciatory. The writer thought
that the fast had accomplished nothing, not even the publicity it was
aimed at. “India whose culture and civilization,” said the writer, “goes
back far beyond record, which was given the new tongue of Christ Jesus
by Thomas, the disciple, in the first century, and in the centuries just
past has been given many opportunities to face the light, still remains
in pagan darkness, its caste system of society the greatest sore spot on
the modern world.”^([101](#101)) The disciple of Jesus went ahead and
repeated all the standard accusations that had been hurled by Christian
missionaries against India for years on end - India’s women were
“without soul”, India’s millions lived in “nauseating filth”, India’s
‘Holy Men’ sat “for years in some deformed position publicly torturing
the body to liberate the soul”, and India’s “pagan religious rites”
consisted of “striking the body full of nails, spears through the
tongue, and other revolting tortures.” He said he had not read Miss
Mayo’s *Mother India* but “am told on good authority that it is a
compilation of facts - so horrible that I have known cases of extreme
illness from reading it.”

The letter proved, if a proof was needed, that neither the protest
registered by Vivekananda nor the admiration for Jesus expressed by
Mahatma Gandhi had helped orthodox Christians to emerge out of the
self-righteous ignorance in which they had enveloped themselves and stop
their vicious propaganda against Hinduism. Gandhiji commented that the
writer “starts with a bias and ends with it”, that he “repeats the
exploded libel about the women of India”, that he had “evidently read
literature containing ignorant and interested distortions”, and that he
had indulged in “wild generalisations” about “the tortures which
so-called yogis undergo.” He concluded, “One can pity the readers, if
there were any such, who made themselves sick by reading a book which
opened the drains of India and made the readers believe that they were
India.”^([102](#102)) He was mild as ever and left it to the readers to
judge for themselves the mind from which the letter had emanated.

One of the ways by which the Catholic Church in India sought to alienate
Hindus from their ancestral religion was to insist that the children of
Hindu husbands and Catholic wives would be brought up as Catholics. It
had been seen that most Hindu young men who fell in love with Catholic
girls yielded easily to this demand. The issue came before Gandhiji when
Manu and Elizabeth, both of whom were known to him, decided for a love
marriage. He was never enthusiastic about love marriages which he had
seen failing in most cases after the first few years. Moreover, he was
opposed to marriages tearing away young people from their families and
favoured marriages seeking the “approval and blessings of the
elders.”^([103](#103)) So he expressed his views on the subject in a
letter dated November 16, 1933 written to Efy Aristarchi, a friend of
Manu and Elizabeth. “The most fatal objection, however,” he said, “that
I can see to this proposed match, is that Elizabeth desires, and from
her own standpoint perhaps naturally so, that the progeny should be
brought up in the Roman Catholic faith. I do not mind it at all. But,
even though Manu may have no objection, his parents and his people whom
he loves dearly will never be able to reconcile themselves to their
grandchildren being brought up in a faith other than their
own.”^([104](#104))

His objection was based on his perception of “a conflict going on
between Hindu culture and the Christianity of Indians.” He had seen that
“Christianity has become synonymous with Western culture” which, in
turn, “may be fittingly described as Christian culture” because “the
religion of the Western people is predominantly Christianity.” On the
other hand, “Indian culture would certainly be described as Hindu
culture.” He, therefore, thought it proper that “the progeny of
Elizabeth must be brought up in entirely different surroundings unless
Manu decides to tear himself away from his surroundings and lives an
exclusive life or decides to settle down in the West.”^([105](#105)) He
was of the firm opinion that “when husband and wife profess a different
faith, the progeny should be brought up in the faith of the husband” and
he had “sound religious and philosophic reasons for this
proposition.”^([106](#106))

As more and more Christian agencies were coming forward to work for the
removal of untouchability, Gandhiji made his terms clear in a speech at
the Leonard Theological College, Jabalpur, on December 7, 1993. While
inviting these agencies to work in subordination to Hindu agencies set
up for Harijan uplift, he said, “You may choose to work independently.
You may have the conversion of Harijans to Christianity. You may see in
the movement a chance for propaganda. If you work among the Harijans
with such aim, you can see that the very end we have in view will be
frustrated. If you believe that Hinduism is a gift, not of God, but of
Satan, quite clearly you cannot accept my terms. You and I would be
dishonest if we did not make clear to one another what we stand
for.”^([107](#107))

A group of Christian Harijans came to Gandhiji and the talk he had with
them was published in the Harijan of February, 23, 1934. “We are in the
same position,” they said, “as Adi-Dravida Hindus. Are we to have any
share in this movement?” Gandhiji told them, “You are getting indirect
benefit. The Christian missionaries are wide awake and recognize that
they should do something.” They proceeded, “We have decided to face the
oppressors boldly. We are thinking of changing our faith.” Gandhiji
said, “I cannot say anything about that. But I feel that oppression can
be no reason for changing our faith.” The Christian Harijans asked,
“Shall we get any relief in future from this movement?” Gandhiji assured
them, “Yes, I am absolutely certain that, if this movement succeeds
untouchability in Christianity is also bound to go.”^([108](#108))

Mahadev Desai recorded in the *Harijan* dated January 25, 1935 a talk
which Gandhiji had with a friend who had reported to him that the
progress of the anti-untouchability campaign had “disturbed some of our
Missionary friends.” The friend said, “Your campaign is taking away from
the Missionary’s popularity.” Gandhiji replied, “I see what you mean,
but I do not know why it should disturb them. We are not traders
trenching on one another’s province. If it is a matter of serving
oneself, I should understand their attitude, but when it is entirely a
matter of serving others, it should not worry them or me as to who
serves them.”^([109](#109))

The friend posed the question another way. “But perhaps,” he said, “the
authorities in charge of a Mission hospital would rightly feel worried,
if you sent your people to go and open a hospital in the same place.”
Gandhiji explained, “But they should understand that ours is a different
mission. We do not go there to afford them simply medical relief or a
knowledge of the three R’s; our going to them is a small proof of our
repentance and our assurance to them that we will not exploit them any
more. I should never think of opening a hospital where there is already
one; but if there is a Mission school, I should not mind opening another
for Harijan children, and I would even encourage them to prefer our
school to the other. Let us frankly understand the position. If the
object is purely humanitarian, purely that of carrying education where
there is none, they should be thankful that someone whose obvious duty
it is to put his own house in order wakes up to a sense of his duty. But
my trouble is that the Missionary friends do not bring to bear on their
work a purely humanitarian spirit. Their object is to add more members
to their fold, and that is why they are disturbed. The complaint which I
have been making all these years is more than justified by what you say.
Some of the friends of a Mission were the other day in high glee over
the conversion to Christianity of a learned pandit. They have been dear
friends, and so I told them that it was hardly proper to go into
ecstasies over a man forsaking his religion. Today it is the case of a
learned Hindu, tomorrow it may be that of an ignorant villager not
knowing the principles of his religion. Why should Missionaries
complain, if I open a school which is more liked by Harijans than
theirs? Is it not natural?”^([110](#110))

The friend asked, “But if it was a pure case of conscience?” Gandhiji
replied, “I am no keeper of anybody’s conscience, but I do feel that it
argues some sort of weakness on the part of a person who easily declares
his or her failure to derive comfort in the faith in which he or she is
born.”^([111](#111))

The *Harijan* dated March 29, 1935 published an interview which Gandhiji
had given to a Christian missionary before March 22. The missionary
“asked Gandhiji what was the most effective way of preaching the gospel
of Christ, for that was his mission.” Gandhiji replied, “To live the
gospel is the most effective way - most effective in the beginning, in
the middle and in the end. Preaching jars on me and makes no appeal to
me, and I get suspicious of missionaries who preach. But I love those
who never preach but live the life according to their lights. Their
lives are silent yet most effective testimonies... If, therefore, you go
on serving people and ask them also to serve, then they would
understand. But you quote instead John 3, 16 and ask them to believe it.
That has no appeal to me, and I am sure people will not understand it.
Where there has been acceptance of the gospel through preaching, my
complaint is that there has been some motive.” The missionary said that
“we also see it and try our best to guard against it.” Gandhiji
observed, “But you can’t guard against it. One sordid motive vitiates
the whole preaching. It is like a drop of poison which fouls the whole
food. Therefore I should do without preaching at all. A rose does not
need to preach. it simply spreads its fragrance… The fragrance of
religious and spiritual life is much finer and subtler than that of the
rose.”^([112](#112))

The same issue of the *Harijan* published another interview given by
Gandhiji to some missionary ladies, also before March 22. One of their
questions was whether the Harijan Sangh was doing “anything for the
spiritual welfare of the people.” Gandhiji replied that “with me, moral
includes spiritual” and that setting up a separate department for
spiritual welfare will “make the thing doubly difficult.” The ladies
said that they had “something to share with the others” and that was the
Bible. “Now as for Harijans,” they asked, “who have no solace to get
from Hinduism, how are we to meet their spiritual needs?” Gandhiji
replied, “By behaving just like the rose. Does the rose proclaim itself,
or is it self-propagated? Has it an army of missionaries proclaiming its
beauties?”^([113](#113)) The ladies persisted, “But suppose someone
asked us, where did you get the scent?” Gandhiji said, “The rose if it
has sense and speech would say, ‘Fool, don’t you see that I got if from
my maker?’”^([114](#114))

The *Harijan* dated May 11, 1935 published an interview given by
Gandhiji to a missionary nurse before that date. The nurse asked him,
“Would you prevent missionaries coming to India in order to baptise?”
Gandhiji replied, “If I had power and could legislate, I should
certainly stop all proselytising. It is the cause of much avoidable
conflict between classes and unnecessary heart-burning among the
missionaries… In Hindu households the advent of a missionary has meant
the disruption of the family coming in the wake of change of dress,
manners, language, food and drink.”^([115](#115)) The nurse commented,
“Is it not the old conception you are referring to? No such thing is now
associated with proselytisation.” Gandhiji was well-informed about
missionary methods. He said, “The outward condition has perhaps changed
but the inward mostly remains the same. Vilification of Hindu religion,
though subdued, is there. If there was a radical change in the
missionaries’ outlook, would Murdoch’s books be allowed to be sold in
mission depots? Are those books prohibited by missionary societies?
There is nothing but vilification of Hinduism in those books. You talk
of the conception being no longer there. The other day a missionary
descended on a famine area with money in his pocket, distributed it
among the famine-stricken, converted them to his fold, took charge of
their temple and demolished it. This is outrageous. The temple could not
belong to the converted, and it could not belong to the Christian
missionary. But this friend goes and gets it demolished at the hands of
the very men who only a little while ago believed that God was
there.”^([116](#116))

The nurse took shelter behind the Bible. “But, Mr. Gandhi,” she asked,
“why do you object to proselytisation? Is not there enough in the Bible
to authorise us to invite people to a better way of life?” Gandhiji
replied, “If you interpret your texts in the way you seem to do, you
straightaway condemn a large part of humanity unless it believes as you
do.... And cannot he who has not heard the name of Jesus Christ do the
will of the Lord?”^([117](#117))

The *Harijan* dated May 25, 1935 published a discussion which Gandhiji
had with Pierre Ceresole on May 16. He told Gandhiji about a book,
*India in the Dark Wood*, which he had recently read and which wanted
“the main framework of the dominant Hindu philosophy to be shattered.”
The author of another book, *Jesus: Lord or Leader?*, also read recently
by Ceresole, on the other hand, “rejects the claim of Christianity as
the final religion and pines for a ‘fuller and richer faith than we have
reached and to believe that God who has nowhere left Himself without
witness, will use the highest institutions of other systems and many
races to enrich the thinking and worship of mankind.’ He sees definite
gain -in the abandonment of special claim for the inspiration of the
Bible, and classes himself among those ‘who humbly desire to follow
Jesus as leader, though their view of truth will not allow them to
worship him as Lord’.” Gandhiji commanded the second approach, saying
“There is a swing in the pendulum.”^([118](#118))

Gandhiji was carrying on a discussion with Mr. A. A. Paul of the
Federation of International Fellowships “on the so-called mass
conversion of a village predominantly or wholly composed of
Harijans.”^([119](#119)) Mr. Paul asked him to “publish a statement
giving your view of conversion?” Gandhiji replied that it would be
easier for him if Mr. Paul could formulate some questions to which he
could reply. So the Executive Committee of the International Fellowship
in Madras sent to him nine propositions which he published in the
*Harijan* dated September 29, 1935 with his own comments on them.

The first proposition was: Conversion is a change of heart from sin to
God. It is the work of God. Sin is separation from God.^([120](#120))
Gandhiji observed, “If conversion is the work of God why should the work
be taken away from Him?… I often wonder if we are true judges of our own
hearts... And if we know so little of ourselves, how much less we know
of our neighbours and remote strangers who may differ from us in a
multitude of things, some of which are of the highest
moment?”^([121](#121))

The second proposition was: The Christian believes that Jesus is the
fulfilment of God’s revelation to mankind, that he is our Saviour from
sin, that he alone can bring a sinner to God and thus enable him to
live.^([122](#122)) Gandhiji said, “The second proposition deals with
the Christian belief handed to the believer from generation to
generation, the truth of which thousands of Christians born are never
called upon to test for themselves, and rightly not. Surely it is a
dangerous thing to present it to those who have been brought up in a
different belief. And it would appear to me to be impertinent on my part
to present my untested belief to the professor of another which for
aught I know may be as true as mine. It is highly likely that mine may
be good enough for me and his for him.”^([123](#123))

aThe third proposition was: The Christian, to whom God has become a
living reality and power through Christ, regards it as his privilege and
duty to speak about Jesus and to proclaim the free offer which He came
on earth to make.^([124](#124)) Gandhiji said, “The third proposition
too, like the first, relates to mysteries of religion which are not
understood by the common people who take them in faith. They work well
enough among people living in the traditional faith. They will repel
those who have been brought up to believe something else.”^([125](#125))

The next five propositions stated that if a man wanted to repent and
live a new life as a disciple of Jesus, the Christian regards it as his
right to admit him to the Christian Church; that the Christian will do
all in his power to test the sincerity of the convert and point out the
consequences of conversion; that the Christian will try his best to
prevent conversion for material considerations; that the Christian shall
not be accused of using material inducements if the conversion results
in the social uplift of the convert; and that the Christian was right in
accepting as his duty the care of the sincere convert, body, soul and
mind.^([126](#126)) “The other five propositions,” commented Gandhiji,
“deal with the conduct of the missionary among those whom he is seeking
to convert. They seem to me almost impossible of application in
practice. The start being wrong all that follows must be necessarily so.
Thus how is the Christian to sound the sincerity of the conviction of
his hearers? By a show of hands? By personal conversation? By a
temporary trial? Any test that can be conceived will fail even to be
reasonably conclusive. No one but God knows a man’s heart. Is the
Christian so sure of his being so right in body, mind and soul as to
feel comfortably ‘right in accepting as his duty the care of the sincere
convert - body, soul and mind’?”^([127](#127))

The last proposition was: It shall not be brought against the Christian
that he is using material inducements, when certain facts in Hindu
social theory, out of his control, are in themselves an inducement to
the Harijans.^([128](#128)) Gandhiji said, “The last proposition - the
crown of all the preceding ones - takes one’s breath away. For it makes
it clear that the other eight are to be applied in all their fullness to
the poor Harijans. And yet the very first proposition has not ceased to
puzzle the brains of some of the most intellectual and philosophical
persons even in the present generation. Who knows the nature of original
sin? What is the meaning of separation from God? Are all who preach the
message of Jesus the Christ sure of their union with God? If they are
not, who will test the Harijan’s knowledge of these deep
things?”^([129](#129))

“It is a conviction daily growing upon me,” concluded Gandhiji, “that
the great and rich Christian missions will render true service to India,
if they can persuade themselves to confine their activities to
humanitarian service without ulterior motive of converting India or at
least her unsophisticated villagers to Christianity, and destroying
their social superstructure, which notwithstanding its many defects, has
stood now from time immemorial the onslaught upon it from within and
without. Whether they - the missionaries - and we wish it or not, what
is true in the Hindu faith will abide, what is untrue will fall to
pieces.”^([130](#130))

Extracts from a letter from a Christian friend of Gandhiji were
reproduced in the *Harijan* dated April 18, 1936. He quoted Jesus as
saying to the Jews, “If you believe not that I am He, you shall die of
your sins” and “I am *the* way, the truth and *the* life, no man cometh
into the Father, but by me.” Next, he threw a challenge to Gandhiji,
“You must either believe Him to have been self-deceived or deliberately
false.” Finally, he declared, “I pray daily that Christ may grant to you
a revelation of Himself as He did to Saul of Tarsus, that… you may be
used to proclaim to India’s millions the sacrificial efficacy of His
precious blood.”^([131](#131)) Gandhiji wrote, “This is a typical letter
from an old English friend who regularly writes such letters almost
every six months. This friend is very earnest and well known to me. But
there are numerous other correspondents unknown to me who write in the
same strain without arguing. Since I now cannot for reasons of health
write to individual writers, I use this letter as a text for a general
reply.”^([132](#132))

“My correspondent,” continued Gandhiji, “is a literalist… My very first
reading of the Bible showed me that I would be repelled by many things
in it if I gave their literal meaning to many texts or even took every
passage in it as the word of God. I should find it hard to believe in
the literal meaning of the verses relating to the immaculate conception
of Jesus. Nor would it deepen my regard for Jesus if I gave those verses
their literal meaning… The miracles said to have been performed by Jesus
even if I had believed them literally would not have reconciled me to
anything that did not satisfy universal ethics… Jesus then to me is a
great world-teacher among others. He was to the devotees of his
generation no doubt ‘the only begotten son of God’. Their belief need
not be mine. I regard him as one among the many begotten sons of
God.”^([133](#133)) Finally, he said, “The *Gita* has become for me the
key to the scriptures of the world. It unravels for me the deepest
mysteries to be found in them. I regard them with the same reverence
that I pay to the Hindu scriptures. Hindus, Mussalmans, Christians,
Parsis, Jews are convenient labels. But when I tear them down, I do not
know which is which.”^([134](#134))

On or after May 10, 1936 Gandhiji had a discussion with Professor Rahm,
a reputed biologist from Switzerland. Dr. Rahm said that he was
“perplexed by the many warring creeds in the world and wondered if there
was no way of ending the conflict.” Gandhiji gave a very
straight-forward reply. “It depends,” he said, “on Christians. If only
they would make up their mind to unite with the others! But they will
not do so. Their solution is universal acceptance of Christianity as
they believe it. An English friend has been at me for the last forty
years trying to persuade me that there is nothing but damnation in
Hinduism and that I must accept Christianity. When I was in jail, I got,
from three separate sources, no less than three copies of the *Life of
Sister Therese*, in the hope that I should follow her example and accept
Jesus as the only begotten son of God and my Saviour. I read the book
prayerfully but I could not accept even St. Therese’s testimony for
myself.”^([135](#135))

Gandhiji proceeded to make his position quite clear vis-a-vis orthodox
Christianity. “But today,” he said, “I rebel against orthodox
Christianity, as I am convinced that it has distorted the message of
Jesus. He was an Asiatic whose message was delivered through many media
and when it had the backing of a Roman emperor, it became an imperialist
faith which it remains today. Of course there are noble but rare
exceptions like Andrews and Elwin. But the general trend is the
same.”^([136](#136)) For the first time he did not try to reinterpret
Christianity for Christians. The obstinacy shown by the orthodox
Christians had hardened his attitude.

A Polish student brought a photograph to Gandhiji and got it autographed
by him. “There is,” he said, “a school conducted by Catholic Fathers. I
shall help the school from the proceeds of the sale of this photograph.”
Gandhiji took back the photograph from the student and said, “Ah, that
is a different story. You do not expect me to support the Fathers in
their mission of conversion? You know what they do?” The *Harijan* of
June 27, 1936 which relates this incident, continues, “And with this he
told him… the story of the so-called conversions in the vicinity of
Tiruchengodu, the desecration and demolition of the Hindu temple, how he
had been requested by the International Fellowship of Faiths to forbear
writing about the episode as they were trying to intervene, how
ultimately even the intervention of that body composed mainly of
Christians had failed, and how he was permitted to write about it in the
*Harijan*. He, however, had deliberately refrained from writing in order
not to exacerbate feelings on the matter.”^([137](#137))

The *Harijan* dated July 18, 1936 published a discussion which Gandhiji
had with Pierre Ceresole and some Christian missionaries. The dialogue
deserves to be reproduced at some length because it shows most clearly
the missionary mentality and Gandhiji’s opposition to it:

> (Missionary Lady) I have not had the time or desire to evangelize. The
> Church at home would be happy if through our hospital more people
> would be led to Christian lives.
>
> (Gandhiji) But whilst you give the medical help you expect the reward
> in the shape of your patients becoming Christians.
>
> (M.L.) Yes, the reward is expected. Otherwise there are many other
> places in the world which need our service. But instead of going there
> we come here.
>
> “(G.) There is the kink. At the back of your mind there is not pure
> service for its sake, but the result of service in the shape of many
> people coming to the Christian fold. (M.L.) In my own work there is no
> ulterior motive. I care for people, I cannot do otherwise. The source
> of this is my loyalty to Jesus who ministered to suffering humanity.
> At the back of my mind there is, I admit, the desire that people may
> find the same joy in Jesus that I find. Where is the kink?
>
> (G.) The kink is in the Church thinking that there are people in whom
> certain things are lacking and that you must supply them whether they
> want them or not if you simply say to your patients, ‘You have taken
> the medicine I gave you. Thank God. He has healed you. Don’t come
> again’, you have done your duty. But if you also say, ‘How nice it
> would be if you had the same faith in Christianity as I have’, you do
> not make your medicine a free gift.
>
> (M.L.) But if I feel I have something medically and spiritually which
> I can give, how can I keep it?
>
> (G.) There is a way out of the difficulty. You must feel that what you
> possess your patient also can possess but through a different route.
> You will say to yourself, ‘I have come through this route, you may
> come through a different route.’ Why should you want him to pass
> through your university and no other?
>
> (M.L.) Because I have my partiality for my Alma Mater.
>
> (G.) There is my difficulty. Because you adore your mother you cannot
> wish that all the others were your  
> mother’s  children.
>
> (M.L.) That is a physical impossibility.
>
> (G.) Then this one is a spiritual impossibility. God has the whole
> humanity as His children. How can I limit God’s grace by my little
> mind and say this is the only way? 
>
> (M.L.) I do not say it is the only way. There might be a better way.
>
> (G.) If you concede that there might be a better way, you have
> surrendered the point.
>
> (M.L.) Well, if you say that you have found your way, I am not so
> terrifically concerned with you. I will deal with one who is
> floundering in mind.
>
> (G.) Will you judge him? Have you people not floundered? Why will you
> present your particular brand of truth to all?
>
> (M.L.) I must present to him the medicine I know. 
>
> (G.) Then you will say to him, ‘Have you seen your own doctor?’ You
> will send him to his doctor, ask the doctor to take charge of him. You
> will perhaps consult that doctor, you will discuss with him the
> diagnosis, and will convince him or allow yourself to be convinced by
> him. But there you are dealing with a wretched physical thing. Here
> you are dealing with a spiritual thing where you cannot go through all
> these necessary investigations. What I plead for is humility. You do
> not claim freedom from hypocrisy for the Christian
> Church?^([138](#138))

At this point Dr. Pierre Ceresole, who- pretended to be a “liberal”
Christian, intervened:

> (P.C.) Most of us believe our religion to be the best and they have
> not the slightest idea what other religions have revealed to their
> adherents…
>
> (G.) I tell you have not read as many books on Hinduism as I have
> about Christianity. And yet I have not come to the conclusion that
> Christianity or Hinduism is the only way.^([139](#139))

The missionary friend wondered, “What exactly should be missionaries’
attitude?”

> (G.) I think I have made it clear. But I shall say it again in other
> words: *Just to forget that you have come to a country of heathens and
> to think that they are as much in search of God as you are; just to
> feel that you are not going there to give your spiritual goods to
> them, but that you will share your worldly goods of which you have a
> good stock. You will then do your work without mental reservation and
> thereby you will share your spiritual treasures*.^([140](#140)) The
> knowledge that you have this reservation creates a barrier between you
> and me.
>
> (P.C.) Do you think that because of what you call the mental
> reservation, the work that one could accomplish would suffer?
>
> (G.) I am sure. You would not be half as useful as you would be
> without the reservation. The reservation means that you belong to a
> different and a higher species, and you make yourself unaccessible to
> others.
>
> (P.C.) A barrier would be my Western way of living? 
>
> (G.) No, that can be immediately broken. 
>
> (P.C.) Would you be really happy if we stayed at home? 
>
> (G.) I cannot say that. But I will certainly say that I have never
> been able to understand your going out of America. Is there nothing to
> do there?
>
> (P.C.) Even in America there is enough scope for educational work.
>
> (G.) That is a fatal confession. You are not a superfluity there. But
> for the curious position your Church has taken you would not be here.
>
> (P.C.) I have come because the Indian women need medical care to a
> greater extent than American women do. But coupled with that I have a
> desire to share my Christian heritage.
>
> (G.) That is exactly the position I have been trying to counter. You
> have already said that there may be a better way.
>
> (P.C.) No, I meant to say that there may be a better way fifty years
> hence.
>
> (G.) Well we were talking of the present, and you said there might be
> a better way.
>
> (P.C.) No, there is no better way today than the one I am following.
>
> (G.) That is what I say is assuming too much. You have not examined
> all religious beliefs. But even if you had, you may not claim
> infallibility. You assume knowledge of all people, which you can do
> only if you were God. I want you to understand that you are labouring
> under a double fallacy: That what you think is best for you is really
> so; and that what you regard as the best for you is the best for the
> whole world. It is an assumption of omniscience and infallibility. I
> plead for a little humility.^([141](#141))

Gandhiji had a discussion with C. F. Andrews who had just returned from
a visit to New Zealand, Fiji and Australia. He wanted to know Gandhiji’s
reaction to the attitude of the missionaries vis-a-vis Harijan uplift.
The discussion was reported in the *Harijan* of November 28,1936. It
also deserves to be reproduced at some length:

> Gandhiji: Their behaviour has been as bad as that of the rest who are
> in the field to add to their numbers. What pains one is their frantic
> attempt to exploit the weakness of Harijans. If they said, ‘Hinduism
> is a diabolical religion, come to us’, I should understand. But they
> dangle earthly paradises in front of them and make promises to them
> which they can never keep. When in Bangalore^([142](#142)) a
> deputation of Christians came with a number of resolutions which they
> thought would please me. I said to them: ‘This is no matter for
> bargain. You must say definitely that this is a matter to be settled
> by the Hindus themselves. Where is the sense of talking of a sudden
> awakening of spiritual hunger among the untouchables and then trying
> to exploit a particular situation?… It is absurd for a single
> individual to talk of taking all the Harijans with himself. Are they
> all bricks that they could be moved from one structure to another? If
> the Christian missions here want to play the game, and for that matter
> Mussalmans and others, they should have no such idea as that of adding
> to their ranks whilst a great reform in Hinduism is going on.’ 
>
> C.F.A.: Let me ask one question. I said in Australia that all the talk
> of Dr. Ambedkar and his followers was not in terms of religion, and I
> said also that it was cruelty to bargain with unsophisticated people
> like the Harijans as they are in most parts of India. Then came the
> London Missionary Society’s statement that the Ezhavas^([143](#143))
> in Travancore had asked for Christian instruction. I said then that
> the Ezhavas were quite enlightened and if they had really asked to be
> instructed in Christianity, it would be, an entirely different matter.
> Was I right?
>
> Gandhiji: I do not think so. Whilst there are individual Ezhavas who
> are doctors and barristers and so on, the vast majority of them are
> just the same as the Harijans elsewhere. I can assure you that no one
> representing the body of Ezhavas could have asked for Christian
> instruction. You should ascertain the facts from our principal workers
> there.
>
> C.F.A: I see what you mean. Only I wanted to say that the London
> Missionary Society was a liberal body and would not make an
> irresponsible statement.
>
> Gandhiji: But they at the centre cannot know, as the Parliament cannot
> know the truth of what is happening in India.
>
> C.F.A: But that apart, I should like to discuss the fundamental
> position with you. What would you say to a man who after considerable
> thought and prayer said that he could not have his peace and salvation
> except by becoming a Christian?
>
> Gandhiji: I would say that if a non-Christian, say a Hindu, came to a
> Christian and made that statement, he should ask him to become a good
> Hindu rather than find goodness in change of faith.
>
> C.F.A: I cannot go this whole length with you, though you know my own
> position. I discarded the position that there was no salvation except
> through Christ long ago. But suppose the Oxford Group Movement changed
> the life of your son, and he felt like being converted, what would you
> say?
>
> Gandhiji: I would say that the Oxford Group may change the lives of as
> many as they like, but not their religion. They can draw their
> attention to the best in their respective religions and change their
> lives by asking them to live according to them. There came to me a
> man, the son of Brahmin parents, who said his reading of your book had
> led him to embrace Christianity... I said to him that you had never
> through your books asked Indians to take up the Bible and embrace
> Christianity and that he misread your book - unless of course your
> position is like that of the late Maulana Mohamed Ali, viz., that a
> believing Mussalman, however bad his life, is better than a good
> Hindu.
>
> C.F.A: I do not accept Maulana Mohamed Ali’s position at all. But I do
> say that if a person really needs a change of faith I should not stand
> in his way.
>
> Gandhiji: But don’t you see that you do not even give him a chance?
> You do not even cross-examine him. Suppose a Christian came to me and
> said he was captivated by a reading of the *Bhagavata* and wanted to
> declare himself a Hindu, I should say to him, ‘Now what the
> *Bhagavata* offers the Bible also offers. You have not yet made the
> attempt to find it out. Make the attempt and be a good Christian.’
>
> C.F.A: I don’t know. If someone earnestly says, that he will become a
> good Christian, I should say, ‘You may become one’, though you know
> that I have in my own life strongly dissuaded ardent enthusiasts who
> came to me. I said to them, ‘Certainly not on my account will you do
> anything of the kind.’ But human nature does require a concrete faith.
>
> Gandhiji: If a person wants to believe in the Bible let him say so,
> but why should he disregard his own religion? This proselytization
> will mean no peace in the world. Religion is a very personal
> matter. We should by living the life according to our own light, share
> the best with one another, thus adding to the sum total of human
> effort to reach God.”^([144](#144))

Mahadev Desai recorded in the *Harijan* dated December 5, 1936 a
discussion which Mr. Basil Mathew had with Gandhiji about Missionary
Methods. “That is a question to which I have given great thought,” said
Gandhiji, “and I am convinced that, if Christian Missions will sincerely
play the game, no matter what may be their policy under normal
circumstances, they must withdraw from the indecent competition to
convert the Harijans. Whatever the Archbishop of Canterbury and others
may say, what is done here in India in the name of Christianity is
wholly different from what they say. There are others in the field also,
but as a devotee of truth I say that, if there is any difference between
their methods, it is one of degree and not of kind. I know of
representatives of different religions standing on the same platform and
vying with one another to catch the Harijan ear. To dignify this
movement with the name of spiritual hunger is a travesty of truth.
Arguing on the highest plane I said to Dr. Mott, if they wanted to
convert Harijans, had they not better begin to convert me? I am a trifle
more intelligent than they, and therefore more receptive to the
influences of reason that could be brought to bear upon me. But to
approach the Pulayas and Pariahs with their palsied hands and paralysed
intelligence is no Christianity. No, whilst our reform movement is going
on, all religious-minded people should say: Rather than obstruct their
work, let us support them in their work.”^([145](#145))

Mr. Mathew asked, “Do not the roots of the reform movement go back to
the missionary movement? Did not the missionaries wake up the reformers
and make a certain amount of stir among the untouchables?” Gandhiji
replied, “I do not think that the missionary movement was responsible
for a stirring of the right kind. I agree that it stung the reformers to
the quick and awakened them to their sense of duty.” Mr. Mathew
persisted, “You have spoken of some good work being done by
missionaries. Should not we go on with it?” Gandhiji observed, “Oh, Yes.
Do, by all means. But give up what makes you objects of suspicion and
demoralizes us also. We go to your hospitals with the mercenary motive
of having an operation performed, but with no object of responding to
what is at the back of your mind, even as our children do when they go
to Bible classes in their colleges and then laugh at what they read
there. I tell you our conversation at home about these missionary
colleges is not at all edifying. Why then spoil your good work with
other motives?”^([146](#146))

Finally, Mr. Mathew asked, “Where do you find the seat of authority?”
Gandhiji said, “It lies here (pointing to his breast). I exercise my
judgment about every scripture, including the Gita. I cannot let a
scriptural text supersede my reason. Whilst I believe that the principal
books are inspired, they suffer from a process of double distillation.
Firstly they come through a human prophet, and then through the
interpreters. Nothing in them comes from God directly. Matthew may give
one version of one text and John may give another. I cannot surrender my
reason whilst I subscribe to divine revelation.”^([147](#147))

The Missionary Supremo, John R. Mott, who had been receiving reports
about Gandhiji’s uncompromising stand against conversion under any
circumstances, thought that it was time he himself sounded the Mahatma
once again. So he paid his second visit to Sevagram and had long talks
with Gandhiji on November 13-14, 1936. Parts of the conversation were
reported in the *Harijan* dated December 9, 1936.

Mott started by praising Gandhiji for his effort to raise the Harijans,
discussed the Yervada Pact and then broached the subject dear to his own
heart, “The importance of this movement,” he said, “lies beyond the
frontiers of India, and yet there are few subjects on which there is
more confusion of thought. Take for instance the missionaries and
missionary societies. They are not of one mind. It is highly desirable
that we become of one mind and find out how far we can help and not
hinder. I am the Chairman of the International Missionary Council which
combines 300 missionary societies in the world. I have on my desk the
reports of these societies; and I can say that their interest in the
untouchables is deepening. I should be interested if you would feel free
to tell us where, if anywhere, the missionaries have gone along wrong
lines. Their desire is to help and not to hinder.”

Gandhiji replied, “I cannot help saying that the activities of the
missionaries have hurt me. They with the Mussalmans and Sikhs came
forward as soon as Dr. Ambedkar threw the bombshell,^([148](#148)) and
they gave it an importance out of all proportions to the weight it
carried, and then ensured a rivalry between these organisations. I could
understand the Muslim organisations doing this, as Hindus and Muslims
have been quarrelling. The Sikh intervention is an enigma. But the
Christian mission claims to be a purely spiritual effort. It hurt me to
find Christian bodies vying with Muslims and Sikhs in trying to add to
the numbers of their fold. It seemed to me an ugly performance and a
travesty of religion. They even proceeded to enter into secret conclaves
with Dr. Ambedkar. I should have understood and appreciated your prayers
for the Harijans but instead you made an appeal to those who had not
even the mind and intelligence to understand what you talked; they have
certainly not the intelligence to distinguish between Jesus and Mohammed
and Nanak and so on.”^([149](#149))

Mott asked, “But must we not serve them?” Gandhiji said, “Of course, you
will, but not making conversion the price of your
service.”^([150](#150)) Mott moved to the patent Christian position. He
quoted Christ about “Preach and Teach” and said, “The whole Christian
religion is the religion of sharing our life, and how can we share
without supplementing our lives with words.” Gandhiji replied, “Then
what they are doing in Travancore is correct? There may be difference of
degree in what you say and what they are doing, but there is no
difference of quality. If you must share it with the Harijans, why don’t
you share it with Thakkarbapa and Mahadev? Why should you go to the
untouchables and try to exploit this upheaval? Why not come to us
instead?”^([151](#151))

Mott came out with more quotations from Jesus. But C. F. Andrews, who
was present, sensed Gandhiji’s impatience and suggested a compromise.
Gandhiji said. “I do not think it is a matter which admits of any
compromise at all. It is a deeply religious problem and each should do
what he likes. If your conscience tells you that the present effort is
your mission, you need not give any quarter to Hindu reformers. I can
simply state my belief that what the missionaries are doing today does
not show spirituality.”^([152](#152))

The talks were resumed next day. Mott made a typically American offer.
“If money is to be given to India,” he said, “in what ways can it be
wisely given without causing any harm? Will money be of any value?”
Gandhiji replied, “No, when money is given it can only do harm. It has
to be earned when it is required. I am convinced that the American and
British money which has been voted for missionary societies has done
more harm than good. You cannot serve God and mammon both. And my fear
is that mammon has been sent to serve India and God has remained behind
with the result He will one day have his vengeance. When the American
says, ‘I will serve you through money’, I dread him. I simply say to
him, ‘Send us your engineers not to earn money but to give us the
benefit of their scientific knowledge.’”^([153](#153))

Finally, Mott presented his pet theory that “money is stored-up
personality” and that “Christ is able to dominate both the money and the
machine.” Gandhiji observed, “I have made the distinction between money
given and money earned. If an American says he wants to serve India, and
you packed him off here, I should say we had not earned his services… It
is my certain conviction that money plays the least part in matters of
spirit.”^([154](#154))

*The Church Times* of London published, on October 16, 1936, the news of
a meeting of Christian denominations held in that city. The meeting was
presided over by the Archbishop of Canterbury. The main speaker was Dr.
J. W. Pickett, Bishop of a Methodist Episcopal Church in the U.S.A. He
was the author of a book, *Christian Mass Movements in India*, which he
said he had written after making studies “on the spot.” He reported that
“four and a half millions of the depressed classes in India have become
disciples of our Lord” and that “even Brahmins have testified - albeit
reluctantly - to the power of Christianity to transform the characters
and lives of people whom they once thought incapable of religious
feelings, and to whom they denied the right of entrance to temples of
Hinduism.” According to him, “900,000 people now profess the Christian
faith” in the Telegu area and “a surprisingly high proportion of them
speak of a sense of mystical union with God.” He quoted “their Hindu
neighbours” who, according to him, had “admitted that the religion of
Jesus Christ had lifted them to a new standard of cleanliness of person
and home, and made them a trustworthy people.” As a result, he said,
“high-caste people are now coming into the church, literally by dozens
of hundreds, in areas where this transformation of life has occurred
among the untouchables.” He described this “mass movement” as a
“miracle, one of the great miracles of Christian history.”^([155](#155))

Gandhiji reproduced the news in the *Harijan* dated December 19, 1936
and made his own comment on the ‘miracle’. “I have rarely seen,” he
said, “so much exaggeration in so little space. A reader ignorant of
conditions in India would conclude that the figures relate to the
conversions due to the movement led by Dr. Ambedkar. I am sure Dr.
Pickett could not have made any such claim. He had in mind the figures
to date commencing from the establishment of the first church in India
hundreds of years ago. But the figures are irrelevant to the general
claim said to have been advanced by the Bishop. Where are the
‘multitudes in India who marvel’ at the transformation in the lives of
‘four and a half millions of the depressed classes’? I am one of the
multitudes having practically travelled more than half a dozen times all
over India and have not seen any transformation on the scale described
by Dr. Pickett, and certainly none of recent date. I have had the
privilege of addressing meetings of Indian Christians who have appeared
to me to be no better than their fellows. Indeed, the taint of
untouchability persists in spite of the nominal change of faith so far
as the social status is concerned… I should like to meet the Brahmins
‘who have testified... to the power of Christianity to transform the
characters and lives of people whom they once thought incapable of
religious feeling’… I must pass by the other generalizations. But I
should like to know the hundreds of high caste Hindus who ‘are now
coming into the church in areas where this transformation of life has
occurred among the untouchables’. If all the astounding statements Dr.
Pickett has propounded can be substantiated, truly it is ‘one of the
greatest miracles of Christian history’, nay, of the history of
man.”^([156](#156))

At the same time Gandhiji asked, “But do miracles need an oratorical
demonstration? Should we in India miss such a grand miracle? Should we
remain untouched by it?” Stating that “Miracles are their own
demonstration”, he drew the attention of the missionaries to the
“miracle in Tranvancore” where 2000 temples had been opened to the
Harijans who “would enter them in their hundreds without let or
hindrance from the most orthodox Hindus.” He concluded that “the learned
Bishop” had made a caricature of Christianity which “hurts
me.”^([157](#157))

The story-tellers, however, did not stop at making tall claims. In the
*Harijan* dated December 26, 1936, Gandhiji had to comment on a pamphlet
published by the Church Missionary Society of England. It had given a
call for an “emergency fund of £ 25,000 to enable extra grants to be
made during the next five years to those areas where this big movement
is taking place.” The Society appealed to the “whole church to support
this effort” for the “sake of the hundreds of thousands who are dimly
groping after Christ and who are finding spiritual life and social
uplift through the Gospel.”^([158](#158)) Some of the claims made by Dr.
Pickett were repeated in the pamphlet which had “discovered” that “the
campaign for the removal of untouchability” led by Gandhiji “had
signally failed because he clung to the Hindu system which has been the
cause of the trouble.” More important, the future prospects for
Christianity in certain areas were seen as very promising. It was stated
that the Bishop of Dornakal in the Telegu region “reckons that about a
million people in his diocese are moving Christward” and among the
Ezhavas “850,000 have waited on the Bishop in Travancore, because they
are anxious that their entire community should become
Christians.”^([159](#159))

Gandhiji commented that he was “utterly unconscious of ‘signal
failure’”, and that he who had “travelled in Telegu areas often enough”
had “never heard of forty thousand Harijans or any figure near it asking
for baptism.”^([160](#160)) As for the Ezhavas, he observed, “The papers
report them to have congratulated the Maharaja on his
Proclamation.”^([161](#161)) He concluded, “There is no other way to
deal with exaggerations of which the appeal is full than by living them
down and by the truth working through the lives of the
reformers.”^([162](#162))

Professor Krzenski, according to whom “Catholicism was the only true
religion”, had a discussion with Gandhiji on January 2, 1937. The
dialogue was reported in the *Harijan* of January 16. Gandhiji made use
of Socratic wit to disarm him completely:

> Gandhiji: Do you therefore say that other religions are untrue?
>
> Krzenski: If others are convinced that their, religions are true they
> are saved.
>
> Gandhiji: Therefore you will say that everyone would be saved even
> through untruth. For you say that if a man really and sincerely
> believes in what is as a matter of fact untruth he is saved. Would you
> not also hold, therefore, that your own way may be untrue but that you
> are convinced that it is true and therefore you will be
> saved?^([163](#163))

Krzenski’s claim that he had studied and compared all religions and
found his own to be the best, did not impress Gandhiji for whom religion
was not a matter of “intellectual examination.” He told the professor
that “your position is arrogant.” The professor then “switched on to the
next question, viz., that of fighting materialism.” Gandhiji said, “It
is no use trying to fight these forces without giving up *the idea of
conversion, which I assure you is the deadliest poison which ever sapped
the fountain of truth*.”^([164](#164))  
   

Before leaving, the professor said, “But I have great respect for you.”
Gandhiji observed, “Not enough. If I were to join the Catholic Church
you would have greater respect for me.” Krzenski agreed and said that in
that case “you would be as great as St. Francis?” Gandhiji winked, “But
not otherwise? A Hindu cannot be a St. Francis? Poor Hindu?”

Krzenski wanted to take a photograph of Gandhiji. He was dissuaded by
Gandhiji’s quick remark, “No, surely you don’t care for materialism! And
it is all materialism, isn’t it?”^([165](#165))

On January 19, 1937 Gandhiji gave an interview to two Bishops and some
other Christians at Kottayam. He had gone there to extend his support to
the Maharaja’s proclamation on temple-entry for Harijans. Bishop Moore
said he was “ready to remove misunderstandings” about missionary work in
Travancore which had disturbed Gandhiji. Gandhiji referred him to Bishop
Pickett’s claim about conversions in the Telegu country and Travancore,
and the Church Missionary Society’s call for funds. Moore pleaded
ignorance about the claim and the collection and agreed that exaggerated
reports should not be circulated. He also stated that “during the last
year they could record 530 persons as having been baptised into the
Anglican faith.” But Bishop Abraham asserted that “there was a
tremendous awakening among even the middle class *savarnas*” in Telegu
areas and that “he had addressed meetings which were attended by many of
the high-caste people.” Gandhiji said, “That means nothing. To say that
hundreds attended meetings addressed by Christian preachers is very
different from saying that hundreds have accepted the message of Jesus
and from making an appeal for money in anticipation of people becoming
Christians in large numbers.” The Christians wanted to know if
“Mr. Gandhi had any objection to their stimulating and responding to the
spiritual hunger of the people.” Gandhiji said that “the matter was
quite irrelevant to the discussion which was entirely about extravagant
statements made by responsible people.”^([166](#166))

On the same day he addressed a public meeting in the town. “In the
estimation of those who so believe,” he said, “this Proclamation is an
act which it would be their duty to resist and to show to the Maharaja
that by issuing the Proclamation of liberation he is simply prolonging
the agony and giving a new lease of life to a body of superstitions
which were bound to die their natural death.” He had the Christian
missionaries and their Hindu mouthpieces in mind. “I know,” he
continued, “that many Christians throughout the length and breadth of
India do not regard Hinduism as a fraud upon humanity or a body of bad
usages and superstitions. A religion which has produced Ramakrishna,
Chaitanya, Shankar and Vivekananda cannot be a body of superstitions.”
After explaining the “essence of Hinduism” with the help of “one
incredibly simple *mantra* of the Ishopanishad”^([167](#167)), he
suggested to “my Christian and Mussalman friends that they will find
nothing more in their scriptures.”^([168](#168))

He declared that he had himself been fighting against whatever
corruptions had crept into Hinduism and requested all non-Hindus not to
exploit the temporary weaknesses of this great religion. “I felt,” he
said, “that I could not do justice to this great meeting, especially a
meeting that is held in a Christian stronghold, unless I was prepared to
utter a truth I held dear as life itself. We all consciously or
unconsciously find and strive for peace on earth and goodwill amongst
mankind. I am convinced that we shall find neither peace nor goodwill
among men and women through strife among men of different religions,
through disputation among them. We shall find truth and peace and
goodwill if we approach the humblest of mankind in a prayful spirit.
Anyway that is my humble appeal to Christians who may be present in this
great meeting... As I have said so often elsewhere, whilst the hand that
traced the signature on the Proclamation was that of the Maharaja, the
spirit that moved him to do so as that of God.”^([169](#169))

On March 5, 1937 Gandhiji had a discussion with R. R. Keithahn, an
American missionary, about the equality of all religions. The missionary
was “not quite sure what was at the back of Gandhiji’s mind when he said
that all religions were not only true but equal.” He felt that
“scientifically it was hardly correct to say that all religions are
equal.” But he admitted that “it is no use comparing religions” and that
“they were different ways.”^([170](#170)) Gandhiji said, “You are right
when you say that it is impossible to compare them. But the deduction
from it is that they are equal. All men are born free and equal, but one
is much stronger or weaker than another physically and mentally.
Therefore superficially there is no equality between the two. But there
is an essential equality: in our nakedness. God is not going to think of
me as Gandhi and you as Keithahn… inherently we are equal. The
differences of race and skin and of mind and body and of climate and
nation are transitory. In the same way essentially all religions are
equal... Where is the use of scanning details and holding a religion to
ridicule? Take the very first chapter of Genesis or of Matthew. We read
a long pedigree and then at the end we are told that Jesus was born of a
virgin. You come up against a blind wall. But I must read it all with
the eye of a Christian.”^([171](#171))

A Roman Catholic Father came to see Gandhiji on March 5, 1937 and
proposed that “if Hinduism became monotheistic, Christianity and
Hinduism can serve India in cooperation.” Gandhiji replied, “I would
love to see the cooperation happen, but it cannot if the present-day
Christian missions persist in holding up Hinduism to ridicule and saying
that no one can go to Heaven unless he renounces and denounces Hinduism…
not so long as there is militant and ‘muscular’
Christianity.”^([172](#172)) The Father persisted, “But if Indians begin
to believe in one God and give up idolatry, don’t you think the whole
difficulty will be solved?” Gandhiji put a counter question to him,
“Will the Christians be satisfied? Are they all united?” The Father
admitted that the Christian sects knew no unity. “Then you are asking,”
continued Gandhiji, “a theoretical question. And may I ask you, is there
any amalgamation between Islam and Christianity, though both are said to
believe in one God? If these two have not amalgamated, there is less
hope of amalgamation of Christians and Hindus along lines you suggest. I
have my own solution, but in the first instance I dispute the
description that Hindus believe in many gods and are idolaters... The
whole mischief is created by the English rendering of the word *deva* or
*devata* for which you have not found a better term than ‘god’. But God
is Ishwara, Devadhideva, God of Gods. So you see it is the word ‘god’
used to describe different divine beings, that has given rise to such
confusion. I believe that I am a thorough Hindu but I never believe in
many Gods.”

Next, Gandhiji proceeded to defend idol-worship. “As for idol-worship,”
he said, “you cannot do without it in some form or other. Why does a
Mussalman give his life for defending a mosque which he calls a house of
God? And why does a Christian go to a Church and when he is required to
take an oath swear by the Bible? Not that I see any objection to it. And
what is it if not idolatry to give untold riches for building mosques
and tombs? And what do the Roman Catholics do when they kneel before
Virgin Mary and before saints - quite imaginary figures in stone or
painted on canvas or glass?” The Father made a distinction between
‘veneration’ and ‘worship’. “When I worship God,” he said, “I
acknowledge Him as creator and greater than any human being.” Gandhiji
observed, “Even so, it is not the stone we worship but it is God we
worship in images of stone or metal however crude they may
be.”^([173](#173)) The Father said, “But the villagers worship stones as
God.” Gandhiji explained, “No, I tell you they do not worship anything
that is less than God. When you kneel before Virgin Mary and ask for her
intercession, what do you do? You ask to establish contact with God
through a stone image. I can understand your asking for the Virgin’s
intercession. Why are Mussalmans filled with awe and exultation when
they enter a mosque? Why is not the whole universe a mosque?… But I
understand and sympathise with the Muslims. It is their way of approach
to God. The Hindus have their own way of approach to the same Eternal
Being. Our media of approach are different, but that does not make Him
different.”^([174](#174))

The Father now came to the patent Christian position. “But the Catholics
believe,” he said, “that God revealed to them the true way.” Gandhiji
replied, “But why do you say that the will of God is expressed only in
one book called the Bible and not in others? Why do you circumscribe the
power of God?” The Father brought in Jesus who “proved that he had
received the word of God through miracles.” Gandhiji pointed out, “But
that is Mahomed’s claim too. If you accept Christian testimony you must
accept Muslim testimony and Hindu testimony too.” The Father dropped the
subject and became curious about the Congress “veering round
Communism.”^([175](#175)) Gandhiji advised him not to confuse with
Communism the Congress campaign against inequality.

Finally, the Father expressed his fear of Hindus coming to power in free
India. “When Hinduism comes to power,” he asked, “will it not make a
united front against Christianity? There are all the signs of Hinduism
coming to power. And if it happens here, as it is happening in
Spain,^([176](#176)) Indian Christians will be despised and persecuted
and swept off.” Gandhiji told him that his fears were imaginary. “There
is no such thing,” said Gandhiji, “as Hindu rule, there will be no such
thing… Let me tell you that no Hindu in his wildest imagination ever
thought of this… Hinduism was well able to destroy the first Christians
that came. Why did it not do anything of the kind? Travancore is a
brilliant example of toleration. I was asked while I was there to see
the most ancient church where St. Thomas is said to have planted the
first cross. Why should he have been allowed to plant it?” The Father
“revealed his bugbear - Arya Samaj.” Gandhiji said, “I agree that the
Arya Samaj represents a type of militant Hinduism, but they never
believed in the cult of the sword. The worst thing they are capable of
is to ask you to become a Hindu if you went and spoke on their
platform!”^([177](#177))

A distinguished American clergyman, Dr. Crane, met Gandhiji on February
25, 1937 and asked him various questions. The interview was published in
the *Harijan* dated March 6, 1937. The first question was about
Gandhiji’s attitude to Christianity. “For a time,” said Gandhiji, “I
struggled with the question, ‘which was the true religion out of those I
know?’ But ultimately I came to the deliberate conviction that there was
no such thing as only one true religion, every other being false. There
is no religion that is absolutely perfect. All are equally imperfect or
more or less perfect, hence the conclusion that Christianity is as good
and true as my own religion… Therefore I am not interested in weaning
you from Christianity and making you a Hindu, and I would not relish
your designs upon me, if you had any, to convert me to Christianity: I
would also dispute your claim that Christianity is the only true
religion. It is also a true religion, a noble religion, and along with
other religions it has contributed to raise the moral height of mankind.
But it has yet to make a greater contribution. After all what are 2,000
years in the life of a religion? Just now Christianity comes to yearning
mankind in a tainted form. Fancy Bishops supporting slaughter in the
name of Christianity.”^([178](#178))

Dr. Crane asked, “But, when you say that all religions are true, what do
you do when there are conflicting counsels?” Gandhiji replied, “I have
no difficulty in hitting upon the truth, because I go by certain
fundamental maxims. Truth is superior to everything and I reject what
conflicts with it. Similarly that which is in conflict with non-violence
should be rejected. And on matters which can be reasoned out, that which
conflicts with Reason must also be rejected... Well then, given these
three criteria, I can have no difficulty in examining all claims made on
behalf of religion. Thus to believe that Jesus is the only begotton son
of God is to me against Reason, for God can’t marry and beget
children. The word ‘son’ there can only be used in a figurative sense.
In that sense everyone who stands in the position of Jesus is a begotten
son of God. If a man is spiritually miles ahead of us we may say that he
is in a special sense the son of God, though we are all children of
God.”^([179](#179))

The next question from the clergyman was, “Then you will recognize
degrees of divinity. Would you not say that Jesus was the most divine?”
Gandhiji said, “No, for the simple reason that we have no data.
Historically we have more data about Mahomed than anyone else because he
was more recent in time. For Jesus there are less data available, no
judge should shoulder the burden of sifting all the evidence, if only
for the reason that it requires a highly spiritual person to gauge the
degree of divinity of the subjects he examines.”^([180](#180))

The clergyman sought his view about conversion. “I strongly resent,”
said Gandhiji, “these overtures to utterly ignorant men. I can perhaps
understand overtures made to me, as indeed they are being made. For they
can reason with me and I can reason with them. But I certainly resent
the overtures made to Harijans. When a Christian preacher goes and says
to a Harijan that Jesus was the only begotten son of God, he will give
him a blank stare. Then he holds out all kinds of inducements which
debase Christianity.”^([181](#181))

Dr. Crane asked him if he regarded Hinduism as a synthesis of all
religions. “Yes,” replied Gandhi, “if you will. But I would call that
synthesis Hinduism, and for you the synthesis will be Christianity. If I
did not do so, you would always be patronizing me, as many Christians do
now, saying, ‘How nice it would be if Gandhi accepted Christianity’, and
Muslims would be doing the same, saying, ‘How nice it would be if Gandhi
accepted Islam!’ That immediately puts a barrier between you and
me.”^([182](#182))

Finally, there was a discussion about what Dr. Crane called the caste
system. Gandhiji said, “Hinduism does not believe in caste. I would
obliterate it at once. But I believe in varnadharma, which is the law of
life. I believe that some people are born to teach and some to defend
and some to engage in trade and agriculture and some to do manual
labour, so much so that these occupations become hereditary. The law of
varna is nothing but the law of conservation of energy. Why should my
son not be a scavenger if I am one?” Crane was surprised and exclaimed,
“Indeed? Do you go so far?” Gandhiji replied, “I do, because I hold a
scavenger’s profession in no way inferior to a clergyman’s… For a
scavenger is as worthy of his hire as a lawyer or your President. That,
according to me, is Hinduism. There is no better communism on earth, and
I have illustrated it with one verse from the Upanishads which means:
God pervades all - animate and inanimate. Therefore renounce all and
dedicate it to God and then live. The right of living is thus derived
from renunciation. It does not say, ‘When all do their part of the work
I too will do it.’ It says, ‘Don’t bother about others, do your job
first and leave the rest to Him.’ Varnadharma acts even as the law of
gravitation. I cannot cancel it or its working by trying to jump higher
day by day till gravitation ceases to work. That effort will be vain. So
is the effort to jump over one another. The law of varna is the
antithesis of competition which kills.”^([183](#183))

Someone wrote a long letter to Gandhiji. Extracts from it were published
in the *Harijan* of March 6, 1937. The letter said, “Your attitude
towards religious conversion and particularly the hope you entertain for
the Depressed Classes within the fold of Hinduism, overlooks the
prevalent practices of Hinduism as it exists in India today…” He also
pointed out that “any religion is judged by its fruits.” Hindu temples
and mutts, he continued, collected a lot of money from the devotees, but
instead of being used for rendering service it was used for the
“princely lives” led by the heads of mutts. Religious heads, Swamis and
gurus were practising “popery in its worst days.” Temples and mutts had
become “weapons of superstition and oppression.” On the other hand,
“Bishops and priests of Christian religion … render humanitarian service
unequalled by any other class of human beings who follow any other faith
or no faith, and are approachable to all people.”^([184](#184))

Gandhiji commented, “It is good to see ourselves as others see us… The
grave limitations of Hinduism as it is today must be admitted…
Humanitarian work done by Christian missions must also be admitted. But
these admissions of mine must not be interpreted to mean endorsement of
the deductions of the writer.” The writer had admitted the “sublimity of
Hinduism as expounded by Vivekananda and Radha-krishnan.” Gandhiji
pointed out that this admission “should have led to his discovery of its
percolation down to the masses.” He said, “I make bold to say that in
spite of the crudeness which one sees among the villagers, class
considered, in all that is good in human nature they compare favourably
with any villagers in the world. This testimony is borne out by the
majority of travellers who from the times of Huen Tsang down to the
present times have recorded their impressions. The innate culture that
the villagers of India show, the art which one sees in the homes of the
poor, the restraint with which the villagers conduct themselves, are
surely due to the religion that has bound them together since time
immemorial.”^([185](#185))

Coming to service, Gandhiji wrote, “In his zeal to belittle Hinduism,
the writer ignores the broad fact that Hinduism has produced a race of
reformers who have successfully combated prejudices, superstitions and
abuses. Without any drum-beating Hinduism has devised a system of relief
of the poor which has been the envy of many foreign admirers… It is not
the Indian habit to advertise charities through printed reports and the
like. But he who runs may see the free kitchens and free medical relief
given along indigenous lines.” Missionary service institutions, on the
other hand, “are established with a view to weaning Indians from their
ancestral faith even as expounded by Vivekananda and
Radha-krishnan.”^([186](#186))

In his talk with Mr. John Mott and some other missionaries Gandhiji has
compared the Harijans with the cow so far as understanding of Christian
theology was concerned. The missionaries made much of it and went about
propagating that Gandhiji had insulted the Harijans. He had explained in
the *Harijan* of January 9, 1937 what he meant by the
comparison.^([187](#187)) But that did not stop the missionary campaign.
So he returned to the theme in the *Harijan* of March 13, 1937. “This
comparison,” he wrote, “shocked my friends so much that the shock has
travelled to America and I have begun to receive letters from America
telling me how the comparison is being used to discredit me and my claim
to serve Harijans. The critics seem to say, ‘You can have little regard
for Harijans if you compare them to the cow!’”

Gandhiji refused to be browbeaten and did not withdraw the comparison.
He explained his simile once again and went farther. “Let my critics and
credulous friends understand,” he said, “that apart from the comparison,
I stand on unassailable ground when I assert that it is a travesty of
religion to seek to uproot from the Harijans’ simple minds such faith as
they have in their ancestral religion and to transfer their allegiance
to another, even though that other may be as good as and equal to the
original in quality. Though all soils have the same predominant
characteristics, we know that the same seeds do not fare equally well in
all soils… But my fear is that though Christian friends nowadays do not
say or admit that Hindu religion is untrue, they must harbour in their
breasts the belief that Hinduism is an error and that Christianity as
they believe it is the only true religion. Without some such thing it is
not possible to understand, much less to appreciate, the
C.M.S.^([188](#188)) appeal from which I reproduced in these columns
some revealing extracts the other day. One could understand the attack
on untouchability and many other errors that have crept into Hindu life.
And if they would help us to get rid of the admitted abuses and purify
our religion, they would do helpful constructive work which would be
gratefully accepted. But so far as one can understand the present
effort, it is to uproot Hinduism from the very foundation and replace it
by another faith. If the Christian world entertains that opinion about
the Hindu house, ‘Parliament of Religions’ and ‘International
Fellowship’ are empty phrases. For both the terms presuppose equality of
status, a common platform. There cannot be a common platform as between
inferiors and superiors, or the enlightened and the unenlightened, the
regenerate and the unregenerate, the high-born and the lowborn, the
caste man and the outcaste. My comparison may be defective, may even
sound offensive. My reasoning may be unsound. But my proposition
stands.”^([189](#189))

A joint manifesto, ‘Our Duty to the Depressed and Backward Classes’, was
issued by “fourteen highly educated Indian Christians occupying
important positions.” It was published in full in the *Harijan* dated
April 3, 1937, though Gandhiji “was disinclined to publish it in the
*Harijan*, as after having read it more than once I could not bring
myself to say anything in its favour and I felt a critical review of it
might serve no purpose.” He thought it was an “unfortunate document.”
But as his criticism was “expected and will be welcomed”, he decided to
tender it. “They seem to have fallen between two stools,” wrote
Gandhiji, “in their attempt to sit on both. They have tried to reconcile
the irreconcilable. If one section of Christians has been aggressively
open and militant, the other represented by the authors of the manifesto
is courteously patronising. They would not be aggressive for the sake of
expedience. The purpose of the manifesto is not to condemn unequivocally
the method of converting the illiterate and the ignorant but to assert
the right of preaching the Gospel to the millions of
Harijans.”^([190](#190))

Para 7 of the manifesto had proclaimed, “Men and women individually and
in family or village groups will continue to seek fellowship of the
Christian Church. That is the real movement of the Spirit of God. And no
power on earth can stem that tide. It will be the duty of the Christian
Church in India to receive such. seekers after the truth as it is in
Jesus Christ and provide for them instruction and spiritual nurture. The
Church will cling to its right to receive such people into itself from
whatever religious groups they may come.”^([191](#191)) Gandhiji
commented, “Men and women do not seek fellowship of the Christian
Church. Poor Harijans are no better than the others. I wish they had
spiritual hunger. Such as it is, they satisfy by visit to the temples,
however crude they may be. When the missionary of another religion goes
to them, he goes like any other vendor of goods. He has no special
spiritual merit that will distinguish him from those to whom he goes.
He, however, possesses material goods which he promises to those who
will come to his fold. Then mark, the duty of the Christian Church in
India turns into a right. Now when duty becomes a right, it ceases to be
a duty... The duty of taking spiritual message is performed by the
messenger becoming a fit vehicle by prayer and fasting.

Conceived as a right it may easily become an imposition on unwilling
parties.” Gandhiji saw the manifesto as “designed to allay the suspicion
and soothe the ruffled feelings of Hindus.” But, in his opinion, it
“fails to accomplish its purpose” and “leaves a bad taste in the mouth.”
He concluded, “In the spiritual sphere, there is no such thing as
right.”^([192](#192))

Soon after Gandhiji made his comments on the manifesto, a missionary
came to him seeking clarification. The discussion which Gandhiji had
with him was published in the *Harijan* of April 17, 1937. “I wonder,”
said the missionary, “if those who made the statement were thinking of
anything in the nature of *legal* right. It is, I think, a moral right
they claim here rather than a legal one.” Gandhiji replied, “My
criticism would apply even if they had used the word ‘moral right’. But
it is clear that they mean a legal right because for one thing there is
no such thing as a moral right, and secondly because in the very next
para of the manifesto, in which they have referred to the Karachi
Resolution of Fundamental Rights, they make it clear that they mean by
‘right’ legal right. A moral right, if there is any such thing, does not
need any asserting and defending.”^([193](#193a))

The missionary came to his next question. “You have objected to
Christian propaganda,” he said, “on the ground that Harijans are
illiterate and ignorant. What would you say of propaganda amongst
non-Harijans?” Gandhiji replied, “I have the same objection because the
vast mass of people of India do not understand the pros and cons of
Christianity better than a cow. I use this simile in spite of the fact
that it has been objected to. When I say that I do not understand
logarithms any better than my cow, I do not mean any insult to my
intelligence. In matters of theology, the non-Harijan masses can
understand no better than the Harijans… Try to preach the principles of
Christianity to my wife. She can understand them no better then my cow.
I can, because of the training I have had.”

The missionary proceeded further. He said, “But we do not preach
theology. We simply talk of the life of Christ and tell them what a
comfort His life and teaching have been to us. He has been our guide, we
say and ask others also to accept Him as their guide.” Gandhiji
observed, “Oh yes, you do say that. But when you say I must accept Jesus
in preference to Ramakrishna Paramhamsa, you will have to, go into deep
waters. That is why I say, let your life speak to us, even as the rose
needs no speech but simply spreads its perfume.”^([194](#194a))

The missionary shifted his ground. “But then,” he said, “your objection
is to the commercial aspect of Christian propaganda. Every true
Christian will agree that no baits should be offered.” Gandhiji asked,
“But what else is Christianity as it is preached nowadays?… Why should
students attending Mission schools and colleges be compelled or even
expected to attend Bible classes?”^([195](#195)) The missionary
protested, “That was the old way, not the modern way.” Gandhiji said, “I
can cite to you any number of modern examples. Is not the Bishop of
Dornakal a modem? And what else is his open letter to the Depressed
Classes of India? It is full of baits.” The missionary moved from
education to medicine and said, “As regards hospitals, I think
philanthropy without the dynamic of some religious teaching will not
do.” Gandhiji did not agree. “Then you commercialize you gift,” he said,
“for at the back of your mind is the feeling that because of your
service some day the recipient of the gift will accept Christ. Why
should not your service be its own reward.”^([196](#196))

The missionary shifted his ground once more and said, “But then you must
judge Christianity by its best representatives and not the worst.”
Gandhiji replied, “I am not judging Christianity as a religion. I am
talking of the way Christianity is being propagated, and you cannot
judge it by exceptions, as you cannot judge the British system of
Government by some fine specimens of Englishmen. No, let us think of the
bulk of your people who preach the Gospel. Do they spread the perfume of
their lives? That is to me the sole criterion.”

The missionary now wanted to “hear from you your attitude to the
personality of Christ.” Gandhiji gave him his settled view that Christ
was “a great teacher of humanity” and not “the only begotten son of
God.”^([197](#197)) The missionary was perplexed. “But don’t you
believe,” he asked, “in the perfection of human nature, and don’t you
believe that Jesus had attained perfection?” Gandhiji replied, “I
believe in the *perfectibility* of human nature. Jesus came as near to
perfection as possible. To say that he was perfect is to deny God’s
superiority to man.”

He anticipated the next assertion which the missionary was bound to make
in order to prove that Jesus was perfect. “I do not need,” he said,
“either the prophecies or miracles to establish Jesus’s greatness as a
teacher. Nothing can be more miraculous than the three years of his
ministry. There is no miracle in the story of the multitudes fed on a
handful of loaves. A magician can create that illusion. But woe worth
the day on which a magician would be hailed as the Saviour of
humanity. As for Jesus raising the dead to life, well, I doubt if the
men he raised were really dead… The laws of Nature are changeless,
unchangeable, and there are no miracles in the sense of infringement or
interruption of Nature’s laws.”^([198](#198))

In the *Harijan* dated April 17, 1937 Gandhiji published a letter which
he had received from P. 0. Phillip of the National Christian Council,
complaining that Caste Hindus in Kerala were molesting Christians,
particularly depressed class converts. He commented that he had received
several other complaints of a similar nature. “The writers,” he said,
“claim that (1) the acts are not isolated; (2) they are perpetrated with
the knowledge of influential Caste Hindus; (3) Caste Hindus want to
suppress, if possible, the progress of Christianity; (4) communal hatred
is on the increase after the Temple Entry proclamation.”^([199](#199))
He advised the complainants to approach the Harijan Sevak Sangh for
investigation of all cases. “I myself,” he said, “will have no
hesitation in denouncing the slightest departure by Caste Hindus from
the strictest nonviolence. It is difficult for me to see why communal
hatred should be on the increase because of the Temple Entry
Proclamation. Certainly I observed none during my recent tour in
Travancore. And in so far as specific charges of molestation are
concerned I would advise Shri Phillip’s correspondent to file complaints
in the local courts. I may mention that I have received complaints of a
contrary nature from Caste Hindus alleging that Harijans living in or
near Christian *cheris* were molested by Christians. I refused to
publish the statements and referred the writers to the local courts. I
would have likewise treated the foregoing postcard but for the very
serious allegations contained in it. They could only be dealt with
publicly and by a public investigation.”^([200](#200))

A friend who had studied the work of the Salvation Army, sent to
Gandhiji “an interesting note” which was published in the Harijan of
June 12, 1937. He quoted the *Encyclopaedia Britannica* which said that
the various social activities of the Army were actuated by the sole aim
of proselytisation. General Booth, the founder of the Army, had himself
written to his son that “the social work is the bait, but it is
salvation that is the hook that lands the fish.” Every soldier of the
Army had to be a “Soul-winner.”^([201](#201)) Gandhiji commented, “Of
course what is true of the Army is more or less true of all Christian
Missions. The social work is undertaken not for its own sake but as an
aid to salvation of those who receive social service. The history of
India would have been written differently if the Christians had come to
India to live their lives in our midst and permeate ours with their
aroma if there was any… But say some of them, ‘If what you say had held
good with Jesus there would have been no Christians.’ To answer this
would land me in a controversy in which I have no desire to engage. But
I may be permitted to say that Jesus preached not a new religion but a
new way of life.”^([202](#202))

In the *Harijan* dated June 12, 1937 Gandhiji published a long extract
from a letter he had received from an American sister who had worked for
years as a missionary in India. “But as for Harijans themselves,” she
wrote, “I certainly do not agree that they are stupid, or unintelligent,
or lacking in religious sense. They are not even unsophisticated. If we
tried to use the ‘high-pressure’ methods of which you accuse us, I
assure you we would get no results among them. To me they are just nice
people very much like myself and my brothers and sisters and friends. To
be sure they are oppressed and illiterate, even unkempt, but they are
thoughtful, spiritual-minded, generous, kindly; in character they seem
to me above, rather than below, the average of mankind. I like them
better than Savarnas - but that is my bad taste, perhaps.”

Next, she proceeded to tell Gandhiji that his attitude towards Harijans
was superficial. “The only explanation,” she continued, “that comes to
my mind is that you either do not know them or you are insincere. The
latter is unworthy of attention. The former might be true - for we
sometimes know least those who live in the same house with us. May be,
you still unconsciously have a little ‘high caste’ attitude… It may be
your city outlook. Whatever it is, you are not seeing them as I see
them.”^([203](#203))

She pleaded that she knew the Harijans better because she herself was a
villager and had lived with them as one of them. “Our spiritual
communion,” she said, “was always on terms of equality. I received as
much from them as I gave may be more. At least I can testify that some
of the deepest spiritual thinking, the most exquisite spiritual
attainment, that I have ever known, I have seen in the souls of
Depressed Class Hindus - and I don’t mean exceptional, educated ones, I
mean illiterate villagers. But would I have seen it if I had been
haggling them to become Christians? I assure you I would not!… To be
sure they talk politics and economics, but it is only the spiritual
interest that holds them till midnight, brings the m back at dawn, and
in the hot noonday, with the plea, ‘If you knew how we want to hear that
God loves us, you wouldn’t want to rest.’”^([204](#204))

She also gave some advice to Gandhiji. “If you cannot meet that need,”
she concluded, “you cannot hold the Depressed Classes - if you can meet
it, you will hold them. For that is what they are asking - yes, and
Shudras, too, and even some merchants and Brahmans.”^([205](#205))

Gandhiji rejected her suggestion that he did not know Harijans. “The
writer,” he said, “has no warrant for suggesting that I do not know or
love Harijans sufficiently because I attribute to Harijans inability to
receive Christian teachings. My attitude is not ‘superficial’ as she
will have it to be. Whatever it is, it is based on deep experience and
observation dependent not on a day’s or even a year’s contact, but on
close contact for years with tens of thousands of India’s masses, not as
a superior being but feeling as one of them. But she is wholly right
when she says, ‘Whatever it is, you are not seeing them as I see them.’
They are my kith and kin, breathing the same air, living the same life,
having the same faith, the same aspirations, and the same earth
sustaining us in life as it will in death! And for her?”^([206](#206))

He agreed with her that the spiritual needs of Harijans had to be met
and that Caste Hindus had to treat them as equals. But he differed with
her as regards the way to meet their spiritual needs. “But I am not so
stupid as to think,” he said, “that I or any single person can supply
the spiritual needs of his neighbour. Spiritual needs cannot be supplied
through the intellect or through the stomach, even as the needs of the
body cannot be supplied through the spirit. One can paraphrase the
famous saying of Jesus and say, ‘Render unto the body that which is its,
and unto the spirit that which is its.’ And the only way I can supply my
neighbour’s spiritual needs is by living the life of the spirit without
even exchanging a word with him. The life of the spirit will translate
itself into acts of love for my neighbour.”^([207](#207))

At the same time he was sure that Christian missions were not meeting
whatever spiritual needs the Harijans had. “But to admit that Harijans,”
he concluded, “have the same spiritual need as the rest of us, is not to
say that they would understand the intellectual presentation of
Christianity as much as I would; for instance. I put them on the same
level as my own wife. Her spiritual needs are no less than mine, but she
would no more understand the presentation of Christianity than any
ordinary Harijan would… Presentation, with a view to conversion, of a
faith other than one’s own, can only necessarily be through an appeal to
the intellect or the stomach or both. I do maintain in spite of the
extract I have quoted that the vast mass of Harijans, and for that
matter Indian humanity, cannot understand the presentation of
Christianity, and that generally speaking their conversion wherever it
has taken place has not been a spiritual act in any sense of the
term. They are conversions for convenience. And I have had overwhelming
corroboration of the truth during my frequent and extensive
wanderings.^([208](#208))

The same issue of the *Harijan* published a report which Gandhiji had
received from Thakkar Bapa about the quality of Christian preaching in
the Nizam’s Dominions (the former Hyderabad State). The report said:

> About six months ago an event which took place at Karepally, Warangal
> District, Nizam’s Dominions, describes the methods adopted by the
> Christian missionaries to make conversions of Hindus and especially
> Harijans. Some days previous to the appointed date, the village
> teachers sent out news of the coming event into all the surrounding
> villages and made sure that the people of all castes of Hindus and
> especially Harijans were present on the occasion in large numbers. The
> pastor arrived at the place bringing with him a girl, about 12 years
> old, who he said would cure all that were presented to her of all
> sorts of diseases and also show them the real path to realization of
> God.
>
> The pastor then stood and said addressing those present, ‘You believe
> in gods who are dead and gone. Your Rama was born, behaved and acted
> like an ordinary mortal and then died. So was the case with Krishna
> also, who had many more vices to his credit. Here is before you a
> person who is the very incarnation of Christ. Christ is in her now,
> which fact you can verify yourself by being cured of your diseases at
> the mere touch of her hands. Why believe in gods who are past and no
> more effective? You should all believe in and follow the path of Jesus
> Christ who was born to Virgin Mary, preached the Gospel which leads to
> salvation, died outwardly but rose again on the third day to redeem
> the sinning millions of the world.’
>
> A subscription of one anna per head and two annas for a metal cross
> were charged. They were told that, unless they wore the cross at all
> times and believed in the truth and efficacy of Christianity, there
> would not be any good effect in the case of diseased
> patients.^([209](#209))

Gandhiji made a brief comment. “If it is true,” he said, “it stands
self-condemned. I would like the Mission concerned to investigate the
complaint and throw light on it.”^([210](#210))

Another report which Thakkar Bapa sent was about the method of
conversion employed by missionaries in the Shahabad District of Bihar.
Gandhiji published it in the Harijan of June 19, 1937. “After having
visited the village,” said the report, “and having created familiarity
with the *Harijans* they at once start a school and put it in charge of
a Harijan teacher who either himself is an influential man or related to
such a one. Whenever they come to learn that some tension or actual
litigation is going on between the Harijans and other villagers they at
once seize the opportunity to take up the side of the poor Harijans and
help them with money and advice. They are thus hailed as saviours and
conversion follows as if to repay the obligation. Whenever a village
Harijan leader accepts the new faith almost all belonging to his clan
follow him.”^([211](#211)) The report went on to point out that “In all
cases of conversion, new or old, not a single instance can be found in
which the acceptance of the new faith was due to any religious
conviction... Those of the new and old who are still continuing as
nominal Christians are willing to return to Hinduism if their grievances
are removed.” Finally, the report listed nine grievances of which “only
one, namely, refusal of entry into temples was religious.”^([212](#212))

Gandhiji wrote, “If what is said in the report about the conversions be
true, it is from my standpoint reprehensible. Such superficial
conversions can only give rise to suspicion and strife. But if a
missionary body or individual choose to follow the methods described in
the report, nothing can be done to prevent them. It is therefore much
more profitable to turn the searchlight inward and to discover our own
defects. Fortunately the report enables us to do so. Nine causes are
enumerated to show why Harijans are induced to leave the Hindu fold.
Seven are purely economic, one is social, and one is purely religious.
Thus they are reduced-economically, degraded socially and boycotted from
religious participation. The wonder is not that they leave Hinduism, the
wonder is that they have not done so for so long and that so few leave
their faith even when they do. The moral is obvious.” He called upon the
Harijan Sevak Sangh to find more workers for doing service to the
Harijans and for “propaganda among the so-called caste Hindus, not in
the shape of reviling them but showing them that religion does not
warrant the treatment that is meted out to Harijans by
them.”^([213](#213))

A correspondent posed before Gandhiji four questions which were
published in the *Harijan* of September 25, 1937. The first question was
whether “Hindus who have once renounced their faith for some reason or
other and joined Islam or Christianity” should be reconverted if they
“sincerely repent and want to come back.” The second question was about
“Lakhs of Depressed Class people in South India” who “have joined
Christianity wholesale but who “feel it worthwhile to readopt their
ancestral faith.” The third question was whether a Hindu who “was made
to join another faith for certain material conditions” and “feels
disillusioned” should be welcomed when he “comes and knocks at our
door.” The fourth question was as to what should be done with “Hindu
boys and girls” who have been brought up and converted in Christian or
Muslim orphanages and who now “approach us for *shuddhi*.”^([214](#214))

Gandhiji’s reply to all these questions was positive. “In my opinion,”
he observed, “they are not examples of real conversion. If a person
through fear, compulsion, starvation or for material gain or
consideration goes over to another faith, it is a misnomer to call it
conversion. Most cases of mass conversion, of which we have heard so
much during the past two years, have been to my mind false coin… I
would, therefore, unhesitatingly re-admit to the Hindu fold all such
repentants without much ado, certainly without any *shuddhi*... And as I
believe in the equality of all the great religions of the earth, I
regard no man as polluted because he has forsaken the branch on which he
was sitting and gone over to another of the same tree. If he comes to
the original branch, he deserves to be welcomed and not told that he had
committed sin by reason of his having forsaken the family to which he
belonged. In so far as he may be deemed to have erred, he has
sufficiently purged himself of it when he repents of the error and
retraces his step.”^([215](#215))

Mr. John R. Mott who had come to India in order to preside over a
conference of the international Missionary Council to be held at
Tambaram in Madras Presidency from December 12 to 29, met Gandhiji on or
before December 4, 1938. This was his third visit to the Mahatma. The
discussion between the two went on for two days and was published in the
*Harijan* of December 10. “This is a unique convention,” Mott said,
“where 14 councils of the younger churches of Asia, Africa and Latin
America, and 14 of the older churches of Europe, America and Australia
will be represented by over 400 delegates. We want this to be a help and
not a hindrance to India… Am I, I ask, right in thinking that the tide
has turned a little bit on the great things you impressed on me?”
Gandhiji replied, “What I have noticed is that there is a drift in the
right direction so far as thought is concerned, but I do feel that in
action there is no advance. I was going to say ‘not much advance’ but I
deliberately say ‘no advance’. You may be able give solitary instances
of men here and there, but they do not count.”^([216](#216))

Some portions of the dialogue that followed are worth being reproduced
at some length:

> J.M: Is not taking advantage of people’s disabilities being avoided
> now? I must say I was terribly pained to read of the McGavran
> incident…^([217](#217))
>
> G: Even on this question, whilst some friends, I agree, are in
> earnest, so far as action goes, there has been no change.
>
> J.M: You mean there is not action enough?
>
> G: No, there is no action at all. I have plenty of evidence to prove
> what I say. I do not publish all the correspondence I get. Mr. A. A.
> Paul, whom you may know, convened a conference some time ago. The
> proceedings were revealing. Their resolutions were half-hearted. As
> far as I am aware, there was no unanimity about any definite
> action.^([218](#218))
>
> J.M.: I was encouraged by a resolution of the National Christian
> Council which insisted on pure motives and pure practice.
>
> G: You may cite the resolution but you will not be able to show
> corresponding action.
>
> J.M: They are now talking of conversion of groups and families. I am
> not quite clear, though, as to what in certain cases the word ‘group’
> implies.
>
> G. I am quite clear. It is mass conversion called by another
> name.^([219](#219))
>
> J.M: On the third question of the wise use of money I see signs of
> encouragement.
>
> G: But it is making virtue of necessity. The Indian Christians are
> thinking aloud and doing things themselves. They are talking of their
> own responsibilities and saying, ‘Thank God, American money can’t
> come.’ J.M: How many missionaries and Christians in general help in
> constructive activities like the village industries movement, the new
> educational movement, and so on?
>
> G: I am happy to be able to say that I have some valued Christian
> colleagues. But they can be counted on one’s fingers. I fear that the
> vast bulk of them remain unconvinced… They evidently believe in
> industrialization and Western type of education. And missionaries as a
> body perhaps fight shy of movements not conducted wholly or
> predominantly by Christians.^([220](#220))

But in spite of the best efforts of Christian missions to exploit the
situation created by Gandhiji’s call for abolition of untouchability,
the tide was turning against conversions. This was admitted by the
Tambaram Conference of the International Missionary Council presided
over by Mr. J. R. Mott. “We have long held,” proclaimed the Conference,
“that the one serious rival for the spiritual supremacy of India that
Christianity has to face is resurgent Hinduism, and recent happenings
have deepened the conviction. The spirit of new Hinduism is personified
in Mahatma Gandhi, whose amazing influence over his fellows is
undoubtedly fed by the fires of religion and patriotism. Because he is a
staunch Hindu and finds within the faith of his forefathers the
spiritual succour he needs, he strongly opposes the Christian claim that
Jesus Christ is the one and only saviour. This reminds us again that
unless the great Christian affirmations are verified in Christian
living, they beat ineffectively on Indian minds.”^([221](#221))

By now the missionaries had realized that India was fast heading towards
independence. That rang alarm bells in their mind. But they could not do
anything about it except getting reconciled to new power equations. In
years to come Christian missions would be forced to change their
strategy and raise the slogan of Indigenisation. The Christian Ashram
Movement of which we hear a lot these days, was one of the products of
this new strategy. Some missionaries started planning to masquerade as
Hindu sannyasins.^([222](#222)) Meanwhile they started pestering
Gandhiji with questions about the future of Christian missions in India.
They wanted him to make some commitment.

The *Harijan* dated December 12, 1939 published extracts from a letter
written to Gandhiji by an American missionary. “Are you and the
Congress,” he asked, “generally neutral in regard to which religion a
person belongs to?” He himself answered the question, saying, “I believe
the Congress claims to be neutral, but my contention is that they are
not.” In proof of his assertion he cited two instances. “Your friend,
the late Prime Minister of Madras,”^([223](#223)) he stated, “sent a
wire of congratulations to Christians who became Hindus. Is that being
neutral? And just the other day, here near Bombay in Thana District,
when about fifty hill people returned to Hinduism, the leaders in making
them Hindus were Congress leaders of Thana District. So that plainly
shows that Congress leaders favour Hinduism.” He concluded by expressing
fear about the fate of the “small minority” of Christians under “Purna
swaraj” which he described as “Hindu raj”.^([224](#224))

Gandhiji wrote back, “I am not aware of what Shri Rajagopalachari said.
He is well able to take care of himself. But I can give my idea of
neutrality. In free India every religion should prosper on terms of
equality, unlike what is happening today. Christianity being the nominal
religion of the rulers, it receives favours which no other religion
enjoys. A government responsible to the people dare not favour one
religion or another. But I see nothing wrong in Hindus congratulating
those who having left them may return to their fold… I have already
complained of the methods adopted by some missionaries to wean ignorant
people from the religion of their forefathers. It is one thing to preach
one’s religion to whomsoever may choose to adopt it, another to entice
masses. And if those thus enticed, on being undeceived, go back to their
old love, their return will give natural joy to those whom they had
foresaken.”^([225](#225))

The missionaries, however, were loathe to give up. Another delegation
came to Gandhiji with some new questions. The discussion was published
in the *Harijan* dated January 1, 1939. One missionary who was a
professor asked Gandhiji, “Will you under swaraj allow Christians to go
on with their proselytizing activity without any hindrance?” Gandhiji
replied, “No legal hindrance can be put in the way of any Christian or
anybody preaching for the acceptance of his doctrine.” The missionary
wanted to know “whether the freedom they were having under the British
regime would be allowed to them under the national Government without
any interference.” Gandhiji said, “I can’t answer that question
categorically because I do not know what is exactly allowed and what is
not allowed under the British regime today. That is a legal question.
Besides, what is permitted may not necessarily be the same thing as what
is permissible under the law. All, therefore, that I can say today is
that you should enjoy all freedom you are entitled to under the law
today.”^([226](#226))

The missionary continued, “Some of us are under an apprehension that
they may have hereafter to labour under… disabilities. Is there any
guarantee that such a thing would not happen?” Gandhiji replied, “As I
wrote in *Harijan*, you do not seem to realize that Christians are today
enjoying the privileges because they are Christians. The moment a person
turns Christian, he becomes a *Sahib* log. He gets a job and position
which he could not have otherwise got. He adopts foreign dress and ways
of living. He cuts himself from his people and begins to fancy himself a
limb of the ruling class. What the Christians are afraid of losing,
therefore, is not their rights but anomalous privileges.”^([227](#227))

Another missionary asked, “Why may I not share with others my experience
of Jesus Christ which has given me such ineffable peace?” Gandhiji
replied, “Because you cannot possibly say that what is best for you is
best for all… And again, is it not superarrogance to assume that you
alone possess the key to spiritual joy and peace, and that an adherent
of a different faith cannot get the same in equal measure from a study
of his scriptures? I enjoy a peace and equanimity of spirit which has
excited the envy of many Christian friends. I have got it principally
through the Gita.” Coming to the obstinacy of Christians about their
mission, Gandhiji added, “Your difficulty lies in your considering the
other faiths as false or so adulterated as to amount to falsity. And you
shut your eyes to the truth that shines in other faiths and which gives
equal joy and peace to their votaries.”

Finally, the missionary asked, “What would be your message to a
Christian like me and my fellows?” Gandhiji said, “Become worthy of the
messages that is imbedded in the Sermon on the Mount and join the
spinning brigade.”^([228](#228))

A group of American teachers from the Ewing College and the Agricultural
Institute, Allahabad, called upon Gandhiji on the eve of their return to
America. The talk which Gandhiji had with them was published in the
Harijan of January 7, 1939. One of the teachers asked, “What is the
place of Christian missions in the new India that is being built up
today? What can they do to help in this great task?” Gandhiji replied,
“To show appreciation of what India is and is doing. Up till now they
have come as teachers and preachers with queer notions about India and
India’s great religions. We have been described as a nation of
superstitious heathens, knowing nothing, denying God. We are a brood of
Satan as Murdoch would say. Did not Bishop Heber in his well-known hymn
‘From Greenland’s icy mountains’ describe India as a country where
‘every prospect pleases and only man is vile’? To me this is a negation
of the spirit of Christ. My personal view, therefore, is that, if you
feel that India has a message to give to the world, that India’s
religions too are true, though like all religions imperfect for having
percolated through imperfect human agency, and you come as
fellow-helpers and fellow-seekers, there is a place for you here. But if
you come as preachers of the ‘true Gospel’ to a people who are wandering
in darkness, so far as I am concerned you can have no place. You may
impose yourselves upon us.”^([229](#229))

Gandhiji received a circular letter sent by the Secretary of the Seng
Khasi Free Morning School stating that the Seng Khasi Free School
Movement had been started in 1921 to break the missionary monopoly on
education of the Khasi children and preserve national culture. The
educational grants given by the British Government, said the circular,
were used by the missionaries for printing Christian literature,
including a Khasi translation of the Bible, and prescribing it in the
school curriculum. The Deputy Inspector of Schools in Khasi and Jaintia
Hills was a Christian. He insisted that the Seng Khasi Free Morning
School should stick to the text-books prescribed by the missionaries.
The School refused and was denied government aid. Gandhiji published the
circular letter in the *Harijan* dated March 9, 1940 and commented, “If
what is stated here is true, it enforces the argument often advanced by
me that Christian missionary effort has been favoured by the ruling
power. But I advertise the circular not for the sake of emphasizing my
argument. I do so in order to ventilate the grievance of the secretary
of the school. Surely he has every right to object to teaching
proselytizing literature prepared by the missionaries… It is to be hoped
that the school will not be deprived of the grant because of the
secretary’s very reasonable objection.”^([230](#230))

Gandhiji had another discussion with Christian missionaries on March 12,
1940. As leaders of Christian thought, they asked for his guidance. “All
I can say,” said Gandhiji, “is that there should be less of theology and
more of truth in all that you say and do.” They requested him to
explain. “How can I explain the obvious?” he said. *“Among agents of the
many untruths that are propounded in the world one of the foremost is
theology*. I do not say that there is no demand for it. There is a
demand in the world for many a questionable thing.” The missionary asked
a supplementary question, “Are you sure that no great result has come
through your own study of Jesus?” Gandhiji replied, “Why? There is no
doubt that it has come, but not, let me tell you, through theology or
through the ordinary interpretation of theologists. For many of them
contend that the Sermon on the Mount does not apply to mundane things,
and that it was only meant for the twelve disciples.”^([231](#231))

Emily Kinnaird was 86 years old when she met Gandhiji on July 20, 1940.
He addressed her as mother. A dialogue started when she observed that
Gandhiji’s advice to Britain and Denmark to offer non-violent resistance
to Nazi Germany was no good. The dialogue, published in the Harijan of
August 4, 1940, is being reproduced below because it is revealing:

> G: What was the good of Jesus Christ laying down his life?
>
> E.K: Oh, that was a different matter. He was the son of God.
>
> G: And so are we!
>
> E.K: No. He was the only son of God.
>
> G: It is there that the mother and son must differ. With you Jesus was
> the only begotten son of God. With me He was a son of God, no matter
> how much purer than us all, but every one of us is a son of God and
> capable of doing what Jesus did, if we but endeavour to express the
> divine in us.
>
> E.K: Yes, that is where I think you are wrong. If you accepted Christ
> in your heart and appealed to your people to do likewise, you could
> deliver your message with greater ease and far better effect. He is
> our salvation, and without receiving Him in our hearts we cannot be
> saved.
>
> G: So those who accept the Christ are all saved? They need do nothing
> more?
>
> E.K: We are sinners all, and we have to accept Him to be saved.
>
> G: And then we may continue to be sinners? Is that what you mean? You
> do not I hope belong to the Plymouth Brothers, do you?
>
> E.K: No, I am a Presbyterian.
>
> G: But you talk like some of the Plymouth Brothers I met long ago in
> Africa.
>
> E.K: Yes, I am afraid you were so unfortunate in the Christian
> contacts you formed in Africa. You did not meet the right kind of
> people.
>
> G: Surely you will not say that. I met a number of estimable people.
> They were all honest and sincere.
>
> E.K: But they were not true Christians.

Gandhiji told her about Christians he met in South Africa “And old A. W.
Baker,” he said, “who must be over eighty now, is still at me. He writes
to remind me time and again that unless I accept Christ in his way I
cannot be saved.”^([232](#232)) The lady “wondered why we were so obtuse
as not to see what was so obvious to her - the outstanding superiority
of Christianity to any other message.” She said that the Bible had been
translated “into several hundred languages” and “God’s message” made
available to many people in their own dialects. Gandhiji observed, “That
proves nothing.” She ignored the remark and went on to say that “whereas
fifty years ago there were so many hundred thousand Christians in India,
there are today ten times as many.” To that also Gandhiji replied,
“Again that proves nothing. But why quarrel about labels? Can we not
find a few hundred thousand Indians or Africans who live the message of
Christ without being called Christian?”^([233](#233))

Gandhiji had a discussion with Harijan workers on January 8, 1942. One
of the questions raised by them was how to deal with “temptations given
by missionaries in the shape of books, school fees, etc., with a view to
the boys’ ultimate conversion.” Gandhiji advised, “The missionaries have
of course the right to preach the gospel of Christ, and to invite the
non-Christians to embrace Christianity. But every attempt to press
material benefits or attractions in the aid of conversion should be
freely exposed, and Harijans should be educated to resist the
temptation.”^([234](#234))

A Christian wrote to Gandhiji, “You oppose all conversion without
conviction. But are you not inconsistent? You profess equal respect for
all religions. Why then worry about how the conversion is brought
about?”^([235](#235)) Gandhiji gave a reply in the *Harijan* of March
29, 1942. “I have extracted the question,” he said, “from your long and
plausible letter, cleverly written. Conversion without conviction is a
mere change and not conversion which is a revolution in one’s life. You
seem to forget that equal respect implies respect for my own faith as
much as for yours or any other neighbour’s. My respect for my own faith
forbids my being indifferent to my children abandoning their parents’
faith without conviction. And I should have little respect for you, if
you led my children astray by making all kinds of worldly promises in
which matters of the spirit had no play.”^([236](#236))

Soon afterwards, Gandhiji became preoccupied with the Quit India
Movement which led him to jail in August 1942. During this crises, the
missionaries by and large were ranged on the side of the
British. William Paton, Secretary of the International Missionary
Council denounced the “moral imbecilities of Mr. Gandhi” in a letter he
wrote on July 21, 1942 to L. S. Amery, the Secretary of State for
India.^([236a](#236a1)) But when he came out of jail in May 1944 after a
fast which had weakened him considerably, four hundred Christians
belonging to the National Christian Party gathered at Juhu (Bombay)
where he was convalescing and offered prayer for his health. Gandhiji
thanked them in a message dated May 28, 1944.^([237](#237))

On November 5, 1944 Gandhiji wrote a letter to the Metropolitan of
Calcutta in response to some criticism the latter had offered. “Utmost
frankness,” he wrote, “is a sure test of friendship. I therefore
appreciate your criticism, being that of a true friend.” He added that
“Religion should be a binding, not a disruptive force” and commanded
“the good work which some missionaries had done among the Frontier
tribes.”^([238](#238)) On December 24, 1944 he sent a Christmas message
and noted in his diary, “Today is Christmas Day. For us who believe in
the equality of all religions, the birth of Jesus Christ is as worthy of
veneration as that of Rama, Krishna, etc.”^([239](#239))

Gandhiji’s Christian disciple, J. C. Kumarappa, had written a book,
*Practice and Precepts of Jesus*. He wrote a foreword to it on March 21,
1945. “It is a revolutionary view,” he said, “of Jesus as a man of God.
It is none the less revealing and interesting… Anyway, this reading of
the Bible must bring solace to the Christians of India. If they will
read the Bible as Prof. K. does, they need not be ashamed of their
forefathers or their ancient faith.”^([240](#240)) On July 20, 1945, he
wrote to Kumarappa, “I have distributed two copies of your book on Jesus
to Indian Christians. Supply me with more books.”^([241](#241))

Mrs. Clara Hopman, a Dutch artist, had made a statue of Jesus Christ
measuring 6 ft. by 4 ft. It was priced Rs.10,000. The statue was to be
installed in the premises of the All India Village industries
Association at Maganwadi. On October 28, 1945 Gandhiji wrote to
Kumarappa, “You have good certificate about the sculpture. As soon as it
is on view in Maganwadi, I shall set about collecting.^([242](#242))

The *Harijan* dated March 3, 1946 published a discussion which Gandhiji
had with members of the Friends Ambulance Unit which had worked during
the Midnapore cyclone in 1942 and the Bengal Famine in 1943. Prompted by
Gandhiji’s remark that even “converts to orthodox Christianity today are
veering round’, a member asked, “By ‘veering’ you mean going back?” He
replied, “Yes, I mean going back to real Christianity, to Christ, not
Western Christianity. They are beginning to realize that Jesus was an
Asiatic. Having realized this, they are reading the Bible through Indian
eyes. You should study the meaning of Indian Christianity through J. C.
Kumarappa’s book, *Practice and Precepts of Jesus*.”^([243](#243))

Gandhiji’s spirit of Swadeshi in respect of religion was not confined to
India or Hinduism. He wanted to spread the message to the whole world.
Some Black soldiers from West Africa came to him some time after
January, 1946. He had a discussion with them which was published in the
*Harijan* dated February 24, 1946. The first question they asked him
was, “There are several religions in the world. They were all originated
in foreign countries. Which one of these should Africa follow? Or should
she discover her own religion? If so, how?” Gandhiji replied, “It is
wrong to say that all religions were originated in foreign countries. I
had fairly extensive contact with Zulus and Bantus and I found that the
Africans have a religion of their own though they may not have reasoned
it out for themselves, I am not referring to the rites, Ceremonies and
fetishes that are prevalent among African tribes but the religion of one
Supereme God. You pray to that God. There are many religions, but
religion is only one. You should follow that one religion. Foreigners
might bring you Christianity. Christianity as exemplified in Europe and
America today is a travesty of the teaching of Jesus. Then there are
Hinduism, Islam and Zoroastrianism and so on. You should absorb the best
that is in each without fettering your choice and from your own
religion.”^([244](#244))

Another question which the Africans asked was, “Everything immoral and
deadly is attributed to Africa. What steps should be taken to eradicate
the foreign prejudice against us?” Gandhiji observed, “Many, perhaps
most of the evils that are at the back of the prejudice against Negroes
are the result of the nominal Christianity imported from America. They
have learnt to drink, dance immoral dances and so on. Then there are
evil African customs. You must eradicate these and thus disarm foreign
prejudice. It is a laborious task but a joyous one. The epidemic of
foreign prejudice will then die a natural death.”^([245](#245))

On January 27, 1946 Gandhiji had a question and answer session with
constructive workers who had come to attend a conference in Madras. A
report of this session was published in The Hindu dated January 29. One
of the questions “related to receiving assistance from Christian
Missionaries in free India.” Gandhiji said that “they could certainly
accept help not only from Christian missionaries but from others also,
if such help was offered sincerely and in a spirit of service to the
country.” He held up the example of C. F. Andrews. “India requires the
help,” he continued, “of all men of goodwill who were prepared to offer
that help in a spirit of love and service.”^([246](#246))

In the *Harijan* dated June 30, 1946, he described Jesus as the most
active non-violent resister known perhaps to history.^([247](#247)) The
*Harijan* dated July 21, 1946, published his article, ‘Jews and
Palestine’. He held the Christians responsible for the Jews seeking a
home in Palestine. “It is a blot on the Christian world,” he wrote,
“that they have been singled out, owing to a wrong reading of the New
Testament, for prejudice against them. ‘If an individual Jew does a
wrong, the whole Jewish world is to blame for it.’ If an individual Jew
like Einstein makes a great discovery or another composes unsurpassable
music, the merit goes to the authors and not to the community to which
they belong.”^([248](#248)) He advised the Jews to follow the example of
“Jesus the Jew” rather than resort to force in Palestine.

In the *Harijan* dated October 13, 1946 Gandhiji chided the Hindus of
Jubbulpore for being rowdy and disturbing a Christian charity show in
the town. The students of the local Christian convent had staged a drama
at the end of which angels appeared before an orphaned girl and advised
her to have faith in Jesus. A section of the audience had raised a hue
and cry and demanded refund of the money they had paid for tickets. The
organiser of the show had not been allowed to speak. Someone reported
the incident to Gandhiji who wrote, “If what the correspondent says is
true, the behaviour described was wholly unworthy. It betrayed extreme
intolerance. Those who do not like things that do not coincide with
their notions need not patronize them but it is ungentlemanly to behave
like less than men when things are not to their taste.”^([249](#249))

On June 7, 1947, Gandhiji had a discussion with some Christian
missionaries. He told them, “The British and American missionaries in
India have rendered no real service to the country. Their conception of
service is to do work of compassion and serve the poor. But by
establishing hospitals, schools and other institutions, they attracted
our children and men, and our people left their own religion and
embraced Christianity. Our religion is in no way inferior to
Christianity.”^([250](#250))

Gandhiji was in Rawalpindi on July 31, 1947 when the President of The
Punjab Students Christian League asked him two questions. The interview
was published in *The Hindustan Times* of August 3. The first question
was if Christian missionaries would be asked to quit after India became
independent. “Foreign missionaries,” replied Gandhiji, “will not be
asked to quit India. Indian Christians will be free to occupy high
official positions in the Indian Dominion.” The second question was “if
non-Christians in the Indian Dominion would have freedom to embrace
Christianity.” Gandhiji said that “he would be guided in this connection
by the rules and laws framed.”^([251](#251))

An Indian Catholic priest and a missionary came to Gandhiji with a
report of “harassment of Roman Catholics at the hand of Hindus” in a
village near Gurgaon, 25 miles from Delhi. Speaking at a prayer meeting
on November 21, 1947, he said, “The persons who brought the information
told me that the Roman Catholics were threatened that they would have to
suffer if they did not leave the village. I hope this threat is
unfounded and that the Christian men and women would be allowed to
follow their religion and carry on their work without any hindrance. Now
that we have freed ourselves from political bondage, they, too, are
entitled to the same freedom to follow their religion and occupation as
they had under the British.”^([252](#252))

Gandhiji addressed a prayer meeting in New Delhi on December 24, 1947.
It was the evening before Christmas. He said, “Tomorrow is Christmas.
Christmas is to Christians what Diwali is to us… I do not regard
Christmas as an occasion for people to indulge in drunkenness. Christmas
reminds one of Jesus Christ. I offer greetings to Christians in India
and abroad. May the new year bring them prosperity and happiness. It has
never been my wish that the freedom of India should mean the ruin of
Christians here or that they should become Hindus or Muslims or Sikhs.
For a Christian to become a Hindu or a Muslim or a Sikh is a fate worse
than death. According to my view a Christian should become a better
Christian… I want that all the Christians in and outside India should
become free in the true sense. Let them exercise self-restraint and
pursue the path of sacrifice and martyrdom shown by Jesus Christ. Let
them be free and increase the area of freedom in the
world.”^([253](#253))  
 

**Summing up**

The one thing that stands out in this long-drawn-out dialogue between
Mahatma Gandhi and the Christians is that all along he identified
himself as a staunch Hindu. In fact, he took considerable pride in this
self-identification. Far from being a dirty word as it would soon become
even for some Hindu leaders and organisations, the word “Hindu” conveyed
to him all that was noble and elevating. He did not feel that he was
being “communal” when he called himself a Hindu. Nationalism as he saw
it came naturally to a Hindu of his definition. Nor did he ever try to
impart to this word a merely geographical meaning by equating it with
the word *“BhAratIya”*. On the contrary, he understood and interpreted
it as the embodiment of what was for him the deepest spiritual message
and the greatest cultural heritage. Hinduism for him was not merely “a
way of life” as some Hindu leaders have started saying these days. For
him, Hinduism was a vast spiritual vision beckoning man to rise to the
highest heights.

In the many essays he wrote on the principles and practices of Hinduism,
we find him affirming not only the fundamentals of Hindu spirituality
but also the framework of Hindu culture and social philosophy. There is
no symbol of Sanatana Dharma which does not stir him to his innermost
depths and which he does not trace back to its inner and eternal
spirit. He accords the highest honour to Hindu Shastras - the Vedas, the
Upanishads, the Puranas,^([254](#254)) the Gita,^([255](#255)) the
Mahabharata,^([256](#256)) the Ramayana,^([257](#257)) the
Bhagavata.^([258](#258)) He defends the “much-maligned Brahman” and
entertains “not a shadow of doubt” that “if Brahmanism does not revive,
Hinduism will perish.”^([259](#259)) He upholds the “spirit behind
idol-worship” and is prepared “to defend with my life the thousands of
holy temples which sanctify this land.”^([260](#260)) For him
cow-protection “is the dearest possession of the Hindu heart” and “no
one who does not believe in cow-protection can possibly be a
Hindu.”^([261](#261)) The sacred thread has a “deep meaning for him” as
it is “the sign of the second birth, that is spiritual.” He says that
*vaMAshrama* is “inherent in human nature, and Hinduism has simply made
a science of it.”^([262](#262)) He never regards Buddhism, Jainism,
Saivism, Vaishnavism, Shaktism, Sikhism, etc., as separate religions.
All of them are for him schools of Sanatana Dharma which allows as many
ways as there are seekers. His view of Hinduism was summed up in the
*Young India* of September 17, 1925. “What the divine author of the
*Mababharata*, “he wrote, “said of his great creation is equally true of
Hinduism. Whatever of substance is contained in other religions is
always to be found in Hinduism, and what is not in it is insubstantial
and unnecessary.”^([263](#263)) Earlier, he had foreseen a great future
for Hinduism. “Hinduism,” he had written in the *Young India* of April
24, 1924, “is a relentless pursuit after truth and if today it has
become moribund, inactive, irresponsive to growth, it is because we are
fatigued. As soon as the fatigue is over, Hinduism will burst forth upon
the world with a brilliance perhaps never seen before.”^([264](#264))

What has caused confusion and misunderstanding about his Hinduism is the
concept of *sarva-dharma-samabhAva* (equal regard for all religions)
which he had developed after deep reflection. Christian and Muslim
missionaries have interpreted it to mean that a Hindu can go aver to
Christianity or Islam without suffering any spiritual loss. They are
also using it as a shield against every critique of their closed and
aggressive creeds. The new rulers of India, on the other hand, cite it
in order to prop up the Nehruvian version of Secularism which is only a
euphemism for anti-Hindu animus shared in common by Christians, Muslims,
Marxists and those who are Hindus only by accident of birth. For
Gandhiji, however, *sarva-dharma-samabhAva* was only a restatement of
the age-old Hindu tradition of tolerance in matters of belief. Hinduism
has always adjudged a man’s faith in terms of his *AdhAra* (receptivity)
and *adhikAra* (aptitude). It has never prescribed a uniform system of
belief or behavior for everyone because, according to it, different
persons are in different stages of spiritual development and need
different prescriptions for further progress. Everyone, says Hinduism,
should be left alone to work out one’s own salvation through one’s own
inner seeking and evolution. Any imposition of belief or behaviour from
the outside is, therefore, a mechanical exercise which can only do
injury to one’s spiritual growth. Preaching to those who have not
invited it is nothing short of aggression born out of
self-righteousness. That is why Gandhiji took a firm and uncompromising
stand against proselytisation by preaching and gave no quarters to the
Christian mission’s mercenary methods of spreading the gospel.

In any case, his *sarva-dharma-samabhAva* did not stop Gandhiji from
processing Christianity in terms of reason and universal ethics.
Christianity like Islam, he said, was born only yesterday and was still
in the process of being interpreted. Christians should not, therefore,
present their dogmas as if they were finished products. He found that
Christianity had become an imperialist creed when it allied itself with
a Roman emperor and that so it had stayed till our own times when it was
working hand in hand with Western imperialism. He saw no sense in the
Christian doctrine of the original sin and thought poorly of vicarious
atonement. He placed Jesus very high as a moral teacher, but denied his
virgin birth as well as the divinity accorded to him by Christian
theology. Miracles of Jesus which have been the stock-in-trade of
Christianity down the centuries, failed to impress him. He dismissed
them as silly stories which did no credit to Jesus and were contrary to
the unchangeable laws of Nature. And even as a moral teacher Jesus
compared unfavourably with the Buddha when it came to universal
compassion which for Gandhiji was the essence of spirituality. He spoke
rather sharply about theology which Christianity prizes most but which
according to him was an agent of a great many untruths known to human
history. Thus very little was left of Christianity after Gandhiji had
gone through it, claim by claim and dogma by dogma. The only part which
survived unscathed was the Sermon on the Mount. Even this was seen by
him as a Jewish rather than a Christian contribution. Jesus for him was
a Jewish prophet par excellence. In any case, he saw no evidence that
the Sermon had ever influenced Christianity as known from history. As
for himself, the solace he found in the Gita was missing in the
Sermon.^([265](#265))

A Christian scholar has summarised the dialogue which Gandhiji had with
the Christian missionaries. He concludes: “The foregoing survey
substantiates that, however unacknowledged, Gandhi did leave a stamp on
missiological thought and practice in his life, for a time at least on
the Indian scene. Most of his Christian missionary contacts being on the
Protestant side, his influence too was largely confined to the
Protestant side. Their liberal outlook, smaller structures and
independent work were favourable to ideological and practical influence
from without, though a fundamentalist approach to the Bible prevented a
change in their dogmatic approach to non-Christian religions. The
Catholic Church by its very size, hierarchically centralised structure
and the sheer weight of its long tradition, was necessarily slow and
cautious in opening to external influences. It was not before the Second
Vatican Council in the early sixties that the new lines and influences
in Catholic missiological thought were to receive official recognition
in the Roman Church and find their place in the conciliar
documents.”^([266](#266)) After giving some salient features of the
Second Vatican Council, he continues, “The Council documents on the
subject represent only the first step and the first official word in the
new thinking on the subject. It will be long before we arrive at the
last word if we arrive at all. But it would seem that since the Council
itself giant strides have been made in missiology which if not avowedly
due to Gandhi’s influence do certainly represent the Gandhian and Hindu
line of thinking.”^([267](#267))

It is difficult to say whether the new formulations of the Second
Vatican Council represented a change of heart or a change of strategy in
the altered situation when Christianity was having a difficult time in
the West and being forced to seek a new home in the East. If it was a
change of strategy, one wonders whether it would have become a change of
heart in case a continued pressure from “Gandhian and Hindu line of
thinking” had been maintained after the passing away of the Mahatma.
History does provide some instances when change of strategy has become a
change of heart due to unyielding resistance from victims of aggression.
Unfortunately, however, the class of people who came to power after
independence had no use for the “Gandhian and Hindu line to thinking.”
They continued to swear by the Mahatma and even installed him as the
Father of the Nation. But that was no more than an empty ritual. For all
practical purposes no other country has bid goodbye to Gandhiji to the
same extent as the country where he was born and from which he drew all
his inspiration. In the world outside he is honoured as a great Hindu
and an outstanding exponent of Hinduism at its best, both in word and
deed. His philosophy of life, based on Hinduism, is inviting serious
attention from the intellectual elite in America, Europe and Japan. In
his own country, however, he has been disfigured into the patron saint
of a Secularism which decries Hinduism as “communalism” and goes out of
its way to give protection to closed theologies of aggression,
ideological as well as physical. Small wonder that the change of mission
strategy has failed to become a change of heart.  
 

**Postscript**

But, at the same time, it has to be admitted that Mahatma Gandhi’s
prolonged dialogue with Christian theologians, missionaries, moneybags,
and the rest, left the Hindus at home more defenseless vis-a-vis the
Christian onslaught than they had been ever before. Whatever laurels the
Mahatma may have won abroad, he has proved to be a disaster for the
Hindus in India. The sorry turnout can be traced to three basic
infirmities from which his position vis-a-vis Christianity and its
missions had suffered. Firstly, he coined and made fashionable the
utterly thoughtless slogan of *sarva-dharma-samabhAva* vis-a-vis
Christianity (and Islam). Secondly, he upheld an unedifying character
like Jesus as a great teacher of mankind, and glorified no end the
sentimental nonsense that is the Sermon on the Mount. Thirdly, he failed
to see the true character of Christian missionaries, and nourished the
illusion that he could tame them by his reasonableness and good manners.
We are taking up the points one by one as they do call for some
elaboration.

*Sarva-dharma-samabhAva* was unknown to mainstream Hinduism before
Mahatma Gandhi presented it as one of the sixteen *mahAvratas* (great
vows). in his booklet, *MaNgala-PrabhAta*. It is true that mainstream
Hinduism had always stood for tolerance towards all metaphysical points
of view and ways of worship except that which led to *AtatAyI-AchAra*
(gangsterism). But that tolerance had never become *samabhAva*, equal
respect for all points of view. The acharyas of the different schools of
Sanatana Dharma were all along engaged in debates over differences in
various approaches to *Sreyas* (the Great Good). No Buddhist acharya is
known to have equated the way of the Buddha to that of the Gita and vice
versa, for instance. It is also true that overawed by the armed might of
Islam, and deceived by the tall talk of the sufis, some Hindu saints in
medieval India had equated Rama with Rahim, Krishna with Karim, Kashi
with Kaba, the Brahmana with the Mullah, *pUjA* with *namAz*, and so on.
But, the sects founded by these saints had continued to function on the
fringes of Hindu society while the mainstream followed the saints and
acharyas who never recognized Islam as a *dharma*. In modern times also,
movements like the Brahmo Samaj which recognised Islam and Christianity
as dharmas had failed to influence mainstream Hinduism, while Maharshi
Dayananda and Swami Vivekananda who upheld the Veda and despised the
Bible and the Quran, had had a great impact. This being the hoary Hindu
tradition, Mahatma Gandhi’s recognition of Christianity and Islam not
only as *dharmas* but also as equal to Sanatana Dharma was fraught with
great mischief. For, unlike the earlier Hindu advocates of Islam and
Christianity as *dharmas*, Mahatma Gandhi made himself known and became
known as belonging to mainstream Hinduism.

It remains a mystery as to how Mahatma Gandhi came to regard
Christianity and Islam as ways of spiritual seeking rather than as
terrorist and totalitarian ideologies of predatory imperialism. Here we
have doctrines with a deity who is exclusive and jealous of all other
deities, who makes himself known to mankind not directly but through a
proxy, who has chosen people with whom he enters into covenants for
imposing him on the rest of mankind by means of force, who commands his
chosen people to wage a permanent war on all other peoples, and who is
most happy when his worshippers commit massacres, destroy whole
civilizations root and branch, and plunder and enslave helpless men,
women and children. Here we have histories stretching over hundreds of
years and hailing as heroes and saints some of the most bloodthirsty
gangsters and altogether despicable characters. Mahatma Gandhi’s
recognition of these ideologies as dharmas as good as Sanatana Dharma
leads only to two conclusions. Either his own perception of Sanatana
Dharma was not as deep as it sounds. Or the politician in him prevailed
over his spiritual perception and he said what he did from the platform
of *Sarva-dharma-samabhAva* in the hope of winning over Christians and
Muslims to the nationalist camp. In any case, the utter failure of his
attempt to achieve this goal proves that the attempt was foolhardy. He
failed to win any significant section of Christians or Muslims either to
the nationalist cause or to the camp of *Sarva-dharma-samabhAva*. But in
the process of popularising this slogan, he diluted the definition of
*dharma* beyond recognition, and placed Hindu society permanently on the
defensive. No other slogan has proved more mischievous for Hinduism than
the mindless slogan of *Sarva-dharma-samabhAva* vis-a-vis Christianity
and Islam.

The Mahatma’s heaping of admiration on Jesus and the Sermon on the Mount
has proved no less mischievous. Before the Mahatma appeared on the
scene, neither Jesus nor the Sermon on the Mount was known to Hindu
society at large. It was only the small circle of Brahmo Samaj which had
swooned on the name and the nonsense. But Mahatma Gandhi extolled them
both, day in and day out, till they became household words, at least
among the Hindu intelligentsia. It was a great solace to the Christian
theologian and missionary that in the aftermath of Mahatma Gandhi he
could silence all Hindu criticism of Christianity by merely mentioning
these two magic names – Jesus and the Sermon. One wonders whether the
Mahatma knew what modern research had done to the myth of Jesus. In any
case, he was not at all called upon to lend his helping hand in the
building up of a mischievous myth in this country. As regards the Sermon
on the Mount, it has only to be referred to a Vyasa or a Valmiki or a
Confucius or a Socrates, and it will be laughed out of court as bogus
ethics devoid of discriminative wisdom. Mahatma Gandhi was not called
upon to sell this mindless clap-trap as the sum and substance of the
highest moral code. In any case, the Christian missionaries themselves
had never known the beauties of the Sermon on the Mount till Mahatma
Gandhi discovered it for them. Now onwards they could strut around with
superior airs.

Finally, Mahatma Gandhi’s meeting the Christian missionaries again and
again and wasting so much breath in talking to them on the same point,
namely, the uniqueness of Jesus and their right to convert in his name,
made them respectable in the eyes of Hindus at large. Till the Mahatma
started advertising the Christian missionaries in his widely read
weeklies, Hindus had looked down upon them as an unavoidable nuisance
deserving only contempt and ridicule. The Mahatma invested them with
unprecedented prestige and made them loom large on the Indian scene. One
wonders why he failed to consult a text-book of missiology and find out
for himself that Christian missionaries are trained and employed as
incorrigible casuits, crooks, liers, and practitioners of despicable
frauds. He was certainly living in a fool’s paradise if he hoped that
Christian missionaries could become straight and honest and serve in a
humanitarians way. By inviting them to be of unmotivated service to
their victims, he bestowed on them an aura which they had never had
before. The result has been an unprecedented strengthening and
multiplication of the Christian missionary apparatus for subverting
Hindu society and culture. He had done the same when he salvaged the
Muslim mullahs from their ghettos and made them look like giants during
the infamous Khilafat agitation.  
   
   

**APPENDIX**

**Bishop Heber’s Hymn**

> > From Greenland’s icy mountians,  
> >      From India’s coral strand,  
> > Where Africa’s sunny fountains  
> >      Roll down their golden sand;  
> > From many an ancient river,  
> >      From many a palmy plain,  
> > They call us to deliver  
> >      Their land from error’s chain.  
> > What though the spicy breezes  
> >      Blow soft o’er Ceylon’s isle,  
> > Though every prospect pleases  
> >      And only man is vile.  
> > In vain with lavish kindness  
> >      The gifts of God are strewn,  
> > The heathen in his blindness  
> >      Bows down to wood and stone.  
> > Can we whose souls are lighted  
> >      With wisdom from on high,  
> > Can we to men benighted  
> >      The lamp of life deny?  
> > Salvation, oh, Salvation!  
> >      The joyful sound proclaim,  
> > Till each remotest nation  
> >      Has learn’d Messiah’s name.  
> > Waft, waft, ye winds, His story,  
> >      And you, ye waters! roll,  
> > Till like a sea of glory  
> >      It spreads from pole to pole;  
> > Till over our ransom’d nature  
> >      The Lamb for sinners slain  
> > Redeemer, King, Creator  
> >      In bliss returns to reign.

  
**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) *The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi*, Volume 39, New Delhi,
1970, p. 32.

[²](#2a) *Ibid.,* p. 33.

[³](#3a) *Ibid.,* p. 61.

[⁴](#4a) *Ibid.*

[⁵](#5a) *Ibid.* p. 100.

[⁶](#6a) *Ibid.,* p. l0l.

[⁷](#7a) *Ibid.,* p. 102.

[⁸](#8a) *Ibid.,* p. 103.

[⁹](#9a) *Ibid.*

[¹⁰](#10a) *Ibid.,* p. 104. This was, however, the most logical and
legitimate interpretation of the Christian doctrine.

[¹¹](#11a) *Ibid.,* p. 111.

[¹²](#12a) *Ibid.,* p. 112.

[¹³](#13a) *Ibid.,* pp. 112-13.

[¹⁴](#14a) *Ibid.,* 113.

[¹⁵](#15a) *Ibid.,* p. 114.

[¹⁶](#16a) *Ibid.,* p. 13o.

[¹⁷](#17a) *Ibid.,* p. 131.

[¹⁸](#18a) *Ibid.,* pp. 131-32.

[¹⁹](#19a) *Ibid.,* p. 132.

[²⁰](#20a) *Ibid.*

[²¹](#21a) *Ibid.,* Volume 13, New Delhi, 1979 reprint, p. 219.

[²²](#22a) *Ibid.,* p. 220. The passage (Mark 16.15) is now recognised
as an interpolation by Biblical scholarship. It is not found in “some
manuscripts and ancient translations” of the gospel.

[²³](#23a) *Ibid.,* Volume 15, New Delhi, 1979 reprint, p. 304.

[²⁴](#24a) *Ibid.,* p. 305.

[²⁵](#25a) *Ibid.,* Volume 23, New Delhi, 1967, p. 104.

[²⁶](#26a) *Ibid.,* p. 391. Non-Hindus continue to meddle in Hindu
affairs with the tacit support of secular editors and the Government,
whether it concerns Sat! or temple-entry.

[²⁷](#27a) *Ibid.,* p. 545.

[²⁸](#28a) *Ibid.,* Volume 24, New Delhi, 1967, p. 476.

[²⁹](#29a) *Ibid.,* Volume 23, New Delhi, 1967, pp. 85-86.

[³⁰](#30a) *Ibid.,* p. 86.

[³¹](#31a) Mahadev Desai, *Day-to-Day with Gandhi*, Volume 4, Varanasi,
1969, p. 86.

[³²](#32a) *Ibid.,* Volume 5, Varanasi, 1970, p. 39.

[³³](#33a) *The Collected Works*, Volume 26, New Delhi, 1967, pp. 8-9.

[³⁴](#34a) Mahadev Desai, *op. cit.,* Volume 7, Varanasi, 1972, p. 50.

[³⁵](#35a) *Ibid.,* p. 52.

[³⁶](#36a) *Ibid.,* pp. 53-54.

[³⁷](#37a) *Ibid.,* p. 55. The full text of Bishop Heber’s hymn is given
in the Appendix at the end of this chapter. It is only one of the many
specimens of contempt which Christians have shown for Hindus. The hymn
was included in the official hymns of the Anglican Church in England and
elsewhere.

[³⁸](#38a) *The Collected Works*, Volume 27, New Delhi, 1968, p. 434.

[³⁹](#39a) *Ibid.,* p. 435.

[⁴⁰](#40a) *Ibid.,* p. 436.

[⁴¹](#41a) *Ibid.*

[⁴²](#42a) *Ibid.,* p. 437.

[⁴³](#43a) *Ibid.,* P. 438.

[⁴⁴](#43a) *Ibid.,* p. 439.

[⁴⁵](#44a) *Ibid.*

[⁴⁶](#45a) Mahadev Desai, *op. cit.,* Volume 7, p. 155.

[⁴⁷](#46a) *Ibid.,* pp. 161-62.

[⁴⁸](#47a) *Ibid.,* p. 163.

[⁴⁹](#48a) *Ibid.,* p. 164.

[⁵⁰](#50a) *Ibid.,* p. 184.

[⁵¹](#51a) *Ibid.*

[⁵²](#52a) *Ibid.,* pp. 185-86.

[⁵³](#53a) *The Collected Works*, Volume 29, New Delhi, 1968, p. 326.

[⁵⁴](#54a) *Ibid.,* Volume 30, New Delhi, 1968, p. 47.

[⁵⁵](#55a) *Ibid.,* Only excerpts from Rev. Scott’s letter are given in
this Volume. In fairness to the missionary, we have reproduced the
letter at some length from M.K. Gandhi, *Christian Missions*, Ahmedabad,
1941, pp. 12-13.

[⁵⁶](#56a) *Ibid.,* pp. 70-71.

[⁵⁷](#57a) *Ibid.,* Volume 31, New Delhi, 1968, pp. 350-51.

[⁵⁸](#58a) *Ibid.,* p. 351.

[⁵⁹](#59a) *Ibid.,* Volume 34, New Delhi, 1969, p. 10.

[⁶⁰](#60a) *Ibid.,* p. 261.

[⁶¹](#61a) *Ibid.,* pp. Z61-62.

[⁶²](#62a) *Ibid.,* p. 262.

[⁶³](#63a) *Ibid.,* pp. 262-63.

[⁶⁴](#64a) *Ibid.,* Volume 35,New Delhi, 1969, p. 166.

[⁶⁵](#65a) *Ibid.,* pp. 166-67.

[⁶⁶](#66a) *Ibid.,* p. 249.

[⁶⁷](#67a) *Ibid.,* p. 250.

[⁶⁸](#68a) *Ibid.,* pp. 462-63.

[⁶⁹](#69a) *Ibid.,* p. 464.

[⁷⁰](#70a) *Ibid.,* Volume 40. New Delhi. 1970, pp. 58-59.

[⁷¹](#71a) *Ibid.,* p.59.

[⁷²](#72a) *Ibid.,* P. 6o.

[⁷³](#73a) *Ibid.*

[⁷⁴](#74a) *Ibid.*

[⁷⁵](#75a) Mr. Mott lived to publish a book, *The Larger Evangelism*, in
1944 and share the Noble Prize for Peace with Emily Queen Balch in 1946.

[⁷⁶](#76a) *Ibid.,* p. 315.

[⁷⁷](#77a) *Ibid.,* volume 45, New Delhi, 1971, pp. 233-34.

[⁷⁸](#78a) *Ibid.,* p. 320.

[⁷⁹](#79a) *Ibid.,* Volume 46, New Delhi, 1971, p. 27.

[⁸⁰](#80a) *Ibid.,* p. 28.

[⁸¹](#81a) *Ibid.,* pp. 28-29.

[⁸²](#82a) *Ibid.,* p. 109.

[⁸³](#83a) *Ibid.,* p. 110.

[⁸⁴](#84a) *Ibid.,* p. 237.

[⁸⁵](#85a) *Ibid.,* p .238.

[⁸⁶](#86a) *Ibid.,* p. 239.

[⁸⁷](#87a) *Ibid.,* p. 314.

[⁸⁸](#88a) *Ibid.,* Volume 48, New Delhi, 1971, p. 121.

[⁸⁹](#89a) *Ibid.,* p. 122.

[⁹⁰](#90a) *Ibid.,* p. 124.

[⁹¹](#91a) *Ibid.,* pp. 124-25.

[⁹²](#92a) *Ibid.,* p. 125

[⁹³](#93a) *Ibid.,* pp. 126-127.

[⁹⁴](#94a) *Ibid.,* p. 127.

[⁹⁵](#95a) *Ibid.,* pp. 437-433.

[⁹⁶](#96a) *Ibid.,* Volume 52, New Delhi 1972, p. 96.

[⁹⁷](#97a) *Ibid.,* p. 164.

[⁹⁸](#98a) *Ibid.,* pp. 344-45.

[⁹⁹](#99a) *Ibid.,* p. 365.

[¹⁰⁰](#100a) *Ibid.,* Volume 54, New Delhi, 1973, pp. 106-107.

[¹⁰¹](#101a) *Ibid.,* Volume 55, New Delhi, 1973, p. 284.

[¹⁰²](#102a) *Ibid.,* pp. 286-87. Earlier, Gandhiji had described Miss
Mayo as a drain inspector.

[¹⁰³](#103a) *Ibid.,* Volume 56, New Delhi, 1973, p. 234.

[¹⁰⁴](#104a) *Ibid.,* pp. 234-35.

[¹⁰⁵](#105a) *Ibid.,* p. 235.

[¹⁰⁶](#106a) *Ibid.,* p. 236.

[¹⁰⁷](#107a) *Ibid.,* pp. 310-11.

[¹⁰⁸](#108a) *Christian Missions*, p. 301.

[¹⁰⁹](#109a) *Ibid.,* p. 195.

[¹¹⁰](#110a) *Ibid.,* pp. 195-96.

[¹¹¹](#111a) *Ibid.,* pp. 196-97.

[¹¹²](#112a) *The Collected Works*, Volume 60, New Delhi, 1974, p. 323.
John 3, 16 says, “For God loved the world so much that he sent his only
Son so that everyone who believes in him may not die but have eternal
life.”

[¹¹³](#113a) *Ibid.,* p. 325.

[¹¹⁴](#114a) *Ibid.,* p. 326.

[¹¹⁵](#115a) *Ibid.,* Volume 61, Ahmedabad, 1975, p, 46.

[¹¹⁶](#116a) *Ibid.,* pp. 46-47.

[¹¹⁷](#117a) *Ibid.,* p. 47.

[¹¹⁸](#118a) *Ibid.,* p. 68.

[¹¹⁹](#119a) *Ibid.,* P. 456.

[¹²⁰](#120a) *Ibid.,* p. 455.

[¹²¹](#121a) *Ibid.,* p. 456,

[¹²²](#122a) *Ibid.,* p. 455.

[¹²³](#123a) *Ibid.,* P. 456.

[¹²⁴](#124a) *Ibid.,* p. 455.

[¹²⁵](#125a) *Ibid.,* p. 456.

[¹²⁶](#126a) *Ibid.,* p. 455.

[¹²⁷](#127a) *Ibid.,* pp. 455-57.

[¹²⁸](#128a) *Ibid.,* p. 455.

[¹²⁹](#129a) *Ibid.,* p. 457.

[¹³⁰](#130a) *Ibid.,* pp. 457-58.

[¹³¹](#131a) *Ibid.,* Volume 62, New Delhi, 1975, pp. 332-33. Jesus’
bombast about himself – ‘I am He’, etc. - can be seen in John 14.6. Saul
of Tarsus was a persecutor of Christians before his conversion to
Christianity. He became Paul after his conversion, and a great
persecutor of mankind at large. He is one of the darkest figures in
human history. Some scholars have seen him as the real inventor of
Christianity and the father of the criminal history of this creed.

[¹³²](#132a) *Ibid.,* p. 333.

[¹³³](#133a) *Ibid.,* pp. 333-34.

[¹³⁴](#134a) *Ibid.,* p. 334.

[¹³⁵](#135a) *Ibid.,* p. 388. St. Therese or Terese is honoured as one
of the great Christian mystics by the Catholic Church

[¹³⁶](#136a) *Ibid.,* p. 388.

[¹³⁷](#137a) *Ibid.,* Volume 63, New Delhi, 1976, p. 47.

[¹³⁸](#138a) *Ibid.,* pp. 90-92.

[¹³⁹](#139a) *Ibid.,* p. 92.

[¹⁴⁰](#140a) Italics in source.

[¹⁴¹](#141a) *Ibid.,* pp. 92-94.

[¹⁴²](#142a) Gandhiji was in Bangalore from May 31 to June 13, 1936.

[¹⁴³](#143a) A depressed section of Hindu society in Kerala.

[¹⁴⁴](#144a) *Ibid.,* Volume 64, New Delhi, 1976, pp. 18-20.

[¹⁴⁵](#145a) *Christian Missions*, pp. 211-12.

[¹⁴⁶](#146a) *Ibid.,* p.212.

[¹⁴⁷](#147a) *Ibid.,* pp. 213-14.

[¹⁴⁸](#148a) The reference is to the Yeola Conference called by Dr. B.R.
Ambedkar in September 1935. The Conference had adopted a resolution
which said, “The depressed classes must leave the Hindu fold and join
some other religion that gives social and religious equality to them.”

[¹⁴⁹](#149a) *The Collected Works*, Volume 64, p. 35.

[¹⁵⁰](#150a) *Ibid.,* p. 36.

[¹⁵¹](#151a) *Ibid.,* p. 37.

[¹⁵²](#152a) *Ibid.,* p. 38.

[¹⁵³](#153a) *Ibid.,* pp. 39-40.

[¹⁵⁴](#154a) *Ibid.,* p. 40.

[¹⁵⁵](#155a) *Ibid.,* pp. 149-50.

[¹⁵⁶](#156a) *Ibid.,* pp. 150-51.

[¹⁵⁷](#157a) *Ibid.,* p. 151.

[¹⁵⁸](#158a) *Ibid.,* p. 176.

[¹⁵⁹](#159a) *Ibid.,* pp. 176-77.

[¹⁶⁰](#160a) *Ibid.,* p. 177.

[¹⁶¹](#161a) This proclamation had opened Hindu temples to Harijans.

[¹⁶²](#162a) *Ibid.,* p. 178.

[¹⁶³](#163a) *Ibid.,* pp. 202-03.

[¹⁶⁴](#164a) *Ibid.,* p. 203. Emphasis added.

[¹⁶⁵](#165a) *Ibid.,* pp. 203.

[¹⁶⁶](#166a) *Ibid.,* pp. 285-86.

[¹⁶⁷](#167a) *Ibid.,* p. 289. The mantra is the very first one of the
Ishopanishad: *ISAvAsyamidam sarvam yatkiñcit jagatyAma jagat /tena
tyaktena bhuñjithA mA gridhaH kasyacit dhanam*. Gandhiji translated it
as follows: “God pervades everything that is to be found in this
universe. Therefore the condition of enjoyment or use of the necessities
of life is their dedication or renunciation. Covet not anybody’s
riches.”

[¹⁶⁸](#168a) *Ibid.,* p. 290.

[¹⁶⁹](#169a) *Ibid.,* p. 291.

[¹⁷⁰](#170a) *Ibid.,* p. 419.

[¹⁷¹](#171a) *Ibid.,* pp. 419-20.

[¹⁷²](#172a) *Ibid.,* p. 421.

[¹⁷³](#173a) *Ibid.,* pp. 421-22.

[¹⁷⁴](#174a) *Ibid.,* pp. 422-23.

[¹⁷⁵](#175a) *Ibid.,* P. 423.

[¹⁷⁶](#176a) At that time, Communists were waging a civil war in Spain
and Persecuting Christians wherever Communist power prevailed.

[¹⁷⁷](#177a) *Ibid.,* pp. 423-24.

[¹⁷⁸](#178a) *Ibid.,* pp. 397-98.

[¹⁷⁹](#179a) *Ibid.,* p. 398.

[¹⁸⁰](#180a) *Ibid.,* pp. 398-99.

[¹⁸¹](#181a) *Ibid.,* p. 400.

[¹⁸²](#182a) *Ibid.,* p. 401.

[¹⁸³](#183a) *Ibid.,* pp. 425-26.

[¹⁸⁴](#184a) *Ibid.,* pp. 401-02.

[¹⁸⁵](#185a) *Ibid.,* pp. 426-27.

[¹⁸⁶](#186a) *Ibid.,* p. 427.

[¹⁸⁷](#187a) *Ibid.,* p. 218.

[¹⁸⁸](#188a) Church Missionary Society based in London.

[¹⁸⁹](#189a) *Ibid.,* pp. 440-41.

[¹⁹⁰](#190a) *Ibid.,* Volume 65, New Delhi 1976, p. 47.

[¹⁹¹](#191a) *Ibid.,* pp. 47-48.

[¹⁹²](#192a) *Ibid.,* p. 48.

[¹⁹³](#193a) *Ibid.,* p. 79.

[¹⁹⁴](#194a) *Ibid.,* p. 80.

[¹⁹⁵](#195a) *Ibid.,* pp. 80-81.

[¹⁹⁶](#196a) *Ibid.,* p. 81.

[¹⁹⁷](#197a) *Ibid.,* pp. 81-82.

[¹⁹⁸](#198a) *Ibid.,* p. 82.

[¹⁹⁹](#199a) *Ibid.,* pp. 91-92.

[²⁰⁰](#200a) *Ibid.,* p. 92.

[²⁰¹](#201a) *Ibid.,* pp. 295-96.

[²⁰²](#202a) *Ibid.,* pp. 295-96.

[²⁰³](#203a) *Christian Missions*, p. so.

[²⁰⁴](#204a) *Ibid.,* p. 103.

[²⁰⁵](#205a) *Ibid.,* pp. 103-04.

[²⁰⁶](#206a) *Ibid.,* p. 105.

[²⁰⁷](#207a) *Ibid.,* p. 104.

[²⁰⁸](#208a) *Ibid.,* pp. 104-05.

[²⁰⁹](#209a) *Ibid.,* pp. 106-07.

[²¹⁰](#210a) *Ibid.,* p. 107.

[²¹¹](#211a) *The Collected Works*, Volume 65, pp. 316-17.

[²¹²](#212a) *Ibid.,* p. 317.

[²¹³](#213a) *Ibid.,* pp. 317-18.

[²¹⁴](#214a) *Ibid.,* Volume 66, New Delhi, 1976, p. 63.

[²¹⁵](#215a) *Ibid.,* pp. 163-64.

[²¹⁶](#216a) *Ibid.,* Volume 68, New Delhi, 1977, pp. 165-66.

[²¹⁷](#217a) McGavaran had contributed to the missionary magazine,
*World Dominion*, a fabricated report of a talk between Gandhiji on the
one hand and Bishops Pickett and Azariah on the other.

[²¹⁸](#218a) *Ibid.,* P. i66.

[²¹⁹](#219a) *Ibid.,* p. 167.

[²²⁰](#220a) *Ibid.,* p. 170.

[²²¹](#221a) *Tambaram Series*, Volume 3, Evangelism, London, 1939, p.
126.

[²²²](#222a) See Sita Ram Goel, *Catholic Ashrams.: Sannyasins or
Swindlers?,* second England Edition, Voice of India, New Delhi, 1994.

[²²³](#223a) The reference is to C. Rajagopalachari who was Prime
Minister of Madras from 1937 to 1939 when the Congress Ministry
resigned.

[²²⁴](#224a) *Ibid.,* Volume 71, New Delhi, 1978, p. 52.

[²²⁵](#225a) *Ibid.,* p. 53.

[²²⁶](#226a) *Ibid.,* p. 53.

[²²⁷](#227a) *Ibid.,* pp. 79-80.

[²²⁸](#228a) *Ibid.,* p. 80.

[²²⁹](#229a) *Christian Missions*, pp. 288-89.

[²³⁰](#230a) *The Collected Works*, volume 71, p. 219.

[²³¹](#231a) *Ibid.,* p. 328. Emphasis added.

[²³²](#232a) *Ibid.,* Volume 72, pp. 297-98.

[²³³](#233a) *Ibid.,* P. 299.

[²³⁴](#234a) *Ibid.,* Volume 75, New Delhi, 1979, p. 207.

[²³⁵](#235a) *Ibid.,* p. 422.

[²³⁶](#236a) *Ibid.,* p. 423.

[^(236a)](#236a2) The Transfer of power, London, Volume II, p. 552.

[²³⁷](#237a) *The Collected Works*, Volume 77, New Delhi, 1977, p. 296.

[²³⁸](#238a) *Ibid.,* Volume 78, New Delhi, 1979, pp. 269-70.

[²³⁹](#239a) *Ibid.,* pp. 384 and 394.

[²⁴⁰](#240a) *Ibid.,* Volume 79, New Delhi, 1980, p. 279.

[²⁴¹](#241a) *Ibid.,* Volume 80, New Delhi, 1980, p.9.

[²⁴²](#242a) *Ibid.,* Volume 81, New Delhi, 1980, p. 432.

[²⁴³](#243a) *Ibid.,* Volume 82, New Delhi, 1980, p. 155. In 1952, only
four years after the Mahatma’s death, Kumarappa became a drum-beater for
Mao Tsetung and his criminal gang. At the same time he saw Gandhi
incarnate in Communist China. He turned out to be a crank of rare
vintage.

[²⁴⁴](#244a) *Ibid.,* Volume 83, New Delhi, 1981, p.11.

[²⁴⁵](#245a) *Ibid.,* p. 12.

[²⁴⁶](#246a) *Ibid.,* p. 39.

[²⁴⁷](#247a) *Ibid.,* Volume 84, New Delhi, 1981, p. 372.

[²⁴⁸](#248a) *Ibid.,* pp. 440-41,

[²⁴⁹](#249a) *Ibid.,* Volume 85, New Delhi, 1982, p. 420.

[²⁵⁰](#250a) *Ibid.,* Volume 88, New Delhi, 1983, p. 96.

[²⁵¹](#251a) *Ibid.,* p. 471.

[²⁵²](#252a) *Ibid.,* Volume 90, New Delhi, 1984, p. 80

[²⁵³](#253a) *Ibid.,* P. 293.

[²⁵⁴](#254a) Mahatma Gandhi, *Hindu Dharma*, Ahmedabad, 1950, p. 7.

[²⁵⁵](#255a) *Ibid.,* p. 36.

[²⁵⁶](#256a) *Ibid.,* pp. 20-21.

[²⁵⁷](#257a) *Ibid.,* p. 178.

[²⁵⁸](#258a) *Ibid.,* p. 22.

[²⁵⁹](#259a) *Ibid.,* pp. 391-92.

[²⁶⁰](#260a) *Ibid.,* p. 73.

[²⁶¹](#261a) *Ibid.,* p. 297.

[²⁶²](#262a) *Ibid.,* p. 374.

[²⁶³](#263a) *Ibid.,* p. 4.

[²⁶⁴](#264a) *Ibid.*

[²⁶⁵](#265a) Modern research has discovered that the Sermon on the Mount
can be found in Jewish sources quite some time before Jesus was born. It
was by no means a characteristic contribution of Jesus. He had learnt it
as a Jewish rabbi and preached it, if at all, in the same capacity. It
is significant that the Sermon is missing from St. John’s Gospel which
imparts a divine status to Jesus and which Christian theology places
above all other gospels.

[²⁶⁶](#266a) Father I. Jesudasan, S.J., ‘Gandhian Perspectives on
Missiology’, *Indian Church History Review*, July 1970, pp. 67-68.

[²⁶⁷](#267a) *Ibid.,* p. 69.  
 

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
