+++
title = "88 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


  
**== APPENDIX XVIII ==**

**Communal Award by His Majesty's Government√∑1932**

  

In the statement made by the Prime Minister on 1st December last on
behalf of His Majesty's Government at the close of the second session of
the Round Table Conference, which was immediately afterwards endorsed by
both Houses of Parliament, it was made plain that if the communities in
India were unable to reach a settlement acceptable to all parties on the
communal questions which the Conference had failed to solve, His
Majesty's Government were determined that India's constitutional advance
should not on that account be frustrated, and that they would remove
this obstacle by devising and applying themselves a provisional
scheme.**[/1/](#n01)**

**(2.)** On the 19th March last His Majesty's Government, having been
informed that the continued failure of the communities to reach
agreement was blocking the progress of the plans for the framing of a
new Constitution, stated that they were engaged upon a careful
re-examination of the difficult and controversial questions which arise.
They are now satisfied that without a decision of at least some aspects
of the problems connected with the position of minorities under the new
Constitution, no further progress can be made with the framing of the
Constitution.

**(3.)** His Majesty's Government have accordingly decided that they
will include provisions to give effect to the scheme set out below in
the proposals relating to the Indian Constitution to be laid in due
course before Parliament. The scope of this scheme is purposely confined
to the arrangements to be made for the representation of the British
Indian communities in the Provincial Legislatures, consideration of
representation in the Legislature at the Centre being deferred for the
reason given in paragraph 20 below. The decision to limit the scope of
the scheme implies no failure to realise that the framing of the
Constitution will necessitate the decision of a number of the problems
of great importance to minorities, but has been taken in the hope that
once a pronouncement has been made upon the basic questions of method
and proportions of representation the communities themselves may find it
possible to arrive at a modus vivendi on other communal problems, which
have not as yet received the examination they require.

**(4.)** His Majesty's Government wish it to be most clearly understood
that they themselves can be no parties to any negotiations which may be
initiated with a view to the revision of their decision, and will not be
prepared to give consideration to any representation aimed at securing
the modification of it which is not supported by all the parties
affected. But they are most desirous to close no door to an agreed
settlement should such happily be forthcoming. If, therefore before a
new Government of India Act has passed into law, they are satisfied that
the communities who are concerned are mutually agreed upon a practicable
alternative scheme, either in respect of any one or more of the
Governors' Provinces or in respect of the whole of the British India,
they will be prepared to recommend to Parliament that that alternative
should be submitted for the provisions now outlined.

**(5.)** Seats in the Legislative Councils in the Governors' Provinces,
or in the Lower House if there is an Upper Chamber, will be allocated as
shown in the annexed table.**[/2/](#n02)**

**(6.)** Election to the seats allotted to Muhammadan, European and Sikh
constituencies will be by voters voting in separate communal electorates
covering between them the whole area of the Province (apart from any
portions which may in special cases be excluded from the electoral area
as "backward").

Provision will be made in the Constitution itself to empower a revision
of this electoral arrangement (and the other similar arrangements
mentioned below) after 10 years with the assent of the communities
affected, for the ascertainment of which suitable means will be devised.

**(7.)** All qualified electors, who are not voters either in a
Muhammadan) Sikh, Indian Christian (see paragraph 10 below),
Anglo-Indian (see paragraph II below) or European constituency, will be
entitled to vote in a general constituency.

**(8.)** Seven seats will be reserved for Mahrattas in certain selected
plural member general constituencies in Bombay.

**(9.)** Members of the "depressed classes" qualified to vote will vote
in a general constituency. In view of the fact that for a considerable
period these classes would be unlikely, by this means alone, to secure
any adequate representation in the Legislature, a number of special
seats will be assigned to them as shown in the table. These seats will
be filled by election from special constituencies in which only members
of the "depressed classes" electorally qualified will be entitled to
vote. Any person voting in such a special constituency will, as stated
above, be also entitled to vote in a general constituency. It is
intended that these constituencies should be formed in selected areas
where the Depressed Classes are most numerous, and that, except in
Madras, they should not cover the whole area of the Province.

In Bengal it seems possible that in some general constituencies a
majority of the voters will belong to the Depressed Classes.
Accordingly, pending further investigation, no number has been fixed for
the members to be returned from the special Depressed Class
constituencies in that Province. It is intended to secure that the
Depressed Classes should obtain not 'less than 10 seats in the Bengal
Legislature.

The precise definition in each Province of those who (if electorally
qualified) will be entitled to vote in the special Depressed Class
constituencies has not yet been finally determined. It will be based as
a rule on the general principles advocated in the Franchise Committee's
Report. Modification may, however, be found necessary in some Provinces
in Northern India where the application of the general criteria of
untouchability might result in a definition unsuitable in some respects
to the special conditions of the Province.

His Majesty's Government do not consider that these special Depressed
Class constituencies will be required for more than a limited time. They
intend that the Constitution shall provide that they shall come to an
end after 20 years if they have not previously been abolished under the
general powers of electoral revision referred to in paragraph 6.

**(10.)** Election to the seats allotted to Indian Christians will be by
voters voting in separate communal electorates. It seems almost certain
that practical difficulties will, except possibly in Madras, prevent the
formation of Indian Christian constituencies covering the whole area of
the Province, and that accordingly special Indian Christian
constituencies will have to be formed only in one or two selected areas
in the Province. Indian Christian voters in these areas will not vote in
a general constituency. Indian Christian voters outside these areas will
vote in a general constituency. Special arrangements may be needed in
Bihar and Orissa, where a considerable proportion of the Indian
Christian community belongs to the aboriginal tribes.

**(11.)** Election to the seats allotted to Anglo-Indians will be by
voters voting in separate communal electorates. It is at present
intended, subject to investigation of any practical difficulties that
may arise, that the Anglo-Indian constituencies shall cover the whole
area of each Province, a postal ballot being employed; but no final
decision has yet been reached.

**(12.)** The method of filling the seats assigned for representatives
from backward areas is still under investigation, and the number of
seats so assigned should be regarded as provisional pending a final
decision as to the constitutional arrangements to be made in relation to
such areas.

**(13.)** His Majesty's Government attach great importance to securing
that the new legislatures should contain at least a small number of
women members. They feel that at the outset this object could not be
achieved without creating a certain number of seats specially allotted
to women. They also feel that it is essential that women members should
not be drawn disproportionately from one community. They have been
unable to find any system which would avoid this risk, and would be
consistent with the rest of the scheme for representation which they
have found it necessary to adopt, except that of limiting the electorate
for each special women's seat to voters from one
community.**[/3/](#n03)** The special women's seats have accordingly
been specifically divided, as shown in the table, between the various
communities. The precise electoral machinery to be employed in these
special constituencies is still under consideration.

**(14.)** The seats allotted to "Labour" will be filled from noncommunal
constituencies. The electoral arrangements have still to be determined,
but it is likely that in most Provinces the Labour constituencies will
be partly trade union and partly special constituencies as recommended
by the Franchise Committee.

**(15.)** The special seats allotted to Commerce and Industry, Mining
and Planting will be filled by election through Chambers of Commerce and
various Associations. The details of the electoral arrangements for
these seats must await further investigation.

**(16.)** The special seats allotted to Land-holders will be filled by
election by special Land-holders' constituencies.

**(17.)** The method to be employed for election to the University seats
is still under consideration.

**(18.)** His Majesty's Government have found it impossible in
determining these questions of representation in the Provincial
Legislatures to avoid entering into considerable detail. There remains,
nevertheless, the determination of the constituencies. They intend that
this task should be undertaken in India as early as possible.

It is possible that in some instances delimitation of constituencies
might be materially improved by slight variations from the numbers of
seats now given. His Majesty's Government reserve the right to make such
slight variations, for such purpose, provided that they would not
materially affect the essential balance between communities. No such
variations will, however, be made in the case of Bengal and Punjab.

**(19.)** The question of the composition of Second Chambers in the
Provinces has so far received comparatively little attention in the
constitutional discussions and requires further consideration before a
decision is reached as to which Provinces shall have a Second Chamber or
a scheme is drawn up for their composition.

His Majesty's Government consider that the composition of the Upper
House in a Province should be such as not to disturb in any essential
the balance between the communities resulting from the composition of
the Lower House.

**(20.)** His Majesty's Government do not propose at present to enter
into the question of the size and composition of the Legislature at the
Centre, since this involves among other questions that of representation
of the Indian States which still needs further discussion. They will; of
course, when considering the composition, pay full regard to the claims
of all communities for adequate representation therein.

**(21.)** His Majesty's Government have already accepted the principle
that Sind should be constituted a separate Province, if satisfactory
means of financing it can be found. As the financial problems involved
still have to be reviewed in connection with other problems of federal
finance, His Majesty's Government have thought preferable to include, at
this stage, figures for a Legislature for the existing Province of
Bombay, in addition to the schemes for separate Legislatures for Bombay
Presidency proper and Sind.

**(22.)** The figures given for Bihar and Orissa relate to the existing
Province. The question of constituting a separate Province of Orissa is
still under investigation.

**(23.)** The inclusion in the table of figures relating to a
Legislature for the Central Provinces including Berar does not imply
that any decision has yet been reached regarding the future
constitutional position of Berar.

London, 4th August, 1932.  


======================

**[/1/](#m01)** Parliamentary Paper (Command 4147) of 1932. Officially
it is spoken of as \[the\] *Communal Decision*.

**[/2/](#m02)** See chart below.

**[/3/](#m03)** Subject to one exception, see note (3) to Table,
Appendix XIII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  


  

**Allocation of Seats in Provincial Legislatures (Lower House Only)**

  

Province.

General.

Depressed Classes

Representatives from Backward Areas.

Sikh.

Muhamadan.

Indian Christian.

Anglo-Indlan.

Europeans

Commerce and Industry, Mining and Planting, Special.

Land Holders special

University Special

Labour Special

Total

Madras

134 (including 6 women)

18

1

0

20 (including 1 women)

9

2

S

6

6

1

6

215

Bombay (Including Sind)

97 (b) (including 6 women)

10

1

0

63 (including 1 women)

3

2

4

8

8

1

8

200

Bengal

80 (c) (including 2 women)

\(c\)

0

0

119 (including 2 women)

2

4 (including 1 woman)

11

19

5

2

8

2M

UnitedProvinces

132 (including 4 women)

12

0

0

66 (including 2 women)

2

1

2

3

5

1

3

228

Punjab

43 (including 1 women)

0

0

32

86 (including 2 women)

2

1

1

1

*5(d)*

1

S

176

Bihar and Orissa

99 (including 3 women)

7

8

0

42 (including 1 women)

2

1

2

4

4

1

√∞ 4

175

Central Provlnces (including Berar)

77 (including 3 women)

10

1

0

14

0

1

1

2

3

1

1

112

Assam

44 (including 1 women) (e)

4

--

0

34

1

0

1

11

--

0

4

108

North-West Frontier Province

9

0

0

3

30

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

50

Bombay(without Sind)

109(b) (including 6 women)

10

1

0

30 (including 6 women)

3

2

3

7

2

1

7

175

Sind

19 (including 6 women)

0

0

0

34 (including 6 women)

0

0

2

2

2

0

1

60

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [back to Table of Contents](../index.html#contents) --  

