+++
title = "12 12. Vulgar nationalism"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**12. Vulgar nationalism**

 

         A consequence of this lack of self-developed understanding of
the forces in the field is that the Sangh is not able to discern
objective allies and enemies on the world stage, so that it is unable to
make friends.  E.g., after liberalization and globalization became hot
items, the Sangh Parivar including the BJP has been multiplying and
intensifying its attacks on the USA.  Time and again, Hindutva spokesmen
have been presenting the impersonal process of globalization as an
American ploy to take over the world (just as Westerners once depicted
earlier developments in capitalism as Jewish conspiracies to dispossess
the workers and smallholders).  Much of their anti-Americanism could
have been borrowed quite literally from Leftist pamphlets of yesteryear,
some of it also from Ayatollah Khomeini's speeches; the only thing
missing is the "Great Satan" label.  Meanwhile, these Hindutva exegetes
of the globalization conspiracy have not even bothered to notice that in
the USA itself, globalization is being criticized both from the Left and
the Right.  This movement spurns its potential friends.

 

         A similarly misguided exercise consists in blaming first the
British and now the Americans for Hindu society's problems with Islam. 
Like the secularists, Hindutva authors systematically exaggerate the
British role in the Partition of India.  The simple truth is that the
British merely made deals with an Islamic separatism which was very much
there before their arrival, and which is intrinsic to Islam.  We can
understand that the secularists refuse to face this fact, but in the
case of Hindutva spokesmen, this refusal smacks of cowardice.

 

         Instead of blaming Islam for Pakistani aggression, a whole lot
is made of the American arms which Pakistan is using during this
aggression; as if it is not the Pakistanis themselves who have chosen to
buy and use these weapons.  Instead of focusing on ideological forces,
the blame is put on a country; in this respect, the creation of Pakistan
comes in handy, because instead of blaming Muslim fellow-countrymen for
riots and bomb attacks and Kashmiri separatism, one can now blame
"foreign agents".  And when Pakistan feels too close for comfort, the
blame can be shifted to a more distant country, like Britain or the
USA.  This demonization of a nation may be excusable in wartime fever
(though it is itself a major cause of wars), but it is definitely below
the dignity of a columnist commenting on world events from his
armchair.  Wherever we look in Sangh thinking, we constantly run into
this reduction of ideological problems to tribal conflicts between
"national" and "foreign" or "anti-national" forces.  What is painfully
missing is a keen eye for potentially friendly trends across the
borders, such as the increasing awareness in US foreign policy circles
that India is the West's natural ally against the anti-democratic
regimes in Asia.[\[1\]](#_edn1)

 

         Equally painful is the absence of any serious understanding
about Communism, a key player on the Indian and world stages during most
of the Sangh's history.  Communist critics of Hindutva take it for
granted that the Sangh is anti-Communist, but a perusal of Sangh
publications does not support this common belief.  Thus, BJP economist
Jay Dubashi, though formerly a staunch critic of Soviet and Indian
Communism, has actually blamed the CIA for the break-up of the Soviet
Union, a conspiracy theory which is highly unjust to the freedom-loving
sections of the former Soviet empire's population and incredibly
unmindful of the self-inflicted economic breakdown which forced the
Soviet leaders into *perestroika*.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  Any retrospective
references to the Korea war, a UNO mission to save South Korea from
Communist aggression, routinely describe it as a case of American
aggression.  Likewise, references to the Vietnam war ignore the fact
that the Americans merely intervened in an ongoing intra-Vietnamese war
triggered by Communist aggression; it may be true that the Americans
misunderstood Vietnamese nationalism (a non-Communist factor of
opposition to the American intervention), but the fact that their motive
was the containment of Communism should not be overlooked. 

 

         All through the Cold War, the BJS/BJP never once developed a
global vision of the Communist problem.  The only BJP publication on
Communism, the 24-page pamphlet *The Great Betrayers* by Krishna Lal
Sharma (ca.1988), devoted to a critique of the Indian Communist Parties,
merely points out the Communists' extra-territorial loyalties and their
"misunderstanding" of nationalism.  Sharma argues convincingly that the
Communists do not accept Indian nationhood, and that whenever it suits
their purposes, they will twist nationalist discourse to promote
"Bengali nationhood" or "Keralite nationhood".  Indian Communists are
attacked for being "anti-national", which is a correct allegation but
hardly the whole story of what is wrong with Communism.

 

         For anyone who has met victims of Communism, it is simply
shocking to read what some spokesmen of the (allegedly anti-Communist)
Hindutva movement have to say about it.  In the spring of 1996, after
the Cuban Army shot down two airplanes of Miami-based Cubans trying to
help Cuban boat refugees, and after China fired some shots in the
direction of Taiwan in order to intimidate the Taiwanese voters,
*Organiser* columnist and former *Illustrated Weekly of India* editor
M.V. Kamath wrote the following: "The United States has a unique record
of grave errors in the last fifty years (...) It tried to prop up Chiang
Kai-shek in Formosa and allotted the Chinese Permanent Membership in the
Security Council to his government.(...) It got into the Korean War and
sacrificed the lives of thousands of its young men in pursuit of a
futile mission to contain Communism.(...) The latest example is its
support to Cuban terrorists making illegal flights over Cuban air space,
a brazen example of international lawlessness (...) But nothing fazes
the United States which seems determined to break any law, *commit any
crime* for its own selfish ends."[\[3\]](#_edn3)  This outburst of crude
and obnoxious anti-Americanism  calls for some comment.

 

         The American (in fact UNO) intervention in Korea was not a
"futile attempt to contain Communism".  It was a rescue mission rendered
necessary by Stalin's unilateral aggression against South Korea, not by
any interventionist whim of the USA; and it was relatively successful,
in that it achieved its stated goal of freeing South Korea and called a
temporary halt to Communist expansionism.[\[4\]](#_edn4)  The
alternative to saving South Korea would have been what India did to
Tibet at the very same time: when Mao's troops invaded, India
treacherously refused help.  Kamath, who is hailed as a “veteran
journalist” in the Sangh Parivar did not know or ignored the fact that
in 1950 India had voted for the UN resolution for resisting Communist
aggression in Korea and sent a medical mission as India’s contribution
to the Allied effort. The alternative to saving South Korea would have
been what India did to Tibet at the very same time: When Mao’s troops
invaded, India treacherously refused to help. Kamath calls American
policy "selfish" (ignoring that in the US, interventionism has always
been criticized by isolationists who argue that their country should be
more selfish rather than help other countries out of trouble), but
India's policy vis-à-vis Communist aggression in Tibet was worse than
selfish: rather than helping a friend and buffer state, it preferred to
damage its own interests by exposing its own borders to Mao's armies. 
At the time, Nehru's despicable China policy was criticized by the
Hindutva circles, but it seems they have changed their minds.

 

         Communist expansionism was at its peak, and if the American-led
defence of South Korea had not cooled Communist cockiness a bit, India
would have been the next target (an armed Communist uprising had already
started in India in 1949).  Without the rescue mission to Korea, and
more generally without the limitations clamped on the Communist powers
by NATO vigilance, China would not have retreated after its successful
invasion of India in 1962, and most RSS men would have breathed their
last in Mao-cum-Namboodiripad's concentration camps.  When China invaded
India in 1962, Communist expansionism was already hampered by
Soviet-Chinese hostility; even then, India had to turn to the USA for
help.

 

         The Chinese membership of the Security Council was not
"allotted" to Chiang Kai-shek's Republic of China (RoC) by whimsical
Americans, as Kamath claims; the RoC held that seat by virtue of being
one of the victorious powers of World War 2 and a founding member of the
UNO.  As for the free Cubans whose unarmed planes were shot down by
Cuban Communists in international air space when they were searching for
boat refugees to help, it is simply disgusting that Kamath calls them
"terrorists".  When RSS spokesmen themselves dole out this label so
carelessly, why do they complain when the RSS is blacklisted by the
ill-informed security forces of some Western countries as a "terrorist
organization"?

 

         Kamath ascribes American policies to the "white racist
supremacists who make policy in Washington".[\[5\]](#_edn5)  He does not
make clear how this profoundly sinister motive explains the preference
of American officials (some of whom are black) for brown Pakistanis over
brown Indians.  Mr. Kamath's allegations are in no way different from
those uttered in petty Leftist pamphlets.  Those who were under the
impression that the RSS counted itself among the anti-Communist forces,
should realize that without too much exaggeration, RSS anti-Communism
can fairly be described as a notion invented by the Communists
themselves.

 

         How can an otherwise capable intellectual like Mr. Kamath stoop
to this vulgar demonization of a foreign country?  Mindless
"patriotism", known to be the refuge of scoundrels, reduces complex
issues to a question of "national" versus "foreign", rather than
analyzing the ideological forces in the field.  Pretending that problems
are essentially non-existent (e.g. Hindu-Muslim hostility), or otherwise
at least very simple (viz. due to the evil foreign hand): that has
become the focus of Hindutva casuistry.

 

         Though the BJS used to support the RoC on Taiwan against
Communist China, the state with the Laogai slave labour camps, now M.V.
Kamath in *Organiser* supports China's right to take Taiwan by force. 
To him, this is merely a matter of "national unity" and thwarting
"American designs" to keep China divided, as if he had never heard of
the intra-Chinese civil war between opposing ideologies which has
created the present division of China (the only American crime in this
intra-Chinese conflict was that at the critical moment, military aid to
Chiang Kai-shek's legimitate Government was cut off).[\[6\]](#_edn6) 
Kamath's hateful jibes against the RoC are representative of a tendency
within the BJP which concedes Beijing's right to annex Taiwan, the last
toehold of the legitimate RoC, by force.[\[7\]](#_edn7)  Here, the BJP
has thrown all considerations of principle overboard, and settled for
*Realpolitik* vis-à-vis big China and little Taiwan.

 

         Or rather, it is worse than *Realpolitik*, it is the product of
a grave political aberration.  Any ideological consideration seems to
have been discarded in favour of a monomaniacal concern for "national
unity": better the whole of China under Communist rule than to allow a
foothold to the freedom-loving Chinese at the price of a temporary
division.  The Sangh simply refuses to study the problem of Communism
except in terms of the Indian Communists' extraterritorial loyalties. 
This is a very crude and narrow-minded type of nationalism.  One wonders
why the Sangh rejects the Jamaat-I-Islami’s offer of a United India
under Islam.

 

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  It is a different matter that many
Hindutva spokesmen fantasize aloud about a clash of civilizations
between Islam and the West, in which they expect the West will take care
of Islam and relieve the Hindus from the burden of facing Islam
themselves.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(             \[2\])  Jay Dubashi: "We don't need
foreigners to destroy us", *Organiser*, 18/2/1996.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(             \[3\])  M.V. Kamath: "A Myopic Policy",
*Organiser*, 14 April 1996; emphasis added.  Remark that while the US
never committed any massacre of Hindus, and while Islam has killed
millions of Hindus, Kamath nor the *Organiser* have ever used such
strong language about Islam.

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref4)^(             \[4\])  As any student of history could tell
the BJP "anti-Communists", the only mistake which President Truman made,
was that he did not allow General Douglas Mc Arthur to bomb the bases
and supply lines of the Chinese "volunteers", in which case the UNO
forces might have completed their success by securing the liberation of
Communist-occupied North Korea.

</div>

<div id="edn5" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref5)^(             \[5\])  M.V. Kamath: "The US threat to
India", *Organiser*, 19 May 1996.  One wonders how the so-called "angry
white males" would feel about this, the people in the US who feel that
their federal government is, on the contrary, biased against whites.

</div>

<div id="edn6" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref6)^(             \[6\])  M.V. Kamath: "The Question of
Taiwan", *Organiser*, 7 April 1996.

</div>

<div id="edn7" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref7)^(             \[7\]) Though I have not found this
confirmed in an official BJP document, this acceptance of Communist
China's right to annex the Republic of China is also the BJP's position,
according to two members of the BJP's Foreign Policy Cell.

 

**     [NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section13.html)**

**     [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section11.html)**

</div>

</div>
