+++
title = "15 15. A party of shopkeepers"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**15. A party of shopkeepers**

 

         The BJP eagerly wants to be friends with everyone who counts as
respectable.  The best predictor of their positions in upcoming
political issues is: what will the opinion-making establishment say? 
When new fads appear on the public scene, whether it is the Ambedkar
cult or reservations for women in Parliament, the BJP is sure to pick
them up in due course.[\[1\]](#_edn1)  Instead of radicalism, the record
of its manifestoes, resolutions, interventions in parliament, and public
statements, shows a goody-goody approach to all the forces which are
animated by a declared and unyielding hatred of the BJP.  This may have
something to do with the party's castewise roots.

        

         It is often alleged that the BJP is an upper-caste party out to
preserve the privileges of the upper castes.  The grain of truth in this
is that the BJP, like the Congress and the Communist Party, was founded
by Brahmins.  But like these other parties, it goes along with the
general shift from upper to middle and lower castes as the most numerous
actors on the political scene.  Significantly, the radicalization of the
party during the period of intensified Hindu-Muslim confrontation over
the Ayodhya temple-mosque dispute was led by lower-caste BJP leaders
like Uma Bharati, Vinay Katiyar and Kalyan Singh (BJP Chief Minister of
Uttar Pradesh in 1991-92, politically responsible for the demolition of
the Babri Masjid).

 

         Still, the BJP is often called a "party of Brahmins and
Banias", and its political style justifies this label to an extent. 
While Brahmins provide the Sanskritic (transregional, culture-centred)
outlook, it is the Bania merchants whose influence seems predominant in
shaping the image and the psychology of the party.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  When
a Leftist commentator tries to explain BJP policy decisions, he usually
blames the economic achievements and problems of the "urban traders" who
seek to build themselves a cultural identity and use the BJP to that
end.  It is even said that they, as aspiring capitalists, use the
RSS-BJP to reform Hinduism into a monolithic "Semitic" religion,
supposedly more fit as a cultural framework for capitalist
development.[\[3\]](#_edn3) 

 

         The grain of truth in this Marxist reduction of the BJP
programme to a mercantile strategy is that at least psychologically, the
BJP can best be understood as "a party of shopkeepers".  The BJP is not
the party of the rich, who always tend to be on the side of power, i.e.,
the anti-BJP establishment (as is evident from the media they own, and
which are either mildly or virulently anti-BJP).  But in large measure
the BJP has become the party of the aspiring middle and lower middle
classes.  Partly this is because the last ten years or so, it had
profiled itself as the least socialist and most pro-entrepreneurial
party.  For the truly big business houses, this wasn't that important,
because they had established their own arrangements with the corrupt
Nehruvian state; the stifling effect of Nehruvian socialism was felt
most acutely by smaller and newly-started businesses.  To an even larger
extent, the success of the BJP is due to its promise of stopping the
disintegration of India and maintaining stability, a prerequisite for
economic progress.

 

         After its 1996 failure to win a confidence vote for its 13-day
government, the BJP has accepted that its only chance lies in gaining an
absolute majority.  Fortunately for the party, few Hindutva-minded
voters are fully informed about the week-kneed positions taken by its
inner circle; most go by its general Hindu image, and by the allegations
of Hindu extremism spread by its opponents.  On the other hand, BJP
strategists have a point when they calculate that many
middle-of-the-road voters need the assurance of moderation given by
leaders like Vajpayee before they can cross the threshold to voting for
the BJP.  In the heart of the mainstream Hindu voter, the combative
Hindu feeling goes underground as long as it is not provoked, and the 
moderate shopkeeper-type predominates, so that in peace time (as in May
1996), he does not mind a shopkeeper mentality in the party he'll vote
for.  But the relative quietness on the communal front may not last, and
in troubled regions, Hindus tend to set up more radical organizations,
modelled on (and often named after) Mumbai's Shiv Sena.  The BJP had
best prepare a contingency plan for the inevitable next round of
confrontation, or it will be pushed aside once more by impatient
youngsters as it was on 6 December 1992.

 

         The signature of the trader mentality is visible in the entire
BJP approach to politics.  Good traders treat trade as a win-win
situation: the seller makes a profit, the buyer acquires a desired
product, both making gains without forcing losses on their
trading-partners.  In humdrum peace time, of course, this is the right
attitude to politics.  But in times of serious political confrontation,
they have difficulty in understanding that achieving one's own goal
implies inflicting defeat on a second party.  Shopkeepers try to curry
favour with everyone, and avoid straightforward ("divisive") ideological
stances and debates in order not to alienate potential business
partners.  Their idea of combattiveness is to outwit buyers and
competitors; they fancy they can catch a much-desired prize on the
cheap, without confrontation.

 

         This mentality was conspicuous during the Ayodhya affair, when
the BJP fostered the illusion that Hindu gain could be gotten without
Muslim loss, that Muslims could be talked into abandoning their claim to
the disputed site, that confrontation was avoidable.  The BJP was
formally right, in that the disputed building was no longer a mosque as
idols had been worshipped in there since 1949.  But in real terms, the
Muslim leadership certainly felt deprived of something very important:
the Quran-based right to trample on non-Muslims, e.g. by usurping their
sacred sites.  Even though the BJP's *White Paper on Ayodhya and the
Rama Temple Movement* (1993) is a well-written and generally complete
document, certainly the best chronology of the whole Ayodhya dispute, it
leaves out a discussion of the one historical fact that justifies and
lends importance to the Ayodhya movement, viz. that the demolition of
the medieval Rama temple at the site was by no means an isolated event,
but a necessary consequence of Islamic doctrine. 

 

         Not to antagonize Muslim and secularist opinion, the BJP
avoided going into the question *why* the Rama temple in Ayodhya, along
with thousands of others, had been demolished by Muslim invaders and
rulers,-- a question pregnant with doctrinal confrontation between
idolatrous Hinduism and iconoclastic Islam.  Or rather, it gave a
pseudo-explanation in terms of "*foreign* invaders" and "*national*
humiliation", hoping to trick the Indian Muslims into affirming that
they too are part of the Indian nation (as they always imply when they
reject any identification of India with Hinduism) and therefore feel
equally strongly about the "national honour" embodied in the Rama
temple-to-be.

 

         So far, so good: if they could resolve the controversy with
superficial and syrupy rhetoric, without raking up old history, that
might have been defensible.  But the point is that, first of all, this
accomodating attitude was not rewarded or even acknowledged in any way
by the secularists (who falsely maintained that the BJP was attacking
Islam), and secondly, the BJP spokesmen did rake up old history, though
not in the anti-Islamic sense alleged by their enemies.  When BJP
spokesmen mentioned history in the Ayodhya context, it was mostly to
*deny a fact inconvenient to their opponents* (whom they were trying to
get into a positive mood), viz. the fact that iconoclasm and intolerance
are intrinsic elements of Islamic doctrine, and not aberrations from
it.[\[4\]](#_edn4)

 

         Sangh Parivar spokesmen have claimed that far from encouraging
the annihilation of idol cults, Islam actually prohibits the demolition
of idol temples, and that the Prophet Mohammed had a mosque demolished
when he found that it had been built in forcible replacement of a
temple.  This was a convenient fiction: the Islamic temple demolishers
in India and elsewhere had always done their thing with full backing
from competent religious authorities, because Mohammed himself had all
non-Islamic places of worship in Arabia either demolished or turned into
mosques, and his model behaviour has an unfailing force of precedent in
Islamic law.  These facts are in conflict with the alluring BJP plea
that nothing in Islam prohibits the Muslims from accepting the
conversion of a mosque into an idol-house.  The BJP shopkeepers
calculated that a white lie might make the desired Muslim abandonment of
any claim to the Ayodhya site cheaper in terms of blood and sweat
expended.  Of course, the Muslim leaders were not fooled into believing
that Islam allows the replacement of a mosque with an idol-house.

 

         People who try to deceive others, thinking they are very
clever, usually end up deceiving only themselves and being disbelieved
by others even when they do speak the truth.  The BJP is not convincing
anyone when it claims that its prime concern in the Common Civil Code
issue is the well-being of Muslim women, or when it claims that it has
no problems with Islam and Christianity as such, or when it pleads that
"genuine Islam" exhorts Muslims to abandon the Ayodhya mosque.  These
positions fail to mollify the adversary, but they are very effective in
confusing the BJP rank and file, Hindu militants at heart but forced to
defend secularist positions as a matter of party-line.

 

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(           \[1\])  In a TV debate on caste issues (ca.
1995), Ram Vilas Paswan attacked Dronacharya, the teacher of the
Pandavas, for refusing to teach the tribal boy Ekalavya.  The reply to
this could have been that Drona's decision had nothing to do with caste
considerations: he simply did the job he was paid for, viz. to make the
Pandavas the best archers in the land, not to teach his skills to any
others whatever their caste.  Instead, VHP spokesman Giriraj Kishore
disowned Drona, saying that "we do not recognize him as an acharya". 
This way, Hindutva leaders disown everything which the secularists
attack.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(           \[2\])  A long chapter could be written about
the role of caste history and caste psychology as determinants of
politics in India.  One example: in the British and post-colonial
periods, the position of the Thakur (landlord) steadily deteriorited,
while that of the Bania changed for the better: he became a modern
entrepreneur, taking full advantage of modernization and urbanization. 
The envy of successful Banias felt by impoverished Thakurs and Rajas is
certainly one of the reasons why the latter are so attracted to
socialist-populist parties like the Janata Dal, typical examples being
the former Prime Ministers Chandra Shekhar and V.P. Singh.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(           \[3\])  This is argued in all seriousness by
Romila Thapar (in  S. Gopal, ed.: *Anatomy of a Confrontation*, p.159)
and parroted by numerous columnists.

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref4)^(           \[4\])  At this point, there is a difference
between the BJP, which tried to be as superficial about the basic issue
as possible, and the VHP, which developed a sharper position after
accepting Chandra Shekhar's invitation to mandate scholars to discuss
the historical evidence concerning the disputed site with a Babri Masjid
Action Committee delegation (which withdrew from the talks when it found
it had no chance of winning).  However, even in VHP ranks it is not
uncommon to hear preachers praise Mohammed and abuse Muslims for
"misunderstanding" the Quran's true message.

 

**    [NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section16.html)**

**    [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section14.html)**

</div>

</div>
