+++
title = "intro"

+++
# Introduction

I am not a Hindu. And I am certainly not a Muslim. So, when I started
writing my earlier book Ram Janmabhoomi vs Babri Masjid, a Case Study in
Hindu-Muslim Conflict, in the spring of 1990, I was an outsider to this
conflict between Hindus and Muslims. But as I ventured deeper into the
unique configuration of forces now existing in India, I saw that this
was not a conflict between just any two communities. It is not just a
struggle between one self-interest and another self-interest. It is a
struggle between very unequal contenders, with unequal motives for
waging this struggle at all.

On the one hand, there is the society that has continued the age-old
civilization of this country. It has been badly bruised by centuries of
foreign rule and oppression, with the moral losses more serious than the
territorial and cultural ones : it suffers of self- forgetfulness and
lack of self-respect. But it is still far better off than most of the
cultures that have been overrun by the Muslim conquerors or the European
colonizers. It has a real chance of coming through.

On the other hand, there is a community, which is allowed to function
within this larger society, but which has the roots of its separate
identity outside this society's age-old civilization. These people's
ancestors were in may cases pulled out of Hindu society and made members
of the Muslim community under duress. Now, they would automatically
evolve back into Hindu society, were it not for some politicians and
theologians who instill a separate communal identity in them.

The Ayodhya movement, which wants to reintegrate the sacred place of Ram
Janmabhoomi into the living Hindu tradition by building a Mandir on it,
is at the same time an invitation to the Muslim Indians to reintegrate
themselves into the society and the culture from which their ancestors
were cut off by fanatical rulers and their thought police, the
theologians. It is thus an exercise in national integration.

The struggle of Hindu society is not primarily with the Muslim
community. The most important opponents of Hindu society today are not
the Islamic communal leaders, but the interiorized colonial rulers of
India, the alternated English-educated and mostly Left-leaning elite
that noisily advertises its *secularism*. It is these people who impose
anti-Hindu policies on Hindu society, and who keep Hinduism down and
prevent it from proudly raising its head after a thousand years of
oppression. The worst torment for Hindu society today is not the
arrogant and often violent agitation from certain minority groups, nor
the handful of privileges which the non-Hindu communities are getting.
The worst problem is this mental slavery, this sense of inferiority
which Leftist intellectuals, through their power positions in education
and the media, and their direct influence on the public and political
arena, keep on inflicting on the Hindu mind.

These Leftist intellectuals work in a strange collusion with the Islamic
fanatics. Normally, the atheist Left should be the sharpest opponent of
religious obscurantism and dogmatic adherence to anti-universalist
belief systems like Islam. But in India, the two work happily together
for the destruction of their common enemy: Hindu Dharma. Of course, the
Leftists are mistaken if they think they can use the Muslims for their
own ends. It is a one-way collaboration, and increasingly so, as the
Left is put on the defensive while Islam is still on the offensive. So
far, the Left has rendered some fine intellectual services to the cause
of Islam. It has strongly supported the movement for the Partition of
India on the basis of the Islamic Two-Nation Theory. After Partition, it
has used its increasing hold on the entire intellectual and educational
scene in India to paralyze all criticism of the historical record and
ideological character of Islam.

Then again, the impression that this westernized elite is merely being
used for Islamic communal designs, may be superficial. This elite itself
is quite confident that it is in no way threatened by Islamic
self-assertion. And rightfully so : Islam cannot seriously challenge
modernity once it has really taken off and shaped the polity (as it has
in India, far more than in the Shah's Iran). While Islamic resurgence
may pose a physical threat to Hindu society, the deeper challenge and
the sharpest disdain are coming from the Left-leaning westernized (short
: Nehruvian) establishment.

So, one of the first tasks in the awakening of Hindu society is to
scrutinize and expose the Nehruvian establishment, it its political and
in, more fundamentally, its intellectual dimensions. Today, that is
becoming easy. When in the fifties people like Ram Swarup and Sita Ram
Goel were waging an intellectual struggle against Communism, they were
up against a dense fog of widespread fascination with this intrusive
ideology. But in the nineties the sky is clearing up, and we witness the
swan song of the once so arrogant Leftist intellectuals even in their
last strongholds. It is a foregone conclusion that their empire is
nearing its end, it is just a matter of not letting their exit drag on
for longer than necessary, and being prepared to fill the vacuum.

At the intellectual level, Hindus will son be able to breathe freely.
They will be able to rediscover and reformulate the numerous valuable
expressions of the one Sanatana Dharma. They will be able to affirm the
unity and integrity of this Sanatana Dharma, without being falsely
accused of *assimilative communalism* when they restate the scientific
fact that Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism are full members of the one
Hindu commonwealth of schools and sects. They will be able to reaffirm
the unity and integrity of Hindu society, and to debunk the casteist and
regionalist separatisms that have been fostered by its enemies and
equipped with a pseudo- historical basis. They will be able to put the
*evils of Hindu society* into the correct historical perspective on the
basis of the real facts, and judge them by universal standards rather
than by the hostile ad hoc standards that have been applied to Hindu
society by its enemies.

Equipped with a renewed self-awareness, Hindus will be able to face the
challenge posed by the increasingly militant Muslim world. So far, with
the help of the leftists, Islam has been able to impose a kind of
Emergency on India. During Indira Gandhi's Emergency rule, everyone was
perfectly free to sing the praise of Nehru's daughter, but criticizing
her was a dangerous thing to do. All the Indian intellectuals refer with
indignation to this episode (during which the Constitution was amended
to make India a *secular socialist republic*). Similarly, it is allowed
to eulogize Islam as a religion of peace and brotherhood, but
scrutinizing Islamic history and doctrine, or merely asking some
critical questions, is quite out of bounds. Books that do these things,
have a good change of getting banned, with the tacit or explicit
approval of the secularists, and newspaper editors have interiorized
this bank on critical writings about Islam. At the intellectual level it
is very easy to put Islam on the defensive and cool down its arrogance,
just by doing those very things which this Emergency wants to prevent.
If Hindus take cognizance of the real texts of Islam, the real doctrines
they embody, the real story of the Prophet's mission and career, and the
real story of the application of these doctrines in the Islamic conquest
of India, then they will soon shed their habit of eulogizing this
imperialist ideology. If moreover they apply the precise psychological
categories, which Hindu tradition has developed, to understand the
quality of consciousness that has generated the central texts and
doctrines of Islam, they will soon be cured of their mental subservience
to Islam.

It is my conviction that Islam will not last very much longer. In the
confrontation with the rational spirit, which was present in Hindu,
thought since millennia, but which has been brought centre-stage in
modern culture and education by the West, the dogmas of Islam cannot
survive. The universalist attitude of science revolts against the belief
that one man could get a special message from none less than the Creator
of the Universe, while others are excluded from any such direct contact.
The critical attitude of science rejects the demand that we accept
Mohammed's claim to prophethood without verification. Islam has no
satisfying reply to this challenge of science and rationality.

Moreover, the present upsurge in Islamic activism, no matter how
threatening it may look, will not be able to deliver the goods. It may
mobilize popular aggression against the non-Muslims of the world, but
when it comes to running a country, it will note fare better than
Communism. Of course, it has more roots in the soul of the people. But
it is faced with material needs and popular attitudes and expectations
that modernity has spread to all the countries of the world. Even
Islamic rulers, even in a dictatorship, somehow have to please their
people. To do this, they need the material products of modernity, if
only because in the overpopulated countries of today, a modern
infrastructure is indispensable to feed the people (we needn't even
mention the fondness of Islamic as much as Kafir rulers for modern
weaponry). So, they cannot avoid bringing in modern technology,
therefore modern science, therefore modern thinking. While *modern*
thinking is certainly not the final word in the progress of humanity, it
is quite sufficient to undermine the exclusivist beliefs central to
Islam.

With that, we have only demonstrated the weakness of Islam. It cannot
possibly win against the culture of rationality and humanism. However,
it can hold out for some time and still gain a lot in numbers and power.
How fat it will crumble, depends partly on the emergence of people,
especially born Muslims, who go in and actively criticize Islam in
forums with Muslims audiences. It also depends on the frankness and
serenity with which non-Muslims who are in regular contact with Muslims,
such as the Hindus, express their skepsis regarding the central claims
of Islam, and the logic and humanity with which they present alternative
views. Confronting Islam with rational criticism will constitute a
turning-point, very delicate but inevitable. But it is the positive
attraction of superior (i.e. more rational and humanist) thought and
culture that will be the single most important factor in the inescapable
decline of Islam.

The Hindu reply to Islam should consist mostly in a positive attitude of
understanding, rooted in Hindu humanism and springing from the knowledge
of the soul which Hindu tradition has been cultivating since ages. It
should, for instance, make a careful distinction between the two
cultural components of the present Islamic upsurge : one is the
self-assertion against the imposition of the spiritually impoverished
(*secularized*), reductionist culture of the West, which is a stand
Hindus may share; the other is the fanatical imposition of the Islamic
belief system. The Hindu should understand the mental and the social
processes that tie people to such irrational belief systems, and
maintain in his attitude and judgment a scrupulous distinction between
the human beings that have been caught in this belief system, and the
Islamic belief system itself. This will be easier, more credible and
less hostile, if he takes an equally sobre look at the state of his own
culture, dropping both the self- depreciation and the compensatory
self-glorification so prevalent in contemporary Hindu rhetoric.

This critique of Islam, it should be clearly understood, is a critique
of a belief system and its concomitant code of behaviour, and not an
attack on a community of people. It is also not a goal in itself. at the
political level, it is merely a practical diagnosis of an acute problem:
the cause of the persistent communal tension in India is Islam. After
all, any two communities, religious or other, can pick a quarrel, but it
remains occasional; while the tension between Muslims and all other
religious is chronic and systematic. At the intellectual level, the
critique of Islam is merely an exercise or case study in the pathology
of religion, as part of a general exploration and mapping of man's
religious history, which in turn is part of the groundwork for the
integral human education in the global civilization of tomorrow. I for
one have no intention of spending my life crusading against Islam or any
other It is just that we have to free ourselves from illusions about
certain intrusive and pretentious belief systems, and once that is done,
we can concentrate on more positive dimensions of social and spiritual
life.

The same thing counts for the critique of the contentions put forward by
the secularists. It is thoughts, not people, that are the problem.
However, people who have been practising slander with so much gusto and
self- righteousness, will only understand if the proper name- tags are
attached to the criticism of their thought. I have dealt with them at
rather great length in this volume, and I have not spared them. They
pretend to be the champions of modernity, rationality and democracy, and
that makes their distortions and their anti- democratic and even
totalitarian stand on important issues all the more unacceptable. They
have to be exposed, and I have made my contribution to the discharge of
this fairly unpleasant job. I wish and intend it to be the last time
that I have to go after them. Once Hindu society has shaken off these
Hindu-baiting leeches, i.e. when it is no longer under their mental
spell, it can concentrate on developing and actualizing the treasures it
has to offer to mankind, and achieving genuine national integration.

Actually, this *national integration* that every talking body in India
talks about, is a very natural condition and needs no *achieving*.
Rather, it requires dropping a few things. It requires dropping the
anti-Hindu separatist doctrines that have largely been created for the
purposes of several imperialisms, and are now being kept afloat with a
lot of distortive intellectual and propagandistic effort. Just drop this
effort, and this country will naturally find back its unity. Delhi, 5th
February, 1991.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
