+++
title = "03 2.1 The belief in Ram"

+++
# 2. Belief and history

## 2.1 The belief in Ram

The near-certainty that the temple which stood on the Babri Masjid spot
was a celebrated Ram temple, does not clinch the issue of whether Ram
was actually born on that very spot. We do know that the Hindu culture,
even more than most traditional cultures, has shown a tremendous
capacity of preserving traditions, poetic compositions as voluminous as
the Vedas, and the information contained therein. It is therefore not at
all unthinkable that the birthplace of a heroic figure like Ram may have
been remembered in an uninterrupted chain of tradition for several
thousands of years. But then that is the maximum we can say : it is
possible.

However, for the political decision of whether to give in to the Hindu
demand concerning Ram's traditional birth site, it is sufficient that
there is a consensus among those people who worship Ram (the contention
that a number of different temples in Ayodhya all claim to be the real
Janmabhoomi is, upon closer inquiry, simply not true). When on October
8, 1990 fighting broke out in Jerusalem over the *Dome on the Rock* and
the Al Aqsa mosque, absolutely nobody has stood up and questioned the
Muslim claim that the Al-Aqsa mosque was built over the Prophet's
footprint in the rock. No one has demanded a probe into the myth that
the mosque is where Mohammed landed after a flight through heaven on a
winged horse. Even when most people are convinced of the impossibility
of making a footprint in a rock, or of flying on a horse, they have all
chosen to respect the Muslims' belief. So, why should Hindus start
proving the sacredness of their sacred places?

The JNU historians have made a lot of the priority of history over
*beliefs*. They have done this without making the crucial distinction
between a theological belief of a dogmatic and anti-rational kind, and
popular belief which is neither rational nor its opposite, but just a
cherished convention at a different level of discourse (the mythical
language game)9a. A theological belief is one that is essential to the
defining belief system of a given religion. In Islam, two such beliefs
are central : the rejection of all gods except Allah, and the
Prophethood of Mohammed. Whoever doubts these, places himself outside
the Muslim fold. In Roman Catholicism, theological beliefs are declared
dogma. The Council statements that formulate the dogma (and which are
attributed to the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, who is also present at
the Councils), conclude with the statement that he who doesn't believe
it, anathema sit, *he is banned*: non-belief in a dogma places one
outside the Church. Apart from these theological beliefs that are
theologically unimportant or even heterodox : concerning relics of
saints, apparitions of the Virgin Mary etc.

In Hinduism, no such thing as theological dogma exists. Even those
teachings that indologists consider crucial to Hinduism, can be freely
rejected. Thus, A.K. Coomaraswamy, as no doubt some Hindus before him,
rejected the common belief in transmigration of individual souls. Many
sections of Hindu society, both in India and more so overseas, have
dropped the caste system, often considered a defining component of
Hinduism, without being any the less Hindu for it.

The belief that Ram was born at the disputed spot in Ayodhya is also not
a matter of theology. It is not essential for Ram bhakti, and Ram bhakti
in turn is not essential for being a Hindu. The belief in the
Janmabhoomi is of the order of popular belief, and has only some
practical (pilgrimage) but no theological implications.

The practical thrust of the entire JNU statement is that the Hindu
belief regarding Ram's birthplace should not be respected: since you
give no scientific proof for Ram's being born there, you will not get
your temple. Instead you may get a secular national monument, where
religious rituals will be forbidden by law.

If the secularists reject an arrangement that would accommodate a
widespread popular belief, viz. a Ram Janmabhoomi Mandir, they should
have the courage of their conviction, and take this stand wherever it
applies. And they should keep up their Nehruvian habit of meddling in
Israeli/Palestinian affairs. This means they should go tell the Muslims
of Jerusalem that the historical fact of the Jewish Temple should have
priority over the "myths" of the Prophet's footprint and of his ride
through heaven. But if they prefer, Muslims' sentiments and beliefs,
then they should have the same respect of Hindu beliefs surrounding a
sacred place. If they fail to show equal respect to the Muslims of
Palestine and to the Hindus of India, then they discriminate on the
basis of religion. Which no true secularist would ever do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.2 Jerusalem and Ayodhya

In the Ayodhya debate, the comparison with the Jerusalem Temple Mount
controversy has been made only sparingly. And when it was made, it was
mostly turned upside down. It was assumed that in both cases, a mosque
is threatened with a takeover by non-Muslims, and that is the relevant
similarity. Stefan de Girval has put it this way : *"(The Jews) want to
rebuild the temple of Jerusalem, which was destroyed by the Romans in
the first century AD. But they face the same problem and dilemma that
the Hindus are facing at the Ram Janmabhoomi
site."*[¹⁰](notes.htm#note10) The non-Muslim communities involved in
these two temple- mosque-controversies do indeed have things in common.
They both have voluntarily and unilaterally set up a secular state.
Their creations, upon departure of the British, were both at the same
time partitions into a secular and an Islamic state. In both cases, the
partition was immediately followed by an invasion from the Muslim
neighbour (here there is a remarkable difference : Israel gained
territory in the ensuing war, while India lost *Azad* Kashmir). They
both live with a Muslim minority, which does encounter problems but is
still treated far better than minorities in the surrounding Muslim
countries. On the other hand, after their creation both Israel and India
have had to receive many refugees, Jewish and Hindu respectively, who
had to flee intense persecution in Muslim countries. Both communities
have been persistently targeted by the same Muslim-Communist combine :
Israel by the Arab-Soviet alliance, Hindus society by the Leftist and
pro-Muslim Nehruvians and by the China-Pakistan
alliance.[¹¹](notes.htm#note11) But all that does not make for a strict
parallel in the two controversies. The differences include the
following. In Jewish theology, there is a belief that only the Messiah,
when he comes, should rebuild the Temple. No such belief is involved in
the Ayodhya controversy. In Jerusalem, the disputed area is a sacred
place to both religions involved; in Ayodhya, the Muslims have never
attached any religious importance to the site of the Babri Masjid, which
was built only to humiliate the Hindus. In Jerusalem, the Muslims built
their mosques in all innocence on a wasteland, where the Romans had
destroyed the Jewish Second Temple centuries before; whereas in Ayodhya
they most probably destroyed the temple themselves before building a
mosque over it.

But the most important difference is this. In Jerusalem, a sacred place
of a religious community is being used for regular worship by that
community, to the exclusion of members of the other community, but it is
being claimed by fanatics of this other community; in Ayodhya, exactly
the same situation obtains. However, in Jerusalem the tenant community
is Muslim, in Ayodhya it is non-Muslim. In Jerusalem, the fanatics who
want to grab the other community's sacred place are non-Muslim, the
*Faithful of the Temple Mount*, in Ayodhya they are Muslim, the BMAC and
BMMCC.

This important factual contrast is compounded by a political difference.
In Israel, a truly secular government is proud of Israel's policy since
he liberation of Jerusalem in 1967, which has guaranteed freedom of
worship to Jews, Christians and Muslims in their respective sacred
places, in contrast to the ban on Christian and Jewish access to the
sacred places under the previous Islamic regime. This secular government
has given the Jewish fanatics no chance to challenge the status-quo, and
is not ready to make any concession to them, or to force a compromise
with them on the tenant Muslim community.

In India, by contrast, some governments have been succeeding each other,
that have not been all that secularly impartial in religious
controversies, in spite of their comprising vehemently secularist
parties. These governments have amply lent their ears to the fanatics
who challenge the functional status-quo and intend to snatch the sacred
place from the tenant community. For clarity's sake, it may be repeated
that the tenant community is, since 1949, the Hindu community. And the
Hindus want to keep the functional status-quo, viz. the Ram temple
remains a Ram temple, even while its architecture may be changed from a
mosque-like domed structure to a traditional Mandir structure. But
instead of unflinchingly upholding their right to their sacred place,
the government pressurizes them to give in to the BMAC and BMMCC
demands, or at least to accept a mid-way compromise.

So, the Temple Mount is not a Jewish Ayodhya[¹²](notes.htm#note12)
rather a Muslim Ayodhya. We should of course not take the comparison too
far, for that would only lead into distortions. Yet, it so happened that
there is one more analogy. In both places the autumn of 1990 has
witnessed a bloodbath among the tenant community, inflicted by police
bullets. In Jerusalem, police killed around twenty people when,
according to the official report, they were throwing stones at Jews
praying at the Wailing Wall (the only leftover of the Second
Temple).[¹³](notes.htm#note13) In Ayodhya, police killed sixteen, or one
hundred and sixty- eight, or five hundred, or who knows, people who were
unarmed and singing Ram Dhun. And this similarity is again compounded by
a stark difference : the Jerusalem shooting triggered as much as a UN
resolution against the Israeli government, but the Ayodhya shooting
triggered absolutely nothing as far as the Human Rights professionals
are concerned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
