+++
title = "05 4.1  A non-mosque"

+++
# 4. Ram Janmabhoomi and the courts

## 4.1 A non-mosque

The juridical debate concerning the Ram Janmabhoomi site centres around
two questions :

1.  Can a court adjudicate in a matter concerning historical wrongs,
    dating to before the present political set-up, and extending far
    beyond the case at hand, which has acquired a symbol value in
    precisely this larger issue of righting historical wrongs?
2.  If not, i.e. if the court can only deal with this at its material
    face value, as a dispute of ownership or of the right of access or
    use, then whose building is it? We will start with the second
    question.

A very important element in the juridical debate is the actual status of
the disputed place before the Hindu take-over in 1949. The Hindu side
says that it was an abandoned building since 1936. They might, on top of
this claim, invoke the principle that *"if you have land and you don't
cultivate it, it's not yours"*, a principle which several Muslims have
mentioned to me as a fine example of how socially progressive Islam
really is. The Muslim side says it was a full-fledged mosque up till
December 22, 1949.

A mr. Hashim Kidwai has written[¹⁹](notes.htm#note19) that mr. Advani's
claim that no namaz was offered in the Babri Masjid since 1936, a full
thirteen years before the Hindu take-over, "is not based on facts". To
substantiate his counter-claim, he brings up the most first-hand kind of
evidence : *"My father was posted at Faizabad as Deputy Collector from
1939 to 1941 and I, along with my mother and other members of my family,
visited the Babari mosque in October 1939 and again in October 1941 and
offered the Zuhar (noon) prayers there."*

I readily believe this man's testimony, especially because it does not
prove what he wanted to prove. It proves that the Babri Masjid was still
considered a mosque, and had not been transformed into anything else. In
fact, it clearly prove that some Muslims still went there to offer
prayers. However, the fact that someone who wants to prove that the
place was still in use in 1936-49, merely says that his family went
there twice (visiting it) in more than two years, and does not say that
he saw with his own eyes that the Muslim community gathered there every
Friday, is a strong indication that the place no longer was a community
mosque in regular use.

I have so far not seen any document that settles the matter in a
conclusive way. But then, that is more to the disadvantage of the Muslim
than of the Hindu side. If the Muslim community was effectively using
the place, then in those thirteen years under discussion it should have
produced some documents proving it.

In a memorandum of Muslim MLA's from Uttar Pradesh to the chief
minister[²⁰](notes.htm#note20), not more is claimed than that prayers
were offered until 21/12/1949 *without any restriction*. It is a fact
that there was no restriction on offering prayers, but in all this happy
unrestrictedness, how many devotees effectively came to pray? These
MLA's are not even claiming that the place was the community mosque for
a designated group of local Muslims, let alone proving it.

In a comment on the VHP list of documents presented to the government of
India (6/10/89), the BMMCC again fails to make this full
claim.[²¹](notes.htm#note21) Commenting on two documents which the VHP
has included as supporting its case, two Waqf documents of 1940 and
1941, the BMMCC can only dismiss them as *not very legible*, and then
quickly jumps to comment on the events of 1949 when *"Muslims of the
place were being subjected to harassment and prevented from offering
namaz in the Babri Masjid"*. Reading *not very legible* documents is not
going to convince many people.

The long list of AIBMAC documents presented to the government on
December 23, 1990, again merely contain proof that the Muslims had legal
access to the place, not that it actually was their regular
prayer-ground.

The claim that the Babri Masjid was a normally functioning community
mosque up till 1949, is also rendered unlikely by what happened just
before the take- over. It seems that the *appearance* of the idols on 22
December 1949 was not at all unannounced. Justice Deoki Nandan Agarwala
mentions, in an appendix to an open letter to the prime
minister[²²](notes.htm#note22), that on 16 October 1949, group
recitation of the entire Tulsi Ramayana started in different places in
an around the disputed property in order to purify it, and the Ram
devotees removed the remnants of the graves of the Ganj-i Shaheedan
(Martyrs' place, the burial ground of the Muslim victims of the 1855
battle over the nearby Hanuman Garhi temple). If the place had been in
regular use as a community mosque, this would have been impossible, or
at least it would have occasioned serious riots.

The course of Muslim participation in litigation over the site is also
not really compatible with the continuous use of the Masjid up to 1949.
If the Sunni Waqf Board was effectively managing the Masjid in 1949, why
did it not immediately start litigation to reclaim its stolen property,
especially since the theft would have interfered with the community life
of the local Muslims in a very frontal way ? In fact, the Sunni Waqf
Board only entered litigation in 1961, just five days before the twelfth
anniversary of the take-over, on which date any claims became
time-barred.

Also, in its 1961 plaint, the Sunni Waqf Board is conspicuously silent
about any details of an actual mosque management : who was effectively
in charge of the Masjid as its mutwalli, if at all there was one ? When
was the repair of the building (damaged in 1934 riots) by the British
authorities completed, and when was namaz resumed ? The Waqf Board has
nothing more to offer than the general assertion that namaz was offered
both and after the said repairs. As we have seen, that statement is
correct in the sense that the place was available for namaz, so that
individual Muslims could go there, but so far not substantiated in the
sense that it was used for regular community prayers.

After the enactment of the U.P. Muslim Waqfs Act in 1936, the District
Waqf Commissioner of Faizabad made a complete inquiry, and the fact that
he really had to *inquire* again shows how non-alive the Masjid was. In
his report (16/9/38), he does mention someone who was known as, and
called himself, the mutwalli of the Babri Masjid. The man, Syed Mohammed
Zaki, was a Shia and traced his ancestry and his job to Mir Baqi, also a
Shia. However, he was an opium addict, unsuited for his duties, and this
could be seen from the neglected state of the Masjid. So, according to
this official Waqf report, the place was neglected; and apparently,
nobody in the Ayodhya Muslim community was doing anything about it. And
even after the report was submitted, and even after it was published in
the gazette of the Sunni Waqf Board in 1944, neither the Sunni nor the
Shia Waqf Board stepped in to effectively take care of the
Masjid.[²³](notes.htm#note23)

Incidentally, it seems that the name Babri Masjid became the official
term from this report onwards, as before it was mostly referred to as
Masjid-i Janmasthan.

What Shias and Sunnis did do, was to quarrel over whether it was a Shia
or a Sunni mosque. Again, their argumentation centered around historical
claims, such as that Babar was a Sunni, and that Mir Baqi was a Shia. It
did not focus on the actual use of the mosque, claiming that the users
were mostly Shias (c.q. Sunnis), or whether they did the Shia or the
Sunni thing on the festival Muharram. The British court ruled, in March
1946, that it was a Sunni Waqf property, but that it had been shared by
Sunnis and Shias, in the sense that there was *no prohibition* for
either to use it.

From a report dated 10/12/1949, by Waqf inspector Mohammed Ibrahim, it
is clear that the official mutwalli of the Babri Masjid was
systematically the nambardar (revenue collector) of the village Sahanwa,
several miles away but still in the Faizabad district. This Shia
functionary was automatically deemed to be in charge of the Babri
Masjid, which otherwise did not have any manager of its own. But the
Babri Masjid job was only nominal, and the mosque was not taken care of.

The report also said that due to fear of the Hindus and Sikhs, nobody
offered namaz in the Babri Masjid, and that travellers who stayed there
for the night were abused and harassed by the Hindus from the near-by
establishments. We should see this state of affairs against the
background of the 1934 riots around the Babri Masjid, triggered by a
cowslaughter. These riots made many victims and the building was
seriously damaged. Several people were killed inside the mosque, which
desecrated it in Muslim eyes. According to justice Deoki Nandan, even
after the British had the building repaired, the Muslims did not
come/return to effectively use the mosque, for fear of the Hindus,
especially the martial monks of the three nearby Akharas (Nirmohi,
Nirvana and Digambar).

It is even disputed whether the Masjid was effectively used before 1934,
and even before 1855. Dr. Harsh Narain has summarized an 1858 document
by one Muhammad Asghar (demanding the removal of the Ram platform just
outside the Masjid) : **He has mentioned that the place of Janmasthan
has been lying unkempt/in disorder (parishan) for hundreds of years, and
that the Hindus performed worship there.**[²⁴](notes.htm#note24)

A second document that dr. Narain quotes, is a paragraph from a book by
local Urdu writer Mirza Rajab Ali Beg Surur : *"A great mosque was built
on the spot where Sita ki Rasoi is situated. During the reign of Babar,
the Hindus had no guts to be match for the Muslims... Aurangzeb built a
mosque on the Hanuman Garhi... The Bairagis effaced the \[Aurangzebi\]
mosque and erected a temple in its place. Then idols began to be
worshipped openly in the Babari mosque where the Sita ki Rasoi is
situated."* So the grip of the Muslims on the sacred places of central
Ayodhya was so weak that they couldn't even prevent the demolition of a
mosque. In that context, mr. Surur's observation on the Babri Masjid may
well indicate what it says, viz. that the Babri Masjid was abandoned by
the Muslims and even sometimes used by the Hindus (until it was
prevented, perhaps in 1855, or at any rate by the British from 1856
onwards).

The testimony by the Austrian Jesuit Joseph Tieffenthaler, who visited
Ayodhya in 1767, also seems to be saying that the Masjid had been
re-occupied by the Hindus.[²⁵](notes.htm#note25) What is more, neither
he nor, to my knowledge, any of the Muslim sources, mentions Muslim
worship in the Babri Masjid. These are indications for what many common
people in Ayodhya have told me : that the Babri Masjid has not been a
real mosque for most of its history. With such a prehistory, it also
becomes understandable that the local Muslim community in the 1930s and
1940s could have a mosque standing there and yet not use it. What kept
them away, just like (according to the above mentioned sources) in the
days of Nawabi rule, was the Hindu presence. The Hindus did not dare to
defy the British rulings concerning the place, but were nonetheless
strong enough to constitute a threat for Muslims who wanted to assert
too much of a presence.

As against the strong indications that the mosque was not really
functional, it is reported that there is one very authoritative witness
to the contrary still alive today : Maulvi Gaffar, described as "the
Imam of Ayodhya's erstwhile Jama Masjid... The last time he had led the
Friday prayers at the Babri Masjid was 41 years ago, on December 22,
1949. Then the idols appeared and the District Magistrate K.K. Nayar
asked him to suspend activities in the masjid for three to four weeks,
while an inquiry was made. The 90-year old Imam says he is still waiting
to resume his vocation."[²⁶](notes.htm#note26)

Of course, this testimony is presented in a very secularist paper, and I
have found out by now that secularist journalists have no scruples at
all about wrongly describing or misquoting their interviewees. Compared
to the testimony of Waqf and Court documents, that is still no reliable
counter-proof. In fact it is rather strange that the BMMCC in its reply
to the VHP presentation of documents, does not mention this testimony.
So far, to my knowledge, this testimony has not brought up by the
pro-Babri side in any context where hard (challengeable and verifiable)
proof is required.

Yet, judicially the Babri case may stand or fall with the proof that it
was a regular mosque up to 1949. After all, the Court Order of the Civil
Judge, Faizabad, of March 3, 1951, based its decision to guarantee the
Hindu plaintiff the right of worship in the building, partly on the
information that it had not been used as a mosque since at least 1936 :
*"It further appears from the copies of a number of affidavits of
certain Muslim residents of Ayodhya that at least from 1936 onwards the
Muslims have neither used the site as a mosque nor offered prayers
there... Nothing has been pointed to discredit these
affidavits..."*[²⁷](notes.htm#note27) If the man described as the
erstwhile Imam did not go to court at that time to contradict the
statements by his fellow Muslims, well, then I would doubt he really was
the Babri Masjid Imam. Until the judge's assumption is disproven, this
must count as the official version : on the strength of local Muslim
testimony, the Babri Masjid was not in regular use since at least 1936.
If any firm counter-proof had come up by now, I guess we would have seen
it : the pro-Babri faction has enough media at its disposal to present
the strong points in its case.

Nevertheless, to conclude the discussion of the status of the Babri
Masjid just before its conversion into a Ram Mandir, I cannot say that
either side's case is as yet 100% convincing. There have certainly been
individual Muslims offering namaz in the Babri Masjid in the forties,
but from the available evidence it seems that it was not a regular
mosque functioning as the real community centre of the local Muslims.

Apart from the factual question of the effective status of the disputed
building in 1949, a judicial settlement of the dispute would have to
base itself on technicalities like Waqf (and other trusts) property
jurisprudence and the division of the domain in three parts with
different ownership titles. I will not go into those
here.[²⁸](notes.htm#note28) Before the Court could go into those
technicalities, it had, however, to decide first whether the Sunni Waqf
Board's plaint was not time-barred. It was filed five days before twelve
years after the Hindu take-over. Now, for suits of declaration, a limit
of six years is prescribed, but for suits of possession, the limit is
twelve years. But it must be more complicated than that, because at the
time of writing, the matter has still not been decided. The decision had
been announced for October 31, 1990, but it was once more postponed.

Meanwhile, there are doubts about how independently the judiciary
apparatus can still function in the present circumstances. When justice
K.M. Pandey ordered the locks removed from the Mandir gate, on February
1, 1986, many secularists said that this was a Congress-sponsored quid
pro quo with the Hindus in return for the infamous Muslim Women's
Bill.[²⁹](notes.htm#note29) That is of course a very serious allegation
against the judge. What did happen, is that the Congress government
first asked the VHP to file a petition to get the locks removed. When
the VHP refused, the Congress moved one of its own people to file the
petition, which was granted by the judge. This did not require any
bribing or otherwise influencing of the judge : the argumentation of the
petition was such that a positive Court ruling was virtually assured.

Shortly before the Kar Seva, the same judge was refused a promotion by
the Union law minister at the insistence of U.P. chief minister Mulayam
Singh Yadav, against the advice of the senior judges, which is normally
followed. Mulayam, in the middle of his propaganda and military build-up
to prevent the Kar Seva programme, justified his veto on the ground that
justice Pandey is *a communalist*.

Lawyers and judges have protested against this interference. If a judge
can be punished by the executive power for the contents of his Court
rulings, then that is an intolerable breach of the separation of the
legislative, executive and judiciary powers, one of the cornerstones of
a modern democratic polity. The secularists, champions of modernity
against obscurantism, have in this case condoned this Ancien Regime
practice by their silence. They have not stood up to remind Mulayam
that, according to their own earlier opinion, justice K.M. Pandey had
only acted on government orders.

In January 1991, when Mulayam and the central government had become
critically dependent on Congress support, and Congress did its best to
placate the Hindu electorate as much as possible, justice K.M. Pandey
was given his promotion after all.[³⁰](notes.htm#note30)

The essence of the Muslim position in the judicial debate has been that
the de facto ownership since 1528 creates a title, no matter whether the
acquisition then was legitimate or not. However, this title by
accustomed possession only counts if the de facto possession went
unchallenged. If the victimized party continues to claim its stolen
property, even if the existing power equations don't permit restoring
it, then de facto possession does not create a valid title. And it is
well-attested that the Hindus kept on claiming the site as much as the
situation permitted. So, even if the matter is treated as purely a title
suit over some real estate, the Hindus do have a leg to stand on when
they claim the Ram Janmabhoomi site.

But of course, this dispute is not really an ordinary title suit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 4.2 Disputed competence of the judiciary

The more fundamental question in the debate on the juridical dimension
of the Ayodhya, is whether the issues involved can at all be adjudicated
by a law court charged with checking legality in terms of the laws of
the Indian Republic founded in 1947 and endowed with a Constitution in
1950. The VHP has rejected the authority of the Courts in this matter.
The Babri Masjid groups have opposed this stand and demanded that the
VHP abide by the Court verdict. But in October 1990, Imam Bukhari of the
BMAC has also declared that if the court ruling goes against the Muslim
demands, then he will not accept it, and an agitation against the
verdict will be launched.[³¹](notes.htm#note31)

Of course, the VHP have a point when they argue that their opponents are
in no position to lecture them about abiding by Court verdicts. First of
all, there are a number of articles in the Constitution which are not
being implemented, and of which the implementation is not even actively
demanded (often opposed) by the secularist parties and critics. Among
them:

1.  Article 15, prohibiting discrimination, which is effectively
    thwarted by the separate religion-based civil codes, and by the
    almost unbridled imposition of reservations in recruitment for
    government jobs; moreover, this Article is violated by Article 30,
    which gives to minorities the right to establish and administer
    educational institutions of their choice, but forgets to grant the
    majority the same right - unique in world history; it is also
    violated by Article 370, giving a special status to Kashmir and
    effectively giving a number of privileges to Kashmiris denied to
    other citizens.
2.  Article 44 mandates the establishment of a common civil code, which
    Muslim organizations refuse (they demand the scrapping of this
    Article), and which went out of reach for a long time when the
    Congress government gave in to the Muslim demand to overrule a
    Supreme Court verdict and enforce Shariat rulings on divorcee
    maintenance through legislation.
3.  Article 48 wants the state to enact prohibition of cowslaughter;
    Kerala, West Bengal and Nagaland have not passed any such act, and
    in several other states the act is openly violated ; India is in
    fact a beef-exporter.[³²](notes.htm#note32)

Coming to the issue of abiding by court verdicts, we find the record of
the parties other than the *Hindu communalists* has not been all that
impeccable. Some examples :

1.  Beru Bari was a district bordering on East Pakistan, awarded by
    Radcliffe to India. When Pakistan minister Liaqat Ali wanted it,
    Nehru obliged. The Supreme Court struck down the agreement, but
    Nehru made his captive parliament overrule the verdict, and ceded
    the territory.
2.  Similarly, the Supreme Court verdict in the well- known Shah Bano
    case was overruled by a law, in order to appease Muslim
    fundamentalist agitation.
3.  When Indira Gandhi was convicted for using unfair means in the
    elections, she organized demonstrations in which the mob clamoured
    for physical action against the judge, and she shouted: *"These are
    my people and my judges"*.
4.  V.P. Singh, champion of *value-based politics*, faced with the
    possibility of the Supreme Court striking down the implementation of
    the Mandal report, declared that he would have it implemented
    anyway.
5.  When some leftists demanded a ban on the Shilanyas ceremony in
    Ayodhya, and on the Ram Shila processions, the Supreme Court
    dismissed the demand, arguing that these activities are but an
    exercise of the freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, and that
    even the threat of riots does not nullify constitutional rights,
    since it is the duty of the governments to protect the exercise of
    constitutional freedoms against such threats of violence.
    Nevertheless, the secularist/Stalinist intelligentsia has been
    shouting scandal that the government did not ban the Shilanyas and
    the processions, and has been deflecting attention from the Supreme
    Court's upholding the constitutional rights which Hindus also have.
    In their comments afterwards, they have kept on attacking Rajiv
    Gandhi for not committing contempt of Court by taking the
    unconstitutional step of proclaiming a ban (the sweetest thing for a
    Stalinist mind) on the Shilanyas.
6.  A petition to ban mr. Advani's rathyatra from Somnath to Ayodhya was
    dismissed, since there was nothing illegal about it, Yet the
    secularists have kept on demanding the ban, and finally Laloo Prasad
    Yadav, chief minister of Bihar, has ignored the judicial decision
    and arrested mr. Advani.
7.  In spite of a High Court ruling upholding the pilgrims' right to
    have a Parikrama around Ayodhya, even in the heat of Kar Seva, the
    U.P. chief minister Mulayam Singh Yadav has effectively made it
    impossible. Moreover, he had the canopy over the Shilanyas spot
    removed against Court orders to preserve the status-
    quo.[³³](notes.htm#note33) A Human Rights Society team released a
    report on December 14 in Delhi, in which it contended that the U.P.
    government had violated the Allahabad High Court orders by
    effectively preventing the Parikrama. This constituted an
    encroachment on the Hindus' religious rights.[³⁴](notes.htm#note34)

So, if the VHP wants to disregard a judicial ruling on Ayodhya, it is in
more or less good company. But then there is still a difference. While
the above-mentioned secularists have disregarded or violated Court
orders without disputing the competence of the Court in the matter
concerned, the VHP disputes that any Court can have any authority in
this matter.

On December 18, when it seemed that the government was willing to let
the decision depend upon the archaeological evidence, which went in
favour of the Hindu claim, a Hindu religious leader still insisted that
no consideration except the Hindu belief should count Sri Sugunendra
Thirtha Swami of Puthige Math (Udupi) declared that *"archaeological
proof should not clinch the Ram temple issue"*.[³⁵](notes.htm#note35)
After all, suppose Babar had been more careful and removed every trace
of the temple he demol- ished: then the Hindus' position would remain
equally justified, yet the archaeological evidence would not be taken as
going in their favour. So, the Hindu belief alone should suffice as a
ground for leaving the place to the Hindus.

The demand to put this item of belief above the authority of the courts,
is in my opinion not so much a display of principled non-secularism, as
rather a display of mistrust in the Indian state. Hindus expect the
state not to respect Hindu beliefs and Hindu sacred places. They know
that, ever since Indira's favouring *committed judges*, the judiciary is
also not what it used to be. They expect that the state will consider
other things more sacred and important than the Hindu sacred places :
among them, the Muslim title to the site, acquired through force by the
invader Babar, and never annulled by the British colonizer.

However, formally the VHP's and the abovementioned Swami's stand is
non-secular. It does not want to submit a decision to the secular
authorities. Yet, a piece of land being A's rather than B's property is
a secular matter, isn't it?

Well, that is precisely the point. In the Hindu view, the piece of land
is sacred. It is the deity's property.[³⁶](notes.htm#note36) Decisions
concerning it are therefore decisions with a religious dimension. Now,
as secularism means a divorce of state and religion, the state should
not interfere with religious affairs. I am not sure this would be
convincing to a secularist, but it certainly has logic.

Some of the Babri Masjid advocates, notably Syed Shahabuddin, have said
that a Masjid is Allah's property, but that Allah doesn't want it, and
doesn't answer prayers offered in it, if it was built on disputed land.
Of course, Islamic Scripture has never had any objection to building
mosques on sites *disputed* by Kafirs ; but if mr. Shahabuddin wants to
play the *tolerant Islam* game, we should join him and compel him to be
consistent (instead of the tactical changes of position he and other
Babri advocates have been making). So, Allah doesn't want the Babri
Masjid, which has irrefutably been built on a site stolen from the
Hindus. With Allah's help, this non-secular approach to the dispute
yields an unambiguous solution and relieves the secular judges of an
unpleasant case.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
