+++
title = "08 7.1  Reporting on Kar Seva"

+++
# 7. Press reporting on Ayodhya

## 7.1 Reporting on Kar Seva

On October 30,1990 thousands of Kar Sevaks moved to the disputed place
in Ayodhya. They had somehow sneaked through the impediments which chief
minister Mulayam and his security forces had put in their way. In fact,
the saga of how the people did it, is the stuff movies are made of.
Hiding in jungles, swimming across the river at night, being caught and
then escaping from prison to move on to Ayodhya (as firebrand BJP MP Uma
Bharati did, making herself unrecognizable), it must have been quite an
adventure for the people who did it.

However, this adventurous aspect of the Ayodhya development has not been
given much attention in the press. In fact, what was lacking rather
systematically from the reports, was an attempt to see the events from
the Kar Sevaks' side.[⁶⁹](notes.htm#note69) In some places, attention
was given to the political assessment of the events from the BJP and VHP
leadership's viewpoint. But mostly, Indian journalists identified with
the governmental or the law- and-order viewpoint.

On the evening of Kar Seva day, Doordarshan gave a totally streamlined
news bulletin. It said nothing of the storming of the building, nor of
the climbing of the domes or the planting of the flags, nor of the
damage done to the surrounding wall, nor of the way the police had
managed to drive the people back. It declared that no Kar Seva had taken
place, that the police had full control, that they had to control a
*violent mob*, that this violent mob had *tried* to climb the domes and
had *tried* to plant flags on top of them. And it showed a heretic film
shot of the Babri Masjid still standing there, unharmed. Then, an
extremely boring queue of political leaders came to declare that
communal harmony must be maintained at all costs. From a statement by a
BJP spokesman, the part on communal harmony was shown but not the actual
BJP view on the Ayodhya problem. Finally, a lot of attention was given
to *human chains* for communal amity in Delhi and Kerala.

One sweet is delicious, but a bagful of them is just nauseating. Fifteen
minutes of this *communal harmony* mantra was just insupportable,
atleast in a news bulletin. In no free democratic country is the news
ever so blacked out by streamlined propaganda. Although the message
drilled into the viewers' heads was a rather harmless one, the news
programme was formally a purely Stalinist show. This replacement of news
by government advice to maintain communal harmony was of course for the
viewers' own good.[⁷⁰](notes.htm#note70)

Now the scandal is that some newspapers, which normally champion the
right to information, actually supported this round of censorship. In a
column titled Responsible Censorship, Rajdeep Sardesai called the
Doordarshan version, including the statement by V.P. Singh,*"blatant
untruth"*.[⁷¹](notes.htm#note71) What a stern condemnation, you think.
But then he continues and starts justifying this lie for the people's
own good, *"to shield viewers from the increasing potency of Hindu
nationalism"*. Those people who had *"expected \[Doordarshan\] to
telecast Kar Sevaks climbing the walls of the Babri Masjid"* and who
*"expect Doordarshan to be just a dispassionate observer of events"*,
have understood nothing of despotic secularism. *"They insist that the
viewer's right to know should not be interfered with in any way. Such a
line of thought is a victim of some diffused libertarian doctrine where
the right to know survives only in unvarnished, absolutist form.
However, transporting and adapting such western concepts to the Indian
scenario is unrealistic..."*

This twisting of concepts to justify despotism, concludes by claiming
that censorship was necessary to *"prevent our right to information from
spreading mayhem in the country"*, because *"on an emotive temple-masjid
issue that threatens to polarize the nation the electronic medium cannot
allow the people to live through symbols and inflammatory images"*. So
this censorship has prevented riots ? One wouldn't say so, judging from
mr. Sardesai's own remark:*"That the possibility of communal violence
erupting was great has been proved by subsequent events."* Without
accepting his implied assumption that the subsequent riots engineered by
Muslim communalists in Aligarh, Hyderabad and other places were
consequences of the Kar Seva, I do notice that mr. Sardesai's
*"subsequent events"* have not merely proved *"the possibility of
communal violence"*. They have proved that this communal violence was
going to take place even after Doordarshan censorship. Everybody knows
that Doordarshan is telling *"blatant untruth"*, so rumors become the
chief source of information, and they are usually a lot more
*"inflammatory"* than a reliable and accurate news bulletin would have
been.[⁷²](notes.htm#note72)

On the newspaper front, there have been some more startling events. When
seven local U.P. dailies published realistic estimates of the death toll
on November 2, instead of Mulayam's *"sixteen"*, all issues were rounded
up from the bookstalls, and a number of scribes and editors were
arrested. Moreover, during the Kar Seva week, journalists in U.P. were
continually harassed and prevented from doing their job. The Press
Council, the Delhi Journalists' Association, the Himachal Pradesh
Working Journalists' Union, and many other journalists=92 organizations'
Union, and many other journalists' organizations, have strongly
protested against this attack on the press. On the other hand, some
organizations and ad hoc platforms have condemned the U.P.papers for
giving *"highly exaggerated figures"* and otherwise *"inflammatory"*
reporting. In other works, they repeated the U.P. government
justification for its anti- press measures.

Another startling fact is that the English-language papers refused to
come up with the correct figures of the Kar Sevaks killed in police
firing. In the afternoon of November 2, I was visiting someone who has
connections with a well-known daily. He called the office and was told
by one staff reporter that the death toll was already 125. Now, if a
reporter of a secularist paper says 125 got killed, no one is going to
make me believe that the number is less than 125. Yet, the following
day, the headlines of the same paper put the death toll at 17.

I have inquired about the massacre among many people in Ayodhya. Common
local people, including eyewitnesses, said invariably that thousands had
been killed : two thousand, five thousand. I guess that even
eyewitnesses were not in a position to count very accurately. However,
the different accounts given to me by hospital personnel, policemen,
Hindu activists, converge to a death toll of about 400. The official
death toll of 45 for the different days of shooting together is quite
untenable, considering that the VHP cremated 76 bodies, of which the
ashes were taken in procession through India, while some bodies had been
taken in procession through India, while some bodies had been taken for
cremation by the families, and many more had been collected and taken
away by the security forces (three trucks full, according to VHP
sources). The figure of 168 which the BJP gave the day after, gives the
correct order of magnitude, but probably on the low side.

So, if some papers stick to figures below 20, they are just telling
lies. Some of them have been so adamant in their misinformation campaign
that they refused to mention any other figure even when quoting from
speeches by BJP or VHP people, replacing"500 were killed" with " a
number were killed". Yet, it seems no one has had the courage to file a
plaint with the Press Council against this blatant misinformation. On
the contrary: two months after the massacre, the Press Council has
condemned the dailies that gave three-digit figures (even if as low as
120).

Mani Shankar Aiyar has tried to ridicule Uma Bharati's concern for the
Ram bhaktas killed in Ayodhya, arguing that the *"real issue"* is: what
were they doing there is the first place?[⁷³](notes.htm#note73) After
all, they wanted to break the law and demolish the "mosque", didn't
they? And if you want to demolish a mosque, you deserve to be killed,
don't you ? Several press people I talked to, defended the shooting with
the same argument: after all, the structure had to be saved *"at all
costs"*.

The point is not merely that these people overlook the fact that
normally the Kar Sevaks could have been driven away with far less
killing, and the other fact that the VHP had declared it had no
intention of demolishing the structure. The point is that they are
deadly serious when they declare that hundreds (or for them, at least,
some twenty) of human lives are worth less than *secularism*, here
embodied in the brick structure. This means that they contend that
bricks can be the embodiment of some mental projection, some god (in
this case : Secularism, the Merciful), which is the very principle of
idolatry : a material object becomes the archanavatar (*worship-
incarnation*) of a spiritual reality. But their idolatry is of the
barbaric type: this embodied principle of theirs sometimes requires
human sacrifice. The JNU historians had once scornfully written that the
Hindu view is better expressed by the openness of the Upanishads than by
*"worshipping bricks"*.[⁷⁴](notes.htm#note74) But who is worshipping
bricks now ? Who is bringing human sacrifices now to an idol of brick ?

If you keep this dispute in its proper historical perspective, the
ruthless anti-Hindu and pro-slaughter stand of the secularist press
becomes only logical. They defend killing not just for the sake of a
piece of property protected by the law of the land: when the police is
*communalized* and *guilty of atrocities*. Here, they defend killing of
unarmed people suspected (against the VHP's own assurance) of intending
to *"demol- ish"* a masterpiece of the Muslim campaign to exterminate
Hinduism. I must grant them consistency : it is indeed logical that mass
killing is resorted to in order to honor and protect this brick idol of
anti-Hindu fervour, built for the god of Jihad by a mass-murderer.

To be sure, there are press people who honestly and in good faith
disbelieve the established historical fact that the Masjid had forcibly
replaced a Mandir. They don't realize that the Masjid is a product of
the most cruel and violent communalism. They really believe it is an
innocent mosque stolen and singled out for demolition by Hindu fanatics,
and that it must be defended as the nation's last stronghold against a
Khomeini-like religious dictatorship. A meta-press is needed to inform
these misguided press people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 7.2. Foreign press reporting

The foreign press has not added any extra facts or perspective to the
reporting on Ayodhya. It has mostly copied the bias of the Indian press.
Time Magazine gave a not too unbalanced report, but quoted two of the
JNU historians without telling its readers that these are not neutral
academics but highly involved parties in the controversy. Newsweek had
done the same at the time of the Shilanyas. Then, it had quoted Romila
Thapar as saying that *"the BJP may be more interested in cow protection
than in people protection"*, without anyhow putting this heavy
allegation in perspective or hearing the BJP's own stand.

This time, Newsweek gave an unbelievably biased report. It simply did
not mention the shot-out against unarmed Kar Sevaks on November 2,
following the Indian secularists' line that you should grant the Hindus
nothing, not even their martyrs. But it did mention a selected part of
the Gonda carnage, a colorful description of the murder of Muslims in
Kanje Mau (Gonda), concealing the fact that this carnage had started
with an attack on a Hindu procession.

This reporting on a riot without telling how it erupted, is like
starting the history of World War II with the Allied *aggression* in
Normandy or the bombing of Dresden. Of course the bombings of Dresden
and Hiroshima were unjustifiable war crimes, but they are judged less
harshly because they were part of a war effort which had been forced on
the Allies by the Axis powers. Normally, any report on a conflict, no
matter how summary, relates how it began, and who started it. If this is
not done and one act of violence is presented in isolation, then that is
a case of wilful distortion.

About the dispute itself, the foreign press has not re- layed the Hindu
viewpoint at all. Most papers and weeklies have at no point informed
their readers that the disputed place is functionally not a mosque but a
flourishing Ram temple. It has continually given the impression that the
Hindus want to take a mosque (often mistakenly called a Muslim *"sacred
place"*) from the Muslims, the way Jewish fundamentalists have wanted to
take the mosques on the Temple Mount from the Muslims. In fact, it is
the BMAC and BMMCC who want to snatch a sacred place from the Hindus,
but hardly any foreign reader has been informed of this. On the whole,
the foreign press has taken exactly the same attitude (distortions and
concealment and all) as the secularist press in India. I have never seen
before that all the papers for weeks on end reported something that was
so diametrically the opposite of what was really happening.

This is at first sight very strange. The Western readership has no love
lost for Islam. It is not only that Muslim terrorists have killed quite
a few Westerners, or that they have persecuted and put to flight many of
the remaining Christians in the Muslim world, or that they continue to
threaten Israel (with which most Westerners keep sympathizing). The
distrust is deeper. Compare the uneasy reaction of Europeans when they
see a woman in burqa on their streets, with their pleasant surprise when
they see a woman in sari: that tells the story in a nutshell. The
Westerners' natural sympathy would be with the Hindu rather than with
the Muslim side. Yet, almost all the Western papers have chosen to
blacken Hinduism almost as thoroughly as the secularist Indian press has
done.

The first reason is that the Western correspondents in Delhi just don't
know very much, and also don't feel the need to find out more. Their
work is not considered important by their editors, because India is
still perceived as a backward and economically unimportant country.
Western correspondents in Delhi are very lazy. I have been to some press
conferences concerning this Ayodhya affair (which involves principles,
has generated an unprecedented mass movement, and has toppled a
government),and not met any foreign press persons there. In Ayodhya and
in the offices of those very people that could give authentic background
information, again I did not see any foreign correspondents. I don't
know what they tell their employers, but I can testify first-hand that
they are not doing any journalistic work here, except for copying the
Indian English-language papers.

The second reason is that they very uncritically swallow that version of
the facts which happens to reach them. Since they hang out a lot with
the westernized clique that controls the media, education and the
government, they don't know better than that those people's viewpoint is
authoritative.

Here, one cannot fail to notice the utter failure of the Hindu movement
to present its case. They could have sent a bundle of copies of relevant
articles to the foreign press corps, as well as some relevant books,
like *Hindu Temples : What Happened to Them* by **Arun Shourie** and
others. The VHP leaders have not even thought of the importance of
publicizing their case. Rather, with their Janmabhoomi campaign they
have unintentionally managed to blacken Hinduism in the face of the
world. They have not cared to check whether they were getting their
message across. Their movement has behaved like a dinosaur with a lot of
muscle but little brain.[⁷⁵](notes.htm#note75)

The third reason why Western correspondents have sided with the
Nehruvian Babri Masjid advocates, is that they still entertain the
colonial attitude that those backward Hindus have to learn the European
civilized ways that Nehru so far-sightedly tried to transmit to them. In
the wake of the Leftist-inspired wave of political anti- colonialism of
the last decades, a cultural anti- colonialism has come up, a sympathy
for other cultures (which was new : Leftist anti-colonialism, following
the arch-colonialist Karl Marx, meant protest against the too slow
westernization of the Third World). But that only concerns those
cultures which have been beaten to near-death (in the New World), or
those of which we are economically or physically afraid (Japan, Islam).
When the last remnant of a Native American tribe wins a court case to
reclaim ancestral burial ground, everybody sympathizes. But when a
culture really and substantially asserts itself, not in terrorist
attacks or export surplus, but in its intrinsic otherness, then the old
colonial bias turns out to stand unshaken.

This anti-native and pro-westernizing bias is quite systematically
present in India reporting. It generally takes the from of gross
misrepresentation of Indian culture. For example, time and again those
correspondents write to the homefront that there are *still* many dowry
deaths. Now everybody knows that dowry deaths typically occur in the
westernized circles (the dowries concerned are seldom the traditional
jewels, but mostly video- machines etc.): they are not a traditional
phenomenon that *still* exists, but are a typical case of the perverting
and poisoning of a native custom by the invasion of Western
consumerism.[⁷⁶](notes.htm#note76)

I will refrain from giving some names of Western correspondents who
after years in Delhi didn't know the first word of Hindi or any other
native tongue, and consequently limited their background information
gathering to some talks with the anglicized elite, not realizing that
the latter has been cultivating an utter ignorance about Indian culture
for decades. But I do want to point out that the result is a very
derogatory style of reporting, reflecting not only journalist's
prejudices, but also the anglicized elite's utter contempt for their
indigenous culture.

Meanwhile in the Western news studios, indologists have been invited to
comment on the communalism issue. But those people are steeped in art
history (like publishing books about Hindu temple architecture without
even mentioning that most samples are only indirectly known since the
Muslim rulers destroyed them) and similar ancient stuff, and they too
have the Times of India as their only source for contemporary news.
Moreover, with all their orientation towards *culture*, they positively
dislike Hinduism, or an innocent Gandhian kind of Hinduism, and they
readily buy the secularist story that an assertive Hinduism is not the
*"real Hinduism"*.

Finally, there is one more kind of India-watcher or India-fan in the
West, with a typical and remarkable attitude to the Ayodhya affair: the
*"seekers"*. Some people staying in India for spiritual things, and who
were told that I was writing about this Ayodhya affair, immediately came
out with their superior scorn for such unspiritual quarrels : *"What are
those Kar Sevaks going to Ayodhya for? To lay the second brick?"*

What these people should realize, is that the society which has allowed
ashrams to flourish, has only survived because it also had a martial
component. Why are they not going to Afghanistan for yoga? because
Hinduism in Afghanistan got militarily defeated and annihilated .
Because Islam, which in their own woolly world-view is just as true as
any other religion, has weeded out the kind of Pagan practices that they
come to India for. If there is a part of the world left where the gurus
can continue their traditional, it is because Hindus have fought. It is
a non-violent part of the same martial tradition, that today Hindus are
asserting themselves in Ayodhya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
