+++
title = "09 8.1 Caught in the act of distorting history"

+++
# 8. The misuse of history

## 8.1 Caught in the act of distorting history

The Ram Janmabhoomi/Babri Masjid issue has highlighted several more
fundamental problems which will have to be dealt with decisively.
Perhaps the most important one is the intellectual dishonesty which
dominates India's official ideology and its arena of public debate. One
area where this dishonesty has been having a free ride during the last
several decades, is history-writing. A case in point is the JNU
historians' statement on Ayodhya, published in November 1989: *The
Political Abuse of History.*

In a reply[⁷⁷](notes.htm#note77) to the JNU professor' statement, Prof.
A.R.Khan has exposed a number of attempts at distortion and deceit in
their statement. I may cite the simplest and clearest case: they try to
pass off the fact that Babar's diary doesn't mention the Ayodhya temple
demolition as proof that it never took place. While this reasoning
correctly presupposes that mentioning temple destruction would be
perfectly coherent with Babar's enthusiasm for pious acts of Kafir
persecution, it disregards the fact that the pages reporting on the
relevant months have been lost. This fact of the missing pages is
well-known to anyone familiar with the subject. But instead of admitting
that Babar's own testimony is lost, they pretend that his absent
testimony warrants some conclusions.

In their re-reply[⁷⁸](notes.htm#note78) to Prof.Khans critique, they had
on choice but to admit that Babar's testimony is just not available.
Nevertheless, in a newspaper column one of them, Harbans Mukhia, has
re-employed the discredited argument once more.[⁷⁹](notes.htm#note79)
The secularist Muslim writer Asghar Ali Engineer has also used
it[⁸⁰](notes.htm#note80), but I will give him the benefit of the doubt:
he may have naively trusted the authority of his *"eminent JNU
historians."*

Another attempt at distortion, in the context of Muslim rulers'
patronage for Hindu instutions is pointed out by Prof.Khan as
follows:*"It may be noted that in the first two evidences the authors
have deliberately concealed the fact that both the diwans \[ prime
ministers\] were Hindus. \[By contrast\], while mentioning about the
gifts by the officials of the Nawabi court to Hindu priests (in their
third evidence), they have not forgotten to state that the officials
were Muslims. This not only amounts to concealment of evidence but also
distortion of evidence."*[⁸¹](notes.htm#note81) I would concede that
this selective highlighting of useful elements in the context of a
polemic is not all that outrageous if it occurs once. But in the case of
the JNU historians, it forms part of an over-all pattern of wilful
misrepresentation of the facts.

A.A. Engineer's book on the Ram Janmabhoomi affair, Babri Masjid Ram
Janmabhoomi Controversy, is merely a collection of newspaper columns on
the subject, or rather a selection, for the above mentioned pertinent
critiques by dr. Harsh Narain, A.K. Chatterjee and Prof. A.R. Khan
(historians equal in rank to the JNU statement signatories), as well as
the relevant articles by Arun Shourie, Ram Swarup, Sita Ram Goel and Jay
Dubashi, have been carefully omitted, eventhough they had been published
well in time for inclusion in mr. Engineer's anthology. The only two
pro-Hindu articles which he has designed to include, both published in
the RSS paper Organizer, were selected for their containing a few weak
arguments and poor comparisons, which he then takes on in his
introduction. Where of course he does not offer any criticism to the JNU
historians' statement nor to any other article included in his volume.
As a presentation of the debate, mr. Engineer's book is on a par with
the JNU professors' presentation of the historical facts : *it is a
distortion*.[⁸²](notes.htm#note82)

The secularists just go on upholding the statement of their JNU friends
as the definitive scientific judgment on the matter. Two weeks after
Harsh Narain's article had been published and had disproven the
*Janmabhoomi myth* concoction thesis, the Illustrated Weekly decided to
publish the already well-publicized JNU statement once more. Even after
A.R. Khan's reply had exploded the objective and scientific pretence of
the JNU historians, the whole secularist crowd kept on quoting the
*eminent historians*. More than half a year later, the leftist paper
Mainstream still quotes them as *"several eminent historians whose
professional honesty nobody questions."*[⁸³](notes.htm#note83) Well, I
for one do question their professional honesty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 8.2 Some recent myths

When Romila Thapar tries to make gullible readers believe that Mahmud
Ghaznavi only desecrated temples for their wealth[⁸⁴](notes.htm#note84),
she must know (assuming, as all her quoters do, that she is competent
historian) that Mahmud is revered by the Muslims as a devout Muslim,
that he calligraphed Quran text *"for the benefit of his soul"*, and
that he actually refused a huge ransom which Hindus were ready to pay if
he agreed to give back an idol, instead of breaking it. Mahmud preferred
breaking idols to selling them, even if that meant foregoing wealth. So
her theory of Mahmud's economical rather than religious motives is at
best an unscientific imposition of Marxist dogma upon the facts of
Indian history, otherwise a deliberate lie.

She is of course in the good company of Jawaharlal Nehru, who declared
that *"as a matter of fact, Mahmud was hardly a religious man. He was a
Mohammedan, of course, but that was just by the
way"*.[⁸⁵](notes.htm#note85) And he in turn only followed the lead given
by Mohammed Habib and the Aligarh school of historians, who tried to
whitewash Islam by blaming external and personal factors for the crimes
to which Islam had prompted its champions.

In the case of their purely concocted grand theory of pre-Muslim
persecution of Buddhism by Hindus, we see our leftist historians throw
all standards of source criticism to the wind. Such is their eagerness
to uphold this convenient hypothesis, and their care not to endanger
what little supportive testimony there is. After all, from the millennia
of pre-Muslim religious pluralism in India, there are not even five
testimonies of such persecution, so these few should be scrupulously
kept away from criticism.

Therefore, the fact that the very first *testimony* of Pushyamitra
Shunga's alleged persecution of the Buddhists dates from three centuries
after the facts, is not treated as a ground for some caution with this
*evidence*. Nor is any alternative interpretation of his alleged
behaviour (e.g. that his anger was not directed against Buddhism but
against the corruption that was overtaking the monasteries) being
explored, the way all kinds of mitigating explanations are invented for
the Islamic crimes. The allegation is simply repeated, and amplified, in
all secularist history-books.

Hsuen Tsang's contention, from hearsay, that the Shaiva king Shashank
had persecuted Buddhists and felled the Bodhi tree, also goes
unquestioned. Yet, his story is just visibly untrustworthy : he claims
that a replanted sapling of the Bodhi tree (which, from his story, must
have been felled only a few years before his own arrival) miraculously
grew overnight into a mature tree. Remember that secularist historians
reject myths and irrational beliefs? What Hsuen Tsang got to see with
his own eyes was a tree far bigger than a recently replanted sapling
could have been: an indication that the tree had never been felled in
the first place. Yet, so many secularist history books go on declaring
that *"fanatical Shashank felled the Bodhi tree"*, in defiance of proper
historical criticism.[⁸⁶](notes.htm#note86)

When it comes to dealing with the history of persecution and temple
destruction by the Muslims, secularist historians throw all regard for
hard evidence to the wind and replace it with a purely deductive (which
is typically medieval) approach : Islam is tolerant, therefore the
destruction and persecution cannot have taken place.

Thus, Sushil Srivastava writes :*"It has been contended by the British
observers that the desecration of the Hindu temple at Ayodhya was
undertaken to extend Islam in India. This contention clearly indicates
that the destroyers of the temples were religious fanatics well versed
in the dictates of their religion."*[⁸⁷](notes.htm#note87) The
contention is well-founded: many Muslim conquerors, including Teimur and
Babar, quoted from the Quran in their announcements and descriptions of
their jihads. Many Muslim rulers were encouraged into jihad by court
clerics whose knowledge of the Quran is above suspicion.

But mr. Srivastava knows it all better: *"However, the Quran clearly
states that prayers offered at a contentious place will not be accepted.
A mosque constructed on the site of a temple would definitely be a
contentious place. Thus, the whole purpose of constructing a masjid on
the site of a mandir would be self-defeating... In this context, I would
like to advance my view that it is highly unlikely that even the
contentious mosques in Varanasi and Mathura are located on the exact
sites of temples. Near the location of a destroyed temple, possible ; on
the same spot, not likely."*

Mr. Srivastava's hair-splitting about whether a mosque is built on top
of or just next to a destroyed temple, is quite beside the point.
Especially for the people who see their temple destroyed, it doesn't
make the slightest difference. Moreover, his totally undocumented theory
is purely deductively based on a book he clearly doesn't know at all:
the Quran.

Whatever ban on building mosques in contentious places there is in the
Quran (i.e. none) or at least in the Hadis, exclusively concerns
conflict within the Muslim community, or with a community with which it
has a treaty (like the Jews in the first Medina years). The Quran in no
way forbids the taking or destroying of Pagan temples. To put all doubts
concerning the absolute non-respect for Pagan places of worship to rest,
it will suffice to point out that the Kaaba itself is a *"contentious"*
place of worship, taken from the Arab polytheists who strongly resented
this, and Islamized by breaking all the 360 sacred idols in it.

Mr. Srivastava's purely deductive (also called dogmatic) position leads
him to disregard well-known hard evidence. The contentious Gyanvapi
mosque (as well as many others) visibly stands on the place of a Hindu
temple : the latter's walls are partly still standing and form part of
the mosque's wall. But our secularist historian unstoppably goes on
deducing : *"Could a devout Muslim like Babar, knowledgeable of the
tenets of the Quran, have allowed such a faux pas as the construction of
a mosque bearing his name at the spot where an important temple had
existed ?"* For secularist true believers, such rhetorical questions
clinch the issue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 8.3 Disregarding the evidence

A fresh case of utter disregard for hard evidence is the central
argument of the reply[⁸⁸](notes.htm#note88) by the inescapable JNU
historians to dr. S.P. Gupta's archaeological
arguments[⁸⁹](notes.htm#note89) for the pre-existence of a temple at the
Babri Masjid spot. Dr. Gupta had written that the pillar-bases and the
glazen ware can be accurately dated; and of course, with the available
archaeological high-tech, as well as with the knowledge of art history,
they can. But the JNU historians simply disregard the dating and declare
that the fact that the pillar-bases were found in the upper layer,
*"would certainly not make them as early as the eleventh century since
the uppermost levels would be comparatively recent"*. Well, compared to
the Valmiki or the Ram era, from which nothing was found during these
excavations, unless Ram is put later than the eighth century BC (a fact
noted with satisfaction by the JNU historians in their well-known
statement), the eleventh century is rather recent. It depends on very
local factors whether old objects can be found just below the surface
rather than deep down ; the sheer depth at which an object is found, is
not a dating method. They themselves do not come up with an alternative
scientific dating method, even while dismissing dr. Gupta's results.

As for the pottery, of which dr. Gupta says that it *"can be firmly
dated : some belong to the thirteenth, some the fourteenth and some the
fifteenth century"*, they have no comment on his dating methods, but
assert : *"This style of pottery first comes into use in Persia and
therefore cannot date to an earlier period in India"*. Actually, the JNU
historians just haven't done their homework on this count. What only
appeared in Iran in the fifteenth century, was a specific type of glazen
war, china, but less refined kinds of glazen ware had been around since
the eleventh century.

The JNU historians even assert : *"Thus the evidence of the pottery
would point to the bases being constructed not earlier than the
fifteenth century and possibly even a later period."* That later period
would then be when the Babri Masjid was already standing there, but in
JNU historiography there is nothing against the co-existence of temple
and mosque right on the same spatial location. Anyway, they go as far as
deducing the age of the building from the age of the pottery. That means
that if you have a computer in your house, this proves that your house
cannot possibly be older than the manufacture of the computer. And all
this funny JNU argumentation is based on the non-motivated disregard for
the scientific dating of the pillar-bases to the eleventh century and
the pottery sharves to the thirteenth to fifteenth century. Either they
should have accepted those datings, or they should have shown the method
by which they were obtained, to be unsound.

In a lecture[⁹⁰](notes.htm#note90) just after the publication of the JNU
historians' reply, dr. Gupta has explained : *"Several of the
temple-pillars existing in the mosque and pillar- bases unearthed in the
excavations conducted in the south of the mosque (although in the
adjoining plot of land) show the same directional alignment. This will
convince any student of architecture that two sets of material remains
belong to one and the same complex. Secondly, the archaeological history
of Islamic glazed ware in India goes back to the eleventh century, not
the fifteenth ; in the fifteenth only a particular type of glazed ware
was brought to India. Here at Ayodhya one kind of Islamic glazed ware
was even a local imitation of the thirteenth century. Therefore, when we
observe that here we recovered Islamic glazed ware of different periods,
from the thirteenth to the fifteenth century, from below the floor level
of the mosque, we are telling the truth of archaeological discoveries."*

One point of progress was that in this round of the debate (December
1990), the JNU historians already had to admit that there had been a
building there. And that is new. In their well-known statement they had
declared : *"So far, no historical evidence has been unearthed to
support the claim that the Babri mosque has been constructed on the land
that had been earlier occupied by a temple."* Now, the interesting thing
is that the archaeological findings on which dr. S.P. Gupta has reported
in the article to which the JNU historians have replied, date from years
before their original statement. What is more, one of the main sources
for their statement was Prof. B.B. Lal's report on the same findings, in
which it is, clearly though briefly, stated that remains of a pre-Masjid
building had been found.[⁹¹](notes.htm#note91) When they said there was
no archaeological evidence, they were bravely lying.

The noted indologist Iravatham Mahadevan, also editor of Dinamani, in a
lecture in Madras on 4/12/90, has drawn attention to the fact that while
the JNU pamphlet starts off by citing Prof. Lal's conclusions on the
ancient settlement issue, though without mentioning him by name, it is
surprisingly silent on his other major finding -- that a temple (or at
least some building) had existed at the Masjid site. Mr. Mahadevan
squarely held the JNU historians guilty of what they try to lay at the
door of others : *"political abuse of history"*. [⁹²](notes.htm#note92)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 8.4 Historians arguing ad hominem

The JNU historians in their reply try to escape by stating that it is
B.B. Lal who changed his version of the findings. They quote his report
: *"...the site was again occupied around the eleventh century A.D.
Several later medieval brick-and-kankar lime floors have been met with,
but the entire late period was devoid of any special interest."* And
they comment : *"These earlier statements contradict his present claim
to having found the pillar-bases of what may have been a temple at the
site, a claim recently made by him in the RSS magazine Manthan (October
1990)"*. These earlier statements rather prove that there was a building
on the spot. Even this earlier report in no way excludes that this
building *"may have been a temple"*, especially considering its
location. And in the Manthan article, B.B. Lal does not claim anything
new, and does not positively state that it must have been a temple :
this cannot be proven from the pillar-bases, only from other types of
evidence, such as the use of the black pillars in the Babri Masjid. B.B.
Lal has not changed his stand at all. The evidence that a building was
replaced by the Babri Masjid was there in his earlier report, on the
basis of which the JNU historians had claimed the non-availability of
any archaeological indication of a pre-existent temple.

The JNU historians stoop so low as to insinuate that Prof. Lal is
distorting evidence to suit certain political compulsions : *"Could it
be that the requirements of VHP politics have occasioned this new claim
?"* And also : *"One wonders why, if there was any such evidence, B.B.
Lal is only revealing it now. Could it be that because of the politics
of the Janmabhoomi, it is being claimed as fresh evidence ?"* And that
from historians who themselves have distorted evidence in order to
satisfy certain political compulsions : apparently a case of what
psychologists call projection.

Dr. Mahadevan's remarks on the Ayodhya affair and against the JNU
historians, have received support from another archaeologist, Muhammed
K.K., deputy superintending archaeologist of the ASI Madras circle. He
writes : *"...Mr. Mahadevan's comments were really an objective analysis
of the archaeological data. I can reiterate this with greater authority,
for I was the only Muslim who had participated in the Ayodhya excavation
in 1976-77 under professor Lal...I was at the Hanuman Garhi site, but I
have visited the excavation near the Babri Masjid and seen the excavated
pillar bases. The JNU historians have highlighted only one part of our
findings while suppressing the other."* He adds that destroying mosques
to right historical wrongs is wrong, but :*"Ayodhya is as holy to Hindus
as Mecca is to Muslims. Muslims should respect the sentiments of their
millions of Hindu brethren and voluntarily hand over the structure for
constructing the Rama temple."*[⁹³](notes.htm#note93)

Another top archaeologist who has come out against the JNU historians'
high-handed intervention in the archaeological debate, is Prof. K.V.
Raman, head of the Madras University Archaeology Department. Noticing
that the most vocal ones among the JNU historians are not archaeologists
or even specialists in medieval history, Prof. Raman reiterates that the
report published earlier was not the complete report and focused mainly
on the period presumed to be that of the Ramayana. So the question is
merely whether Prof. Lal has recorded his recently divulged findings in
the so far unpublished report : *"When Lal says he has indeed done so, I
see no reason why anyone should doubt him on that
score."*[⁹⁴](notes.htm#note94)

The JNU historians also try to raise suspicions against Dr. Gupta : *"In
his excavation reports, B.B. Lal mentions those who excavated along with
him, and curiously, despite his insisting that he was part of the team,
the name of Dr. S.P. Gupta is conspicuously absent."* Well, what an
allegation. Do the JNU historians really think that dr. Gupta would risk
his academic reputation by making a false claim of having participated
in this research ? They themselves of course can get away with blatant
lies, because they are shielded by a politically motivated press against
any criticism that would threaten their *eminence*. But real scientists
do not count on such exemptions. The fact of the matter is that Dr.
Gupta was involved in the research as an *observer*, and that in his
article against which the JNU historians sent their reply, he has merely
claimed that he *"was for some time connected with the research work
done at the site"*, which is impeccably truthful.

In his lecture, Dr. Gupta has replied to the JNU insinuations : *"In
1975-76 our primary aim was to find out the antiquity of the site, and
not the temple. Hence the brief reports did not mention it. It is common
knowledge that when we excavate, we record everything we find and all of
them appear in the final report. That is why we are extremely sorry to
see the oblique attack on us as if we are 'planting' evidence now which
never existed before. But then finally, does it really speak highly of
my friends to tell people that I was not present in the excavations ?
Ask the director of excavations, he will say that since I belonged not
to the Archaeological Survey of India staff but to the National Museum,
I could not be designated as a regular member of the team, I had the
status of an 'observer'. But then what ?"* The unacademic attitude of
these JNU historians, who are stronger in character
assassination[⁹⁵](notes.htm#note95) than in historical method should
make it clear to their critics that there is no reason to feel inhibited
when it comes to exposing them. They really deserve to be shown up in
public as the impostors they are.

For the rest, the JNU historians' latest attempt to wriggle out from
under the inconvenient evidence, is just pitiable. For instance, they
state that the presence of the pillar-bases just next to the mosque is
no proof that there are more of them underneath (why not demand
excavations underneath to settle that uncertainty ?). Their suggestion
is, in effect, that there stood a small building with only a very few
pillars there (on an elevated spot overlooking the temple city), just
next to an empty spot where later the Masjid was built. Apart from being
one more ad hoc theoretical construction incoherent with all we know,
this is another case of hair-splitting about the exact location, which
disregards the central point (that remains unaffected by their
hypothesis) that a pre-existent building was demolished and that it has
made room for the Babri Masjid.

Moreover, if the pillared building was only standing next to the Masjid
site, why wasn't it left standing ? The entire JNU argument is a
patchwork of such untenable ad hoc constructions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 8.5 Broadcasting distortions

For all its untenability, the secularist version of history does manage
to get amplified continually in the press. The historical debate in
Indian Express in the first week of December 1990, which allowed the
readers to hear both sides and to make up their own minds, was ignored
by most papers, and what much came through, was a systematical
distortion.

The Times of India gave no coverage to dr. Gupta's findings, but invited
other scholars to air their counter-opinions. In an article with the
misleading title *"Ayodhya may be Buddhist site"*[⁹⁶](notes.htm#note96),
they announce that Prof. R.S. Sharma *"has strongly dismissed the
validity of evidence regarding the existence of an eleventh century Ram
temple at Ayodhya"*. When you read on, you find that he really only
denied that it was a Ram temple. Disregarding the presence of distinctly
non- Buddhist symbols like the trishul on the black pillar- stones, he
opines that remains of a Buddhist temple were used in the Babri Masjid.
So, at any rate there was a building, and it was a Kafir temple.

Further down the article, a Prof. V.N. Mishra, director of Deccan
College in Pune, is also quoted as saying that Dr. Gupta's findings are
*inadequate* and *unconvincing*, but again this turns out to merely
refer to the status of the building as a Ram temple (on the doubtful
ground that no contemporary Ram temples in Uttar Pradesh have been
found), not to its existence or its religious or even its specifically
Vaishnava character.[⁹⁷](notes.htm#note97)

What the readers did not get to read, is that Prof. Mishra is a
prehistorian, not at all involved in research concerning the pre-Babri
period, and that he was not really interviewed but gave his outsider's
opinion casually during a group conversation, not knowing that his
opinion would be printed on the Times of India front-page. He has
expressed his indignation at these undeontological methods of quoting
people without telling them beforehand, and moreover misquoting
them.[⁹⁸](notes.htm#note98) It just goes to show what unscrupled vipers
these secularist journalists are.

That Ayodhya was a chiefly Buddhist town, is an information which Prof.
Sharma has taken from the Chinese travellers Fa Hsien and Hsuen Tsang.
He cites Hsuen Tsang's highly slanted figures without any critical sense
(at least according to the Times of India version of the interview) :
Ayodhya had one hundred Buddhist and ten non-Buddhist temples. That the
historically attested Jain temples alone already add up to ten, does not
seem to make him more cautious in dealing with Hsuen Tsang's highly
partisan (and in some places just fabulating) report.

At any rate, nobody had ever doubted the Buddhist presence in Ayodhya.
But that is not the point. The point for the Times of India's Arvind N.
Das is, to bracket or even replace the facts of Muslim destruction of
Hindu places with a postulated Hindu destruction of Buddhist places :
*"The historical evidence of the flourishing of Buddhism at Ayodhya and
the existence of the Babri Masjid on a mound, typical of the remains of
Buddhist stupas in Mohenjo-Daro and elsewhere, provides strong
indication to historians and archaeologists that indeed the
archaeological remains found in Ayodhya could well belong to Buddhist
monasteries which were destroyed by Brahminical onslaught."* (this is
apparently the journalist's own insertion, for further on in the
article, we see Prof. Sharma suggesting it was a Shaiva temple)

Here, we are facing a central item in the secularist disinformation
campaign : the theory that all religions (which the Marxists plan to
weed out), with the possible exception of Islam (the proto-socialist
religion of equality and brotherhood), were all equally intolerant and
given to persecution. Or in the newer and somewhat less anti-religious
version : all religions except Hinduism are basically tolerant, but they
have been persecuted by the Brahmins and that is why Brahminism has come
to dominate India.

To support this theory, all kinds of fantastic exaggerations and pure
lies are launched. Thus, the Economic Times manages to rhetorically ask
:*"If the Hindus want to demolish mosques which were built on temple
sites, should Buddhists ask for the rebuilding of Nalanda University
which the Hindus destroyed ?"*[⁹⁹](notes.htm#note99) Now, everybody with
some education should know that Nalanda University was destroyed in the
wake of Mohammed Ghori's conquest of North India. To be more precise, it
was destroyed and its staff and students exterminated to the last by
Mohammed Bakhtiyar Khilji in 1200. It is not Hinduism but Islam that
*"banned Buddhism from its homeland"*.

But what to make of this misdirected allegation : is it utter dishonesty
or utter ignorance ? Either way, it is actively or passively part of a
disinformation campaign concerning Hindu history, perversely calculated
to make Hindus feel guilty for the kind of crimes Islam perpetrated
against them, thus to paralyze and pre-empt criticism of Islam and
similar ideologies.

## 8.6 "They were all fanatics"

As a result of the sustained disinformation campaign that blames Hindus
for the destruction of Buddhism, we see Mrs. Savita Ambedkar claiming
that the Ram temple was a Buddhist stupa.[¹⁰⁰](notes.htm#note100) This
is obviously impossible : a stupa is a massive structure, not a pillared
building like the one that must have stood on the pillar-bases at the
disputed site. But I guess she genuinely believes it herself, in keeping
with the theories of her late husband, a non-Nehruvian but equally
anti-Hindu thinker. Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar's historical writings on
Hinduism, Buddhism and the caste system are so full of mistranslations,
misinterpretations, and emotional distortions, that it really makes one
feel sorry for him, even if it does not mar his memory as the chief
framer of India's Constitution. Dr. Ambedkar's merits lie else- where,
and his theory of a millennia-long Buddhist- Brahmin struggle as the
chief determinant of India's socio-political life in pre-Muslim times
would have been mercifully forgotten, if there had not been on the one
hand casteist politicians who elevate to the rank of dogma every word
Ambedkar has written, and on the other hand the Nehruvian historians who
have an interest in spreading the same version of
history.[¹⁰¹](notes.htm#note101)

Mrs. Ambedkar could have been saved the embarrassment of her utterly
unfounded claim[¹⁰²](notes.htm#note102), if the prominent Indian
historians had done an honest job of debunking the Ambedkarist version
of history (which is very much a *"myth claiming the legitimacy of
history"*, and *"used for political purposes"*, against which the JNU
historians normally take out crusades). Instead, they have ensured that
the myth is now spreading into the collective consciousness via
schoolbooks and newspapers.

Another approach to blur the stark contrast between Muslim intolerance
and the general Pagan tolerance, is to admit the fact of the temple
destructions, adding that all ancient conquerors asserted their
authority by destroying temples, and that Muslim temple destruction was
just an application of this general rule. Thus, Partha S. Ghosh writes
:*"It was a common practice in ancient and medieval times, when the
concept of sovereignty was not so well-defined, particularly in
territorial terms, to assert one's sovereignty over a region by
destroying the religious places belonging to the faith of the earlier
rulers and then by building one's own on their ruins. It was primarily a
political activity and had little to do with religious faith as
such."*[¹⁰³](notes.htm#note103)

If it was a common practice, it should be easy to verify. But when you
go through ancient history, you find almost nothing of the sort. On the
contrary, you find that systematically the gods and religious places of
even enemy peoples were respected.

In feudal China, the ruling house of a defeated state was not be
exterminated, even if its survival meant a political risk : the
religious reason for this taboo was that family's ancestral gods had to
continue to be worshipped, which only their descendants could properly
do. Ch'in Shih Huang violated this rule, and that is one of the reasons
for his utter condemnation by the Confucian tradition.

There is in Chinese history one case of alleged religious persecution
for purely economical reasons. In the eighth century, a Tang emperor
abolished all Buddhist monasteries. They had been exempt from paying
taxes, but through donations and legacies, they had become big
landholders with enormous revenue, which was all escaping the public
treasury. So, the monasteries were abolished as a strictly institutional
measure. The monks were not put to the sword, or forbidden to practice
and teach Buddhism. It was simply not a case of religious persecution,
which is a phenomenon quite alien to the entire Chinese civilization.

The Romans, when they conquered a city, took care not to offend the
local gods, and payed a visit to their temples. When they occupied
Israel, they took care not to break the Jews' taboo on depicting animal
life : of the legions, only those with a tree (rather than an animal)
symbol in their standards were posted in Jerusalem. The few religious
persecutions in the Roman empire were indeed politically motivated. When
the Christians and the Jews, egged on by apocalyptic preachers,
expressed their belief that the end of the empire was near, refused to
pay respects to the emperor's statues, and even rose in armed rebellion,
they were indeed suppressed and persecuted.

When Caesar occupied the Celtic West of Europe, he found that the Druid
class was the backbone of this society (the parallel with the Brahmins
in the perception of the missionaries is quite exact) : therefore, he
persecuted the Druids. However, that campaign had no religious dimension
for Caesar: in his description of the Celtic religion, he mentions the
Celtic gods by the names of their Roman equivalents, for he understood
fully well that there was no fundamental but merely an ethnic difference
between the Roman and Celtic religious traditions.

So, whereas the secularist historians claim that religious places were
systematically destroyed as a symbol of political sovereignty, in fact
the few cases of such destruction took place when the religious centres
were effectively centres of political power or rebellion. The rule was
respect for priests and temples, but this rule was made subordinate to
the rule that centres of political resistance to the empire have to be
broken. As a religious centre, the Second Temple in Jerusalem was never
destroyed; only when it became a centre of rebellion, the Romans
overcame their "superstitious fear" or respect for the alien god that
lived in this temple, and moved in to destroy it. Of the hundreds of
religions that have existed in the Roman empire, hardly a handful have
ever been the object of persecution and temple destruction.

In pre-Muslim Indian history, we again see that after victory, kings
systematically went to perform sacrifice in the temple of defeated
opponents. And we know that Ram sacrificed to Shiva, the god of his
enemy Ravana (after killing Ravana, he also put a member of Ravana's
family on the throne, as was the ancient Hindu custom). In fact, with
the massive evidence of respect for all temples and all gods, we are
still waiting for the Nehruvian *historians* to come up with the very
first example of a Hindu king who *"asserted his sovereignty over a
region by destroying the religious places belonging to the faith of the
earlier rulers"*.

Even Pushyamitra Shunga, of whom it is unreliably said by a very
non-contemporary source that he had Buddhist monks killed, allowed
Buddhist universities to flourish in his kingdom. Even he is not
described to have demolished temples on the occasion of his political
take-over, his alleged acts of persecution are ascribed by his
detractors to purely sectarian fanaticism.[¹⁰⁴](notes.htm#note104) The
one apparently reliable report of religious persecution in pre-Muslim
India, about the Tamil king Kun Pandya (Arikesari Parankusha Maravarman,
670-710) who had Shaivas killed, then converted (under the influence of
his wife's guru Sambandar) and had Jains killed, is also not linked to
any assertion of political authority : *he was already safely in power*.

So, the sweeping allegation of a *common practice* of temple destruction
as a symbol of political self- assertion, is not based on the facts of
history, and goes against abundant evidence to the contrary. A historian
who proposes this theory, violates all standards of historical method,
and must be deemed either incompetent or dishonest. But even if such a
general rule had existed : the Muslim pattern of temple destruction does
not conform to it.

When a Muslim ruler conquered another Muslim country, he did not go and
destroy the chief mosques. Never, Conversely, Muslim rulers often had
temples destroyed when their rule was firmly established and not in need
of any assertion. For instance, the Christians of Damascus were at first
allowed to keep their cathedral (itself a converted Pagan temple), under
the general conditions imposed on zimmis (*protected* Jews and
Christians). However, the Muslim clerics couldn't stand the sight of
this proud non-Muslim building, and demanded its conversion into a
mosque. The Christians payed huge ransoms in order to be allowed to keep
their church, but finally the Caliph gave in to the pressure and had the
church converted into a mosque. Financially he lost on it, and
politically he didn't need it : the reason for the Muslim take-over of
this place of worship was of a different nature, neither economical nor
political, but theological.

When under Muslim rule, rebellious princes or generals had used mosques
or Sufi centres as head-quarters of their conspiracies, this never led
to the destruction of these places of worship. When these places housed
wealth, still they were not plundered. But thousands of temples that did
not house any conspiracy nor for that matter any wealth , were
nonetheless destroyed. If Aurangzeb needed a symbolical act of
destruction to assert his authority, why was he not satisfied with
destroying only the most important temple of Varanasi, why did he
destroy so many of them ? The theories that Muslim rulers plundered only
for wealth, or only to assert their authority, have holes in them on all
sides.

The far simpler explanation, corroborated by all the available
documents, is that they had a theology of temple destruction, and that
this led them to a behaviour pattern unknown in Pagan cultures :
proportionate to their military might and to their fervour in the faith,
they systematically destroyed Pagan temples. It didn't matter whether
these temples had any riches in them or any political significance : in
every case it was a scripturally ordained act of great merit to weed out
Paganism by destroying Pagan temples and centres of learning, as well as
by killing or forcibly converting the Pagans themselves.

If we accept this simple and well-attested fact, then secularist scholar
Partha S. Ghosh can get a straightforward answer to his question : *"Do
we ever look back to rationalize why after all there are no ancient
Buddhist temples in North India when Buddhists had ruled the country for
several centuries ?"*[¹⁰⁵](notes.htm#note105) Yes, why ? Why are there
absolutely no Buddhist temples left in Afghanistan, in Turkestan ? Nor
Brahmin or Zoroastrian or Manichaean temples, for that matter ? This
secularist scholar does not seem to know that the Buddhist monasteries
and universities were destroyed and exterminated to the last, in India
just as well as in Central Asia, by none other than the Muslim armies.
So, the answer is that, while Buddhism had been partly reabsorbed into
Hinduism, and had partly continued as a separate tradition under Hindu
dynasties, the Muslim conquerors finished it off totally.

So, mr. Ghosh may be the Director of the Indian Council of Social
Science Research, but as an independent scholar I am not impressed by
such titles and positions. His view of the history of religion and
persecution is thoroughly flawed. But then, maybe he can't help it,
because it seems he picked up his views on history from the JNU
*"eminent historians whose professional honesty nobody questions"*. And
so many more innocent young people are equally being misled by the
Nehruvian (i.e. Marxist plus *nationalist Muslim*) history distorters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 8.7 Up against undeserved authority

Intellectually, these Nehruvian historians and pressmen stand thoroughly
discredited. But they have power positions in the media and in the
education and research establishments, so they still manage to black out
criticism and alternative opinions. A recent example of their power is
the nomination of a successor to Leftist Muslim historian Irfan Habib as
head of the Indian Council of Historical Research. The expected choice
was Prof. G.C. Pande, former vice-chancellor of two universities. But
the secularist intelligentsia launched a campaign against him : *"RSS
connections loom large"*[¹⁰⁶](notes.htm#note106). It is said that Irfan
Habib contacted the Shahi Imam, who in turn had a chat with his friend
V.P. Singh, prime minister. At any rate, G.C. Pande's name was scrapped
from the list of candidates. This is also one more example of the
unscrupled connivance between *secularists* and Muslim communalists.

The status and pretence of these Nehruvian historians should be openly
challenged, as has been done by Prof. A.R. Khan in his rejoinder to the
JNU historians' well- known statement.[¹⁰⁷](notes.htm#note107) All
secularists have tacitly agreed to absolutely ignore his shattering
reply to the *eminent* historians' pamphlet.[¹⁰⁸](notes.htm#note108)
They know they have been beaten at the intellectual level, but they use
their power over the public arena to ensure that these challengers
remain in the margins.

In their re-reply to Prof. Khan's critique, the JNU historians wrote
haughtily : *"Mr. Khan's misrepresentation of our views on these matters
is, we presume, not a deliberate attempt to malign us, but due rather to
an unfortunate lack of familiarity with historical sources and an
inability to comprehend the language of our
argument..."*[¹⁰⁹](notes.htm#note109) In other words: whatever your
arguments, you can't prevent us from authoritatively putting you in the
role of a pitiable nitwit.

Personally, I think I do *comprehend the language* of their argument.
But unlike Prof. Khan, I also do advocate *a deliberate attempt to
malign* the Nehruvian historians. Not the kind of maligning that they
themselves indulge in, taking their cue from Lenin's own advocacy of
lies and disinformation as weapons in the revolutionary struggle. Not
throwing swearwords at people, not stigmatizing them with a label
(except those they give to themselves, like *secularist*), not trying to
suppress their opinions. On the contrary, the stress in a genuine
intellectual debate should always be on the contents of people's
arguments, no matter what label they have come to carry. A careful
scrutiny of their statements and historical theories is all that is
needed to expose them and explode their *eminent* status.

This scrutiny may also take into account their record of academic
support for (i.e. conferral of respectability on) the classic lies of
Communism : the murder of thousands of Polish officers in Katyn, long
blamed on the Germans with support from *historians* ; the secret
protocol in the 1939 Hitler-Stalin pact, allotting the Baltic states and
Eastern Poland to Stalin (a Belgian Marxist *historian* denied the
protocol's existence in the very week when the glasnosted Soviet
authorities published its full text); the economical *successes* of
Stalin and of Mao's Great Leap Forward ; the Chinese *historical* claim
on Tibet as well as on some Indian territory ; and others.

What about, for instance, the rather different treatment meted out to
Mahatma Gandhi in the successive editions of JNU historian Bipan
Chandra's work on India's independence struggle : could it be that the
change in the partyline and Moscow's increasing regard for the Mahatma,
rather than new research findings, was responsible for the shift ? All
this should be checked. Just a factual record, something like *"From
Katyn to Ayodhya : Leftist historians' record of support for politically
motivated lies"*, would go a long way in undermining their totally
undeserved hold over the intellectual arena.

The way they have obtained and handled their power positions also
deserves some scrutiny. Take the case of the project allotted by the
government to the Indian Council of Historical Research (ICHR), about
the history of the freedom struggle in 1937-47. As The Week has
reported, this project was started in 1974, and should have resulted in
the publication of 10 volumes by 1984. The first volume was published in
1985. It was prepared by non-Marxist dr. P.N. Chopra, and branded as
*unsaleable* (though it fetched Rs. 2 Lakh in royalties) by the
Marxist-dominated review committee. Chopra was hounded review committee
in 1987, as too sympathetic to Congress and not interested enough in the
trade unions' involvement. He explains : *"I could not be a party to
suppression of historical facts. That was why they turned against me."*

But more intriguing than the predictable fact that the Marxists were
intolerant of anyone not toeing their line, is the fact that after
sixteen years and Rs. 2.5 crore, only two volumes were completed (of
which only one was published), and that by a non-Marxist member.
According to a press report, the list of people involved in this
expensive project contains the top names in secularist historiography :
Prof. R.S. Sharma, first chairman of the ICHR ; dr. s. Gopal, who was in
charge of the project under Prof. Sharma's tenure, and remained *"its
chief editor for over a decade without producing a single line"*; Irfan
Habib, AMU historian and ICHR chairman ; Prof. Bipan Chandra and Prof.
K.N. Panikkar, who, with six others, were appointed in 1987 when dr.
Gopal had resumed the charge of the project, with the promise to the
government of finishing by 31 December 1991. The promise was not kept
and the government decided to call off the whole project, in spite of
Prof. Habib's reportedly high-handed attempts to get yet another
extension.

This is how The Week explains this strange lack of productivity of these
lavishly sponsored Communists :*"Right from the beginning, ICHR has been
in the hands of Communist historians. They had more than an academic
interest in the period under study (1937-47), since the Communists are
accused of betraying the freedom struggle and of siding with the British
during the Quit India movement. Their idea apparently was to get the
project shelved so that they could bury their past, or interpret the
period from the Communist angle..."*[¹¹⁰](notes.htm#note110) Now that
the money has been wasted, it is certainly a good thing to shelve this
project of publishing ten volumes of Communist history falsification. At
any rate, such adventures should be investigated and given some well
deserved publicity.

And then, the falsehood of the grand secularist vision of Indian history
should be exposed. As a concrete starting-point, their facile way of
equating the numerous cases of persecution by Muslim rulers with the
handful of similar acts by Pagan rulers, should be exposed.

Thus, the way Romila Thapar equates Mahmud Ghaznavi with Harsha of
Kashmir (twelfth century) as being both temple
plunderers[¹¹¹](notes.htm#note111), can be shown up to be in gross
conflict with the contemporary testimonies about the two. Of Ghaznavi,
it is well-attested that he was a devout Muslim, that he refused ransom
for an idol, that he deliberately committed numerous acts of sacrilege
in Hindu temples with no profit whatsoever attached, and that he of
course never plundered mosques. By contrast, Harsha plundered temples of
his own religion, Hindu as well as Buddhist. He did not demolish them,
or force Brahmins to eat beef or Buddhist monks to have sex, or any
other deliberate act of sacrilege. For Harsha it was purely a matter of
filling the treasury, and for Mahmud it was a matter of humiliating and
destroying Paganism. This conclusion is inescapable from the
contemporary reports about Harsha and Mahmud. Romila Thapar's
explanation that Ghaznavi's behaviour was essentially the same as
Harsha's, can only rest on an utter incompetence in reading the source
material, or in a deliberate attempt to distort history.

What is more, if at all one wants to compare Harsha's behaviour with
that of the Muslim rulers, one should face the connection that the
contemporary historian Kalhan explicitly makes. Commenting on Harsha's
temple plundering, he writes :*"Prompted by the Turks in his employ, he
behaved like a Turk"*. At face value, that seems to confirm the
Nehruvians' equating of Harsha's and Mahmud's behaviour. Yet, the
Nehruvians historians gloss over it (and we know by now that there is a
system in their glossing-over), because on closer analysis, it seems
that Kalhan does not make a detailed distinction between desecrating a
temple by plundering it (as Harsha did), and desecrating it by more
precise (and non-profit) acts of sacrilege, such as hanging a cow's
tongue around an idols' neck (as Mahmud did). Kalhan is simply saying
that the very idea that a temple need not be respected, was borrowed by
Harsha from the Muslim Turks. These already had a well-established
reputation for temple desecration, and that is a fact to which the
Nehruvian historians prefer not to draw the readers' attention.

For another example, Harbans Mukhia should not be allowed to get away
with his statement that *"the demolition of temples in enemy-territory
was symbolic of conquest by the sultan... many Hindu rulers also did the
same with temples in enemy-territory long before the Muslims had emerged
as a political challenge"*, for which he gives as proof : the
above-mentioned Harsha of Kashmir, and Subhatavarman (Paramara king
1193-1210) who attacked Gujarat and destroyed many Jain temples at
Dabhoi and Cambay[¹¹²](notes.htm#note112).

While the latter could be an illustration of the destruction of temples
in enemy-territory (though no reason for singling out Jain temples is
even attempted), he did not act this way *"long before the Muslims had
emerged as a political challenge"*: much of North India had freshly been
conquered and thousands of temples destroyed by Ghori and Aibak. And
Harsha also was already under Muslim influence, as stated explicitly in
the contemporary report, and moreover, he didn't plunder in
enemy-territory but in his own kingdom (an early example of the
now-prevalent Hindu cowardice rallying against Hindu institutions and
following the Muslim lead). So, here we have a case of a history
professor who does not realize that the proofs he cites have hardly any
logical connection with the thesis he proposes; or who is so assured
about his *eminence* that he doesn't expect readers to notice the faulty
reasoning.

From a criticism of the Nehruvians' behaviour in such case studies in
religiously motivated persecution and destruction, we may then move on
to the more general statements about religion as a determinant in
shaping India's military, political and social history. Let us consider,
for instance, the profoundly mistaken view that *"monotheism \[i.e.
Islam\] implies equality"*. Like several Aligrah historians, Harbans
Mukhia has propounded this view[¹¹³](notes.htm#note113) in the context
of explaining Islam's role as a social reform movement, giving a lead to
many other secularists in academe and in the press. This view is so
visibly untrue that one cannot really imagine an intellectual
propounding it without some ideological compulsion overruling his
intelligence.

Obviously, monotheism does not abolish the differences in the universe.
The Pagan world-view was aware of the different realms of nature, the
different levels of integratedness from the atoms up to the Whole, and
indeed also the differences within humanity. Each phenomenon was
represented by personifications of its typical characteristics, so the
plurality of the cosmos was represented by a plurality of gods. Now, the
postulate that all these personifications or gods are to be forgotten
and that only Allah is to be worshipped, does not make any difference
for the plurality in the cosmos and in society : plants and animals are
still different realms of nature, and rulers and commoners have also not
merged.

In the monotheistic Jewish society, there were still kings, priests,
traders, free servants and slaves. In Christianity, a stratified feudal
society was sanctified by Christian theologians . The Christian concern
for social action is a recent invention, made necessary by the finding
that in Europe the working-class was attracted by atheist socialism, and
that in Asia the strategy of first converting the elite was a total
failure, so that a way to the hearts of the lower classes had to be
devised.

So, there is nothing intrinsically equalitarian in monotheism. Relating
the concept of equality with conceptual monotheism may be a somewhat
complicated intellectual exercise which a Marxist-trained mind is not
ready for, so eminent Prof. Harbans Mukhia may be forgiven this lapse.
But the postulate that specifically Islam is a religion of equality, is
an ideological and totally un-historical concoction. From a history
professor, this cannot be accepted.

The first case of sharp inequality fostered by Islam that comes to mind,
is the Islamic treatment of women. While equality in the most modern
sense between men and women was never the rule anywhere, at least women
used to enjoy more freedom and autonomy in most societies than they do
in Islam. At this point, Muslim apologists have come up with the
unbelievable contention that in tribal Arabia, it had been even worse
than in Islam ; which is readily disproven by the case of Mohammed's
first wife Khadija, who had inherited a trading company of which she
herself was in charge, with Mohammed as her employee. The apologists'
contention that polygamy under Islam was in fact a progress compared to
pre-Islamic pagan society is altogether untenable. A Muslim man can have
4 wives plus X concubines : compared to what can 4+X be a decrease? The
traditional, non-modern justification that this polygamy provided the
best security to the numerous widows (who must have become especially
numerous in the high-intensity warfare which Mohammed newly introduced
among the Arabs)[¹¹⁴](notes.htm#note114), was a more reasonable
explanation.

For a second example of inequality, Islam is in world history the
absolute champion of slavery from European slave-traders who shipped
black slaves from Africa to America, mostly bought these slaves from
Arab slave- catchers. One of the first things the Belgian king Leopold
II had to do in his Congo colony (though not out of any noble motive),
was to defeat the Arab slave- catchers.[¹¹⁵](notes.htm#note115) This was
as late as the end of the nineteenth century. But even today, some
Muslim countries tolerate the outright practice of slavery. In 1989,
reporters found out that hundreds of children belonging to the black
non-Muslim Dinka tribe in Southern Sudan were being sold into slavery,
after the army of the Islamic government had slaughtered their fathers.
In Indian history too, many lakhs of Hindus have been sold into slavery.

Forcing Kafirs into slavery was of course a common practice. But even
among Muslims, the master-slave relation existed. The only case where
slavery was abolished, was where a Muslim was slave to a Kafir. Since
Islam is a doctrine of domination, it could not tolerate that a Kafir
lorded it over a Muslim.[¹¹⁶](notes.htm#note116)

It is significant for the boundless arrogance which Islam inculcates in
its proponents, that Islam is now being advertised as a religion of
equality even among the black Africans. *"Islam is the religion for
Africa"*, colonel Kadhafi proclaimed in a speech in which he promised
support to the South-African blacks; even when the South- African word
Kaffer (*nigger*, but even more derogatory), is simply the Islamic term
Kafir, which was applied to the black slaves by the Arabs and borrowed
by the later European colonizers. And nobody dares to go in and remind
those Africans of what the Muslim have done to them, the way the lower
castes in India are continuously being fed anti-Brahmin *history*.

But the point is, while one cannot blame the Muslim propagandists for
painting a rosy picture of the religion they try to sell, we now see
eminent historians spreading this utterly untruthful item of propaganda,
in books which are required reading in many universities. They even
lecture others and call them communalists if they don't swallow these
Islamic-cum-Nehruvian lies.

In another important respect, Islam is even more antithetical to
equality. We will not bother about the superiority which the Arabs feel
vis-a-vis the non-Arabs (as when Kadhafi lambasted some Quran
interpretation by *"someone who is not even an Arab"*, meaning
Khomeini), nor about the inequality between Ajlaf and Ashraf (vulgar and
noble), between Sheikhs and Sayyids and other such subdivisions in the
Muslim community : these are just human phenomena of differentiation to
which no heavy conclusions need be attached. The one crucial inequality
which Islam has brought is the radical and absolute inequality between
Momins and Kafirs, believers and non- believers.

This is a very central point in Islamic theology. Humanity is divided
into two : the Momins are bound to go to heaven, and in the lower world
should lord it over the Kafirs, and these are bound to go to hell
forever, and in this world may be subjected to all kinds of injustice.
For a hundredfold testimony of this persistent doctrine of absolute
inequality, it suffices to check the true untailored sources of Islamic
doctrine, the Quran and the Hadis. It is against those sources that the
claims of Islam as a religion of equality have to be checked. The claim
for Islam as a religion of equality will then stand utterly disproven,
because authentic facts are more eminent than even the JNU historians.

Once the support of the Nehruvian historians to such utter
falsifications of history is tackled and exposed, they have no chance of
saving their reputations or even the hold of their theories over the
public arena. They have gone too far in their distortions of history, so
they are very vulnerable. If they have held out in the role of
oft-quoted "eminent historians" for so long, it is only due to the
slackness and timidity of the Hindu intellectuals.

Only because of a configuration of forces peculiar to India have the
anti-Hindu historians been able to completely dominate the scene. In
most free countries, they would have been exposed long ago. Take the
case of veteran Leftist historian Prof. R.S. Sharma. In the Ayodhya
debate, he has played a fairly prominent role, with his book Communal
History and Rama's Ayodhya, published in December 1990, with his
interviews and public statements on the matter, and with his
participation for the Babri side in the VHP-BMAC discussion on the
historical evidence.[¹¹⁷](notes.htm#note117) That he has in his writings
totally ignored the abundant documentary evidence, has not stopped the
press from citing him as a great authority. But what does the
international historical scene think about him ?

The Dutch historian and indologist Andre Wink writes, referring to Prof.
Sharma's chief claim to fame, his book on Indian Feudalism in the early
medieval period : *"R.S. Sharma's Indian Feudalism has misguided
virtually all historians of the period... Sharma's thesis essentially
involves an obstinate attempt to find 'elements' which fit a
preconceived picture of what should have happened in India because it
happened in Europe (or is alleged to have happened in Europe by Sharma
and his school of historians whose knowledge of European history is
rudimentary and completely outdated)... The methodological underpinnings
of Sharma's work are in fact so thin that one wonders why, for so long,
Sharma's colleagues have called his work
'pioneering'."*[¹¹⁸](notes.htm#note118) In a world where the wind of
free inquiry blows, Marxist dogmas cannot hold out for long. They have
been abandoned, except in those places where an artificial authority is
attached to them by a partisan intelligentsia.

From his high pedestal, Prof. Sharma could afford to disregard the
*"very few authors whose work effectively addresses the feudalism thesis
in a critical manner"*, and he *"appears to have been in no mood to take
heed of criticism levelled at his work"*. This disregarding and ignoring
of counter-evidence is tactically the best way to prolong your dominant
position (which is why this tactic was adopted by most secularists in
the Ayodhya debate): it denies publicity and respectability to the
critic's alternative thesis. But to the progress of science, this
upholding of dogma and suppression of debate is detrimental. According
to Prof. Wink, the effect has been this : *"Under the impact of the
feudalism thesis the historiography of the period is still in utter
disarray."*

On the Ayodhya issue too, popular and governmental perception has been
brought into *utter disarray* by the concerted efforts of a small but
powerful group of committed Hindu-baiters, including the same Prof. R.S.
Sharma, who have hammered into the public consciousness a suspicion
against the well-attested facts of the matter. With all their eminence
and authority, they actually managed to turn facts into *myth* and
*concoction*. But as you can see from the comment of a competent
outsider, the authority which these Hindu-baiters enjoy, is highly
undeserved and based on something else than scholarly merit.

So, in my opinion, the dominance of these Nehruvian and other
Hindu-baiters need not last much longer. Their eminence will go down as
soon as the debunking of their central myths has come centre-stage in
the intellectual arena (which means that an issue-centered critique will
suffice to do most of the job). And that can go unexpectedly fast, there
are plenty of occasions at which the readers are interested enough to
pick up an alternative thesis, if only it gets competently presented to
them.

For a promising example, Meenakshi Jain has done an admirable job of
debunking a number of cherished misconceptions (consciously spread in
the colonial and missionary interests) concerning the caste system, as
part of a debate in Indian Express triggered by the Mandal
Report.[¹¹⁹](notes.htm#note119) While casteist politicians will go on
for some time to use these misconceptions in their rhetoric, the
intellectual questioning of the (widely prevalent) anti-Brahmin and
anti-Hindu casteist view of Indian history has started, and it is bound
to affect every caste-related debate soon.[¹²⁰](notes.htm#note120)

Another recent myth which is easy to debunk on the strength of the
authentic texts, is that Buddhism and Jainism were social reform
movements and reactions against Brahminism. Buddha and Mahavira were
religious critics of the ritualism of some Brahmins which had
degenerated to mere form, with the spirit lacking (which is a very
ordinary development in traditions and societies after some time). But
they didn't claim to bring anything new, they merely restored the spirit
which some Brahmins had become too uninspired to uphold. Buddha is quite
explicit about merely walking the same path as all the Awakened ones
before and after him, entirely in the sanatana spirit. Both *Buddha*
(Awakened one) and *Mahavira* (Great Hero of self-conquest) were
long-established titles before Gautama and Vardhamana came to carry
them. Both revivers of Vedic spirituality were positively uninterested
in social reform. While Brahmins played a role in society and codified
social order in Dharma Shastras, these Shramanas (monks) concentrated
entirely on Moksha, liberation of consciousness, and they considered
worldly concerns, such as social reform, as foolish
waste.[¹²¹](notes.htm#note121)

Once this Marxist-inspired myth of Buddhism and Jainism as social reform
movements gets debunked, the authority of those who publicly identify
with this myth will also be questioned. The same counts for other such
myths, artificially created by politically motivated people : once the
myth goes its proponents lose their aura of authority. While a scrutiny
of the individual record of the big-mouth secularists may be useful as
long as this debate remains as nasty as it is now, it is the issue-
centered criticism which will blow the secularists' authority away very
soon.

The myth of Brahmin oppression, the myth of Buddhism as a social reform
movement, the myth of the Buddhist-Brahmin power struggle, the myth of
the economical motives for the Muslim conquests and destruction, the
myth of the non-existence of an indigenous and nation-wide Hindu
culture, the myth of the social reforms brought by Islam, the myth of
Hindu-Muslim amity, the myth of Nehru and of India as a *a nation in the
making*, the myth of the Composite Culture, the myth that communalism is
a British creation, all these myths are bound to give way once a
substantial number of Hindu intellectuals apply their minds to them in a
serious and scientific way, and then use the available channels to speak
out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
