+++
title = "12 11.1  Reporting vs. comment"

+++
# 11. The riots

## 11.1 Reporting vs. comment

"*The 'progressive' people in this country show a remarkable eagerness
to see communalism even in the most harmless observations of \[Hindu\]
religious leaders, while overlooking such outrageously communal and
provocative statements as the one made by the former government official
Syed Shahabuddin, that contact with the Hindus debased the Muslim, or
the one by Syed Abdullah Bukhari, the Imam of the Jama Masjid in Delhi,
that the Muslims would resort to a civil war*." This observation by
Subhash Chandra Sarkar[¹⁴⁹](notes.htm#note149) is quite correct, and it
explains the peculiar features of press reporting on communal riots. The
progressive pressmen attribute every riot to "*Hindu communalism raising
its ugly head*", while justifying or explaining away the undeniable
cases of Muslim communalist violence.

When reading the press reports about communal riots, one should make a
distinction between two stages of riot reporting. The day after a riot
breaks out, the press will just write what happened, in some detail. The
report will be a little bit blurred by the obligatory usage of
non-definite terms for the communities involved : "*As members of one
community passed through an area dominated by another community, stones
were thrown at them*", etc. But the experienced reader can mostly
understand who is who.

However, the editorials devoted to these instances of *communal carnage*
are not interested in the details of the matter, and in their effort to
allot guilt and suggest remedies, they often implicitly start from a
riot scenario which is totally unsupported by the factual details that
appeared in the first report. The autumn of 1990 has offered some
striking examples of this recurring press phenomenon.

For instance, about the Hyderabad violence of December 1990 there could
be no doubt whatsoever about who was the aggressor and who the victim.
The violence was, according to press reports, started by revenge action
of Muslims against the police, for killing an influential Muslim goonda,
Mohammed Sardar. This man was a convicted murderer, and while free on
parole, he had killed a policeman, and gone underground. When the police
caught up with him, he was killed in an exchange of
firing.[¹⁵⁰](notes.htm#note150) This encounter *triggered* a wave of
stabbing by people belonging to the same community as this Mohammed. Not
only in Hindu-Muslim terms it is very clear who started, but also in
miscreant-police terms: the first victim was not the Muslim goonda, but
a policeman. it is not the *partisan anti-Hindu* police who killed the
victims for whose murder Mohammed Sardar was convicted, it was not they
who killed the policeman that was killed by him, and it was not they who
started the stabbing.

Moreover, while in many riots Muslims take the initiative but then lose
it to the more numerous Hindus, here it was the Muslims who were on the
attack all through the weeks of violence.[¹⁵¹](notes.htm#note151) The
Statesman reported : "*An unusual feature of the current clashes was the
heavy toll inflicted on the majority community, forcing many of them to
flee their hearth and homes south of the Musi, which were immediately
occupied by members of the minority community*." The inserted comment
that heavy suffering on the part of the Hindus is *unusual*, is of
course based on secularist estimates. The report continues:
"*House-to-house searches in the \[predominantly Muslim\] old city
yielded a rich haul of weapons, imported from the north*."

But in the same issue, the editorial has heard nothing of Muslim
attacks, Muslim goondas, Muslim arms caches. Under the caption Spark
from Ayodhya, it writes : *"If the trouble in Aligarh followed the
stabbing of a policeman \[by a member of an unnamed you-know-which
community\], it is not yet clear what caused the eruption in Hyderabad.
Nor is it worthwhile any longer to look for specific reasons since a
focal point already exists."*[¹⁵²](notes.htm#note152) The focal point is
(guess once) the BJP/VHP's *"cynical, vote- catching policies relating
to the disputed shrines in Ayodhya"*.

If one would believe the columns in the national English- language
press, Mr. Advani's Rathyatra has left a trail of bloodshed. But when
one turns to the actual reports of the riots, this very serious
allegation turns out to be totally contradicted by the facts.

During the Rathyatra, which was underway for about a month until it was
stopped on October 22, there were some riots in Karnataka, and many very
serious riots in Uttar Pradesh in the first state, Advani had only
tipped the North-East corner on his way from Maharashtra to Andhra
Pradesh, in the second he had not set foot at all. Now, those who are
biased and perforce need to blame Advani, can say that at least he
*created the atmosphere* that led to the riots. But then they should
explain how he managed to cause riots five hundred miles distant from
his Rathyatra, and none in its vicinity. Where he could personally
impress his *atmosphere* on audiences, there was no violence, but where
it was only a distant echo, it would have moved people to utter
barbarities like those that took place in Gonda, U.P.: a strange
explanation. To my mind, it would seem that such an explanation does not
spring from the *scientific temper* which secularism seeks to inculcate,
but rather from a political compulsion to blame the Hindu campaign at
any cost and/or to shield the real culprit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 11.2 Inspiring and starting riots

A far more logical explanation for the non-occurrence of riots in or
near the Rathyatra, and the large-scale occurrence of serious riots in
Uttar Pradesh, is this. For the common Hindu, the passing of the Ram
Rath was a joyous religious event, perhaps compounded by a sense of
relief or even victory because it announced the symbolical righting of
the centuries of persecution inflicted by Muslim rulers upon the Hindus.
At any rate, it was a happy affair that sweetened the atmosphere rather
than create bitterness and violence. Moreover, mr. Advani in his
speeches called on all Indians to celebrate and to cultivate harmony.
That his speeches were not inflammatory, I know for certain even though
I heard not one of them : mr. Advani has many enemies who watch him for
discrediting mistakes, and if he had made any objectionable statement,
it would have been splashed across the front pages. It may be true, as
some papers have written, that some local BJP leaders did make
inflammatory speeches. but at least the starring speaker called for
peace and harmony, and the very invoking of Ram created a positive
atmosphere good enough to yield the actual result that no riots place.

By contrast, in Uttar Pradesh the ubiquitous public speaker was chief
minister Mulayam Singh Yadav, a man with an impressive crime record
(highlighted in Illustrated Weekly after the 1989 elections, but now
forgotten thanks to his uncompromising *secularism*), who gave very
inflammatory and confrontationist speeches : *"Not even a bird shall be
able to enter Ayodhya"*, for *"We will crush them"*. The power of the
word was demonstrated once more : while the man who called for
self-restraint and harmony had a peaceful Rathyatra, the man who called
for confrontation, got confrontation.[¹⁵³](notes.htm#note153) In spite
of unprecedented police deployment and curfews in many towns, riots
broke out.

A recurring scenario, in conformity with the general pattern of
Hindu-Muslim riots in the twentieth century, was that Hindu processions,
especially the Ram Jyoti processions, were attacked when passing through
Muslim- dominated areas. These attacks were largely a materialization of
all the fiery curses that Mulayam in his mass rallies had cast upon the
Ram processions. In many cases, the Hindus retaliated by attacking any
Muslims they could find, which unfortunately were mostly innocent
bystanders. Or villagers who got involved in a riot in town went back to
their village and attacked the Muslims they could find there (that was
the scenario of the huge Bhagalpur carnage of 1989, this repeated on a
smaller scale in Gonda).

However, it seems it was not only by the power of the word that those
riots got going. The Gonda riot started when actual bombs were thrown at
a Hindu procession. According to press reports as well as the report by
a BJP fact-finding team, at least one of them had been thrown from the
local Janata Dal office by people working for Munnan Khan, the local
MLA. This man is a friend of the chief minister : with the latter's
support, he was elected in 1989 as an independent candidate (though a JD
member) against the official candidate of the anti- Congress combine (a
BJP man). After people had been killed in this unilateral attack on the
procession (officially six ; according to Congress MP Anand Singh, one
hundred), mutual fighting broke out. And still later, some Hindu
hotheads took out revenge parties to Muslim quarters outside the city.

Many papers have, in their final overview of the riot, consciously
blurred the first stage of the Gonda riot, and highlighted the last
stage in order to absolve the Muslims and put the blame on he Hindus,
i.e. on the Janmabhoomi movement, i.e. on L.K. Advani who was far away.

Consider this report in the Times of India :"The procession numbering
about 5000 people was wending its way through the narrow streets of
Colonelganj shouting some slogans which could be deemed provocative in
an atmosphere of tension, when it was attacked with stones, bombs and
other missiles. The attack allegedly began from the roof of the Janata
Dal office, according to some shopkeepers whose shops were
gutted."[¹⁵⁴](notes.htm#note154) This suggests that slogan-shouting on
the part of the processionists has *caused* the violence. But of course,
bombs are not picked up and thrown in an emotional reaction to
inflammatory slogans, as too many journalists would like us to believe.
Bombs are quite certainly purchased or made beforehand, and a
bomb-attack is definitely premeditated. In fact, on rooftops not even
loose-lying stones are that readily available for impulsive acts of
stone-throwing.

It is very clear to an unbiased reader that the Gonda carnage has
started with a pre-meditated attack on the procession. Going by the
original newspaper reports, some Janata Dal *miscreants* affiliated with
Muslim party leaders were the aggressors, and the processionists were
the victims. However, it is in the nature of aggression that the victims
get the blame. Thus, a rapist will usually say that the girl had asked
for it, that she had *provoked* him. Here too, it is not stated simply
that the processionists *were attacked*. Rather, it is said in
goonda-speak, approvingly broadcast by the secularist press, that the
procession has *provoked violence* and *caused riots*.

In the same newspaper report, mention is made of an earlier incident:
*"It all began with a girl being teased by anti-social elements owing
allegiance to one Talukdar Khan."* Even for this earlier stage of the
communal conflict, the paper does not hide what side started. And then
it goes on to say that *"the other side was provoked and mobbed his
house"*, without specifying how exactly they were "provoked" by the
Muslims, upon which *"he drew up plans with his supporters to attack the
procession on September 30"*.[¹⁵⁵](notes.htm#note155)

So, at every stage of the escalation, you see Muslims starting, Hindus
merely reacting, and Muslims pre- planning large-scale violence. And it
is not me who says so, I read this in the reporting of secularist
newspapers (though not on their Opinion page). These are indications
from unsuspected sources that members of the Muslim community take a
disproportionately large part in starting communal violence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 11.3. Received wisdom on riots

As a foreigner, I have no access to certain archives, much less to
police records. But going by the riot information generally available, I
do find that there is truth in the received wisdom that

1.  a clear majority of the riots are started by Muslims,
2.  a clear majority of the victims are Muslims, at least in the final
    count
3.  a clear majority of the victims shot by the police (not including
    the Kar Sevaks) are Muslims; the police in most of these case claims
    self-defense against attacks by mobs or snipers.

To start with an unsuspected source, Mufti Mohammed Saiyid, Home
minister, made a statement on communal riots between January and April
1990. It lists nine riots, with their causes. The monthly Muslim India
reproduces the list[¹⁵⁶](notes.htm#note156), but omits parts of the
stated causes of five of the riots, e.g.: *"Clash between anti-social
elements...on black marketing of cinema tickets"*. This leaves the
reader guessing what was omitted. The causes of two other riots are
stated in the well-known indeterminate terminology: *"Alleged
misbehavior with a girl of the other community"*. but the two remaining
riot causes, the only ones clearly saying which community was attacked
(and leaving little doubt as to which community attacked), are these :
*"Stoning of Holi procession passing a place of worship"*, and *"Alleged
murder of the president of VHP, Kheda District, by persons belonging to
other community"*.

One might of course start blaming any possible (I hasten to prefix
*alleged*) *provocative slogans* uttered by the processionists and by
that local VHP leader; but normally, people who start the violence, like
throwing stones or committing murder, are held responsible for these
acts, and at least partly responsible for the reactive violence which
they may trigger. It is humanly quite feasible to listen to
objectionable and insulting slogans without having a knee-jerk reaction
of throwing bombs. It is a free human decision to react with violence.
At worst, slogans can be a reason for violence ; given human freedom,
they can never be the cause.

This take excuse of the provocative slogans leading mechanically to
stone-throwing and worse, is used routinely by biased reporters. For
another example, on October 30 there was a riot in Bijnor, with
officially 14 people killed, others say 55. A procession with about 100
women members of Durga Vahini had gone out to the Ghanta Ghar area.
*"There they raised communal slogans, resulting in stone-pelting and
bomb-throwing."*[¹⁵⁷](notes.htm#note157) This cheap excuse for a
pre-planned bomb attack is even contradicted by other information in the
same article. Superintendent of Police Praveen Singh arrested Municipal
Chairman Javed Aftab Siddiqui, alleged to have masterminded the riot.
District Magistrate Ramesh Yadav confirmed that the violence was
instigated by J.A. Siddiqui. This case proves that newspapers keep on
blaming the slogan-shouters even when it is crystal-clear from their own
information that the violence was premeditated and engineered by the
other side.

Let's hear some examples of newspapers inadvertently reporting that
Muslims have started riots, in late 1990. On October 29, *"members of
two communities indulged in heavy brickbatting, stabbing and exchange of
fire. The whole trouble started when Kar Sevaks shouting anti-
government slogans burnt the effigy of the chief minister, mr. Mulayam
Singh Yadav \[so far, no-one hurt\], and members of the other community
objected to this."*[¹⁵⁸](notes.htm#note158)

In Lucknow, BJP people *"marched towards Moulviganj shouting slogans.
Seeing the frenzied mob advancing towards them the members of the other
community took up positions and pelted stones and missiles, resulting in
a violent clash."*[¹⁵⁹](notes.htm#note159)

In Bulandshahr, near Aligarh, a bomb factory was *discovered* when it
exploded, due to uncareful handling of the precious factory output.
Since many riots, including the big ones of Bhagalpur and Gonda, have
started with bomb attacks on processions, many Hindus believe that
Muslims have started to manufacture bombs illegally. That may not be a
*communalist prejudice*, for the owner of the factory, who died in the
explosion (with three of his friends wounded) had at least a Muslim
name.[¹⁶⁰](notes.htm#note160) In the same mohalla, *"nine countrymade
bombs and a huge quantity of explosives were
recovered"*.[¹⁶¹](notes.htm#note161)

An article titled Anatomy of Carnage reports: *"In Ganj Dundwara in
Etah, the spark was provided by a minor injury to a Muslim girl caught
in a melee of 100-odd two- wheelers escorting BJP MP Uma
Bharati."*[¹⁶²](notes.htm#note162) So, this says that the Muslim girl
had not been attacked, not even while Uma Bharati was *whipping up
communal passions*, but then the Muslims retaliated to this non-attack
by attacking the Hindu crowd. And in Hyderabad, *"the latest about of
violence broke out after a leader of the Majlis- e-Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen
(MIM) was injured on December 5 following a private land dispute. Within
minutes of his admission into hospital - \[it\] was not serious -- MIM
supporters killed a Hindu traveling in an autorickshaw."* So, the
dispute was neither communal nor serious, and then Muslims made it
communal and serious by attacking and killing a non-involved Hindu.

While this article lists a number of riots that had a precise local
cause, the whole wave of violence is attributed in one sweep to, of
course, Ayodhya : *"There is no denying that the flames of communal
hatred which scorched the towns of Uttar Pradesh and Hyderabad were the
consequence of state impotence in responding to the message of revenge
and hatred that echoed with every frenzied call for a Ram Mandir at
Ayodhya."*

BJP leader V.K. Malhotra has aptly ridiculed this facile allegation in a
speech in the Lok Sabha :*"The country has witnessed 2500 riots between
1950 and 1990. Godhra city had communal riots in 1947, 52, 59, 61, 65,
67, 72, 74, 80, 83, 89 and 90. Were all of these caused by the Rathyatra
?"* He pointed out that those who were painting a grim picture of the
minorities being massacred, were doing a great disservice to the country
and giving it a bad name. The fact was that 90% of the people killed in
Hyderabad were Hindus. The riots in Delhi (Sadar Bazaar, on November 14)
had been engineered by Muslims, as even the Shahi Imam had admitted
(even while the *report* by the Leftist IPF had sophisticatedly blamed
economical rivalries and the Congress-I).[¹⁶³](notes.htm#note163) In
Sambhal (Moradabad, U.P.) all those killed were Hindus, and yet the BJP
was being blamed.

Mr. Malhotra also reminded his colleagues that the ex- chief minister of
Andhra Pradesh, Chenna Reddy, and Andhra opposition leader N.T. Rama Rao
had said that the BJP had had no role in the Hyderabad riots. That M.J.
Akbar, spokesman of the Congress fact-finding team (some called it a
*fault-finding team*), kept on blaming the BJP, only added to the
widespread suspicion that a Congress faction had fomented the riots in
order to make Chenna Reddy step down and make room for a Chief Minister
more agreeable to the party leadership. The same explanation has also
been given for the October riots in Karnataka, which had equally forced
a Congress Chief Minister to step down.

On the U.P. riots, Mr. Malhotra said that they had been caused by the
inflammatory speeches delivered by the Chief Minister:*"It was he who
had asked Muslims all over the state to were these irresponsible
utterances that caused the trouble in that
state."*[¹⁶⁴](notes.htm#note164)

We may conclude that the whole business of blaming Hindu organizations
and political parties has little to do with the actual responsibility.
While this dirty and futile game may be forgiven to politicians, it is
unacceptable from newsman and independent intellectuals. But it is not
only the automatical blaming of the Hindutva organization that has lost
its credibility. The blaming of politicians in general only touches the
surface of the problem. It is quite possible that the Congress has used
communal riots in order to get its own Andhra and Karnatka chief
ministers replaced; and if is not true, at least some other
party-political ploys are surely behind some of the riots. But then,
that is only possible because a riotproneness already characterizes the
communal co-existence in India. The unscrupled and cynical use of
communal friction by politicians is bad enough, but this problem is just
a parasite on the more fundamental problem: the communalism inherent in
India's Hindu-Muslim relation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 11.4 Muslims and the police

The mutual enmity between the Muslim community and the police is a
well-known feature of India's communal friction. Both parties say the
other one always starts. This is what newspaper reports say: *"A head
constable was killed in an assault in Mirzapur area \[of Ahmedabad\]
while a brother of a constable was stabbed to death in Gomitpur area.
Another person was also killed in stabbing... The head constable was
stoned to death by a group of rioting mob..."*[¹⁶⁵](notes.htm#note165)
Whatever the name of you- known-which community that stabs and stones
policemen and their family members: at any rate, the police clearly have
a point when they claim they are often put in a situation of pure
self-defense.

In the Hyderabad violence,*"police were finding it difficult to enforce
curfew in the lanes and by-lanes of the \[predominantly Muslim\] Old
City. People on the roof- tops were pelting stones on the police. On
Friday morning, about 200 people gathered... at around 11a.m. and began
pelting stones at the houses of members belonging to one \[i.e.Hindu\]
community, besides indulging in stabbing, looting and torching houses
and shop. to quell this mob,police opened fire...resulting in the death
of one person and injuries to three others. In view of the seriousness
of the situation, police clamped curfew at around 12.30 p.m... By this
time, nearly 15 persons had been stabbed."*[¹⁶⁶](notes.htm#note166)

In Aligarh, *"miscreants spread the rumour that two constables had been
stabbed by AMU student"*. These terrible rumour-mongers fortunately had
it all wrong: *"Senior officials, however, said that the two constable
were only beaten up with hockey sticks"*. Ah, so the aversion of Muslim
students for policemen is not that bad after all. Even more reassuring
is the explanation given by the AMU vice-chancellor, prof.M.N.Farooqi:
*"The students have formed vigilance groups. One such group stopped two
or three constables when they were entering the university in plain
clothes. And a fight ensued."*[¹⁶⁷](notes.htm#note167) After stating
that the AMU vigilance groups routinely beat up people dressed in plain
clothes, he doesn't add what would have been the procedure if they had
been in uniform. Stabbing instead of hockey sticks?

In fairness, Hindu students of BHU have also taken on the police, albeit
only with some stone-throwing, and only after being *provoked* by a ban
on the demonstration they wanted to take out against the Aligarh
killings. A lathicharge was enough to control the situation, and on one
got killed.

In Aligarh however, the situation must have been very grim for the
policemen, for they went to the unusual length of not resuming duty on
October 13, after their two colleagues had been attacked. These attacks
had by far not been the only ones, and now the policemen were not even
allowed to defend themselves anymore. That at least is pro-Muslim. *"So
he has ordered us not fire on them even as we are being attacked by them
every day. We can't even fire in self-defense."* The policemen even
quoted him as saying: *Go die, but don't kill*.[¹⁶⁸](notes.htm#note168)

A BJP spokesman said that the violence in Aligarh had started when a
Friday mob \[i.e. coming from the mosque\] assaulted a policeman and
snatched his rifle. *"The violence spread to other areas of town
including AMU, which has always been a hotbed of communalism."* The BJP
spokesman, J.P.Mathur, also alleged that in Badaun two boys were caught
throwing a bomb at a mosque and turned out to be Muslims: a genuine case
of provocation. He also reported that a murderous assault had been made
on BJP MP Uma Bharati, known for her fiery Ayodhya
speeches.[¹⁶⁹](notes.htm#note169)

Another version of the Aligarh eruption says that on December 7, *"some
youths came out of a mosque after the Friday prayers and confronted a
PAC picket in the Kotwali area. From all accounts the PAC overreacted,
and thus began an orgy of violence..."* Thus ? We have not been told
anything precise about how it began. What does *confronted* mean ?
Further on in the article, about the same incident we read that *" when
the PAC men were confronted by the Muslim youths, they first fired
plastic bullets but resorted to firing when three of their men,
including the senior superintendent of police, were
injured."*[¹⁷⁰](notes.htm#note170) This makes sufficiently clear that
the PAC had a point when they invoked self-defense as a legitimate
ground for firing.

Nevertheless Muslim leaders and secularists go on blaming the police
Local Congress leader Haji Nooruddin said :*"Had the police shown a
little more restraint, the slogan-shouting youths would have dispersed
without any major damage."* From the reports, it is clear that the
Muslims youths attacked the police. But even if Haji Nooruddin is right
in equating this attack with mere, we may remind him that according to
Muslim and secularist commentators, slogan-shouting mechanically and
irremediably (and therefore, excusably) *provokes* bomb- throwing or
other lethal reactions. So these Muslim youths who *confronted* the
police, even if it had been with mere slogans, should not complain ;
just like the Hindu processionists who get killed by Muslim bombs
without any secularist editorial to weep for them.

Janata Dal leader Ajit Singh reportedly charged the PAC with collusion
\[with the Hindus\] and has questioned its presence *"in a cent per
minority locality in Aligarh"*. And he attributed the violence to Uma
Bharati's speeches and L.K. Advani's Rathyatra. With that *"he
indirectly admits that the minority community was provoked to attack
first"*, comments reader Sahil Brelvi. [¹⁷¹](notes.htm#note171) And he
adds a report of another riot : *"I was in Bareilly on December 7 and
the facts ascertained from authentic sources and reported widely in the
local newspapers point to a pre- planned mischief by the minority
community, in collusion with the Janata Dal and the Left parties **to
teach a lesson to the VHP**. The trouble started immediately after
Friday prayers when the mob fanned out on a killing spree in all
directions shouting **jihad**. One **crusader** snatched the rifle of a
policeman on duty signaling the trouble and punitive action by the
police."* If Muslim bomb-throwing has to be glossed over on the ground
that it was *provoked by slogans*, then why all this uproar about police
action which, after all, has merely been *provoked* by jihad ?

So, rather than blaming the police, mr. Ajit Singh and many other
secularists should answer mr. Brelvi's questions : *"Why the communal
trouble starts on Fridays after jama prayers, as in Aligarh, Hyderabad
and elsewhere ? How can the police succeed in flushing out the illegal
arms and check the attackers without being posted on the troubled spot ?
Why is it that illegal arms are mostly recovered from minority areas ?"*
M. Brelvi also makes short work of the reports blaming the PAC :*"Not
long ago in Meerut, the earlier reports of PAC 'excesses' in Maliana on
the minority community were found baseless, when handgrenades and
bullets with Pakistan Ordnance Factory markings were recovered by the
same PAC."*

And this is what happened in Kanpur on December 12 :*"In a major
flare-up on Wednesday, armed mobs came on the roads in curfew-bound
areas on Chamanganj and Beconganj following provocative speeches on
loudspeakers mounted atop some religious places, and mounted an attack
on a police picket at the Phoolmati trisection and surrounded the
**Heerman ka Purwa** police outpost. According to \[director-general of
police\] dr. R.P. Mathur, the police personnel facing the threat of
being lynched or murdered, opened fire resulting in the death of four
rioters and dispersal of others."*[¹⁷²](notes.htm#note172) So it is true
that the police has killed Muslims. The statistics will correctly say
that more Muslims than Hindus got killed : four to zero (though
elsewhere in town some Hindus got stabbed to death). Yet, they have no
one to blame but themselves.

So, there is no truth in the picture given by secularist commentators,
that the PAC decided one day to start a *genocide* against the poor and
defenseless Muslim community. That is not to say that police crimes and
atrocities have never occurred.[¹⁷³](notes.htm#note173) But they cannot
completely explain the systematic attack on the PAC by Muslim goondas on
the streets and by secularists in the press.

A better explanation can be found in the statement by *a Muslim leader*
to Tavleen Singh : *"Once Muslim feel that the state is not going to
protect them and they are on their own, it is only a question of time
before they start doing what the Sikhs are doing in Punjab. As it is,
when we visit a town after a communal riot, people say : if the police
wasn't there, we could take the Hindus on."*[¹⁷⁴](notes.htm#note174) The
militant Muslim want the PAC out of the way, to have their hands free.

And this is what Imam Bukhari has said : *"We will look after ourselves.
Let there be a direct confrontation between communal forces. The world
will witness the battle, but let the police forces keep
out."*[¹⁷⁵](notes.htm#note175) A section of the Students Islamic
Movement (SIM) threatened *direct action* if a fresh attempt was made to
touch the Babri Masjid.[¹⁷⁶](notes.htm#note176) Syed Shahabuddin
declared that he could *understand* the young Muslim who had told him :
*"Let us blow up this bridge, let us do something. If the state can kill
us, we have the right to rebel against it."*[¹⁷⁷](notes.htm#note177)

On December 18, 1990, prominent members of the Indian Union Muslim
League submitted a memorandum to the Prime Minister, demanding, among
many other things, the disbanding of the PAC and the constitution of a
special anti-riot force with 30% Muslims. This more-than- proportional
grip on the police is really the punch line. The demand to just get the
police out of the way (voiced by Imam Bukhari and by Tavleen Singh's
spokespersons) will not be readily conceded, so the next best thing is
to get a friendly police. Of course, Muslim demands for a
more-than-proportional reservation in a number of sectors of society
were a central feature of pre- independence Muslim League politics, and
we know to what it has led.[¹⁷⁸](notes.htm#note178)

N.S. Saxena has devoted a two-part article to Riots in U.P. the
questions.[¹⁷⁹](notes.htm#note179) He attacks the cheap explanations and
cheap solution proposals that are being repeated again and again in the
press as well as on the Lok Sabha floor. Thus, no matter how crude and
inflammatory the rhetoric of Mulayam may have been, it has not pushed
the number of riots and riot victims spectacularly higher than in other
years. Under Mulayam's predecessors, U.P. was about equally riot-prone.
Similarly, Advani's rathyatra, if at all a factor, has also not managed
to make much of a difference. After all, U.P. was already riot-prone
under the totally different administration in unpartitioned British
India.

If we look for other factors that are now falsely mentioned as decisive,
but that have not made a difference in the past, we see that in the ten
years preceding independence, the percentage of Muslims in the U.P.
police was 30 to 35%, and yet there were hundreds of riots every year.
The *insecurity* among Muslims was so big that they opted for the
creation of Pakistan. In the communal-riot-free year 1970, Muslims
formed only 2% in the PAC.

SO, the solution for communal violence lies not in a communalist
recruitment policy (reservations for Muslims in the police). The most
immediate need is that all people guilty of communal violence in any of
its stages be brought to book without exception. If riot-mongers do land
in jail, they may not start again, and it may deter their colleagues.
Also, riot investigation reports should be taken serious, instead of
ending in a drawer. On the basis of real impartisan investigation
(instead of these partisan *fact-finding missions* with their all too
convenient conclusions) and court proceedings, fingers must also be
pointed at the culprits behind the scene. The cloud around the communal
identity of both killers and victims should go. Now, everyone thinks his
community has suffered worst. There are even Muslims who believe that
riots are mostly started by Hindus, and Muslim communalists actually
stage dharnas to protest the communal violence which they themselves
have fomented, without feeling ridiculous. At any rate, the truth must
be told, the causes of the riots diagnosed without secretiveness, and
the culprits should bear the consequences through judicial prosecution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 11.5. Who starts ?

One phase of the 1990 Aligarh violence was the attack on a train on
December 8. *"Four passengers were killed when a 600-strong mob stopped
the Gomti Express at Daud Khan near Aligarh, stoned the train and set on
fire the Second Class bogey in which the passengers were traveling. Five
passengers were also injured."*[¹⁸⁰](notes.htm#note180) The unofficial
death toll was eleven. I have it from one of the passengers in that
ill-fated train, that the attackers were a Muslim mob. Papers reported
tellingly that an earlier attack on a train had been attempted *"close
to a Muslim locality"*.[¹⁸¹](notes.htm#note181)

The violence on November 7 had started, according to a Frontline report,
with *"an attack on a group of people bound for Etah from the house of
Manawwar Hussain, ex- chairman of the Nagar Palika, and from a nearby
Masjid. A similar incident was reported on November
16"*.[¹⁸²](notes.htm#note182) The police has lodged a criminal case
against mr. Hussain.

We may as well continue to read this report :*"On December 4, the
motorcade of the BJP MP, Uma Bharati, who was supposed to address a
public meeting, was reportedly attacked from the house of Manawwar
Hussein... Trouble started again on December 7 when some PAC men were
attacked by a group of people belonging to the minority community while
returning from a masjid in the Upper Court area. One of them snatched
the rifle of a PAC jawan and stabbed him. The jawan's colleague who
tried to save him, was also attacked. Bombs were reportedly thrown on
the PAC men who retaliated by opening fire killing some of the
assailants. The news spread like fire and clashes between the two
communities began."*

The same report quotes the vice-chancellor of AMU, Mohammed Nasim
Farooqi, who traces the violence to the Ram Janmabhoomi issue :*"It is
wrong to say that the minority community had a hand in the violence. Why
should they be insecure when they are in the mainstream of public life
?"* He mistakenly links riot starting with the secularist concept of
*"insecurity among the minorities"*, as the standard explanation if not
justification for all kinds of anti-social
behaviour.[¹⁸³](notes.htm#note183) Instead of denying the proven facts
of the Muslim initiative in every single round of the Aligarh violence,
he should question his own dogma (now contradicted by the facts) that
the secure Aligarh Muslims are incapable of starting riots ; this at
least is what a man of scientific temper would do.

This report I have been quoting, was published in a secularist paper,
and the reporter is in sympathy with the anti-PAC elements, as will be
clear from the italicized words: *"The people's hatred for the PAC knows
no bounds. They have been demanding for a long time that the PAC be
removed"*. But PAC men aver that once they go out the town would go up
in flames. *"The PAC's presence is as good as its absence', said one of
the saner elements in the town."* Our reporter, K. Kannan, thinks that
the aversion against the *communalized* PAC has somehow remained
uncommunalized, and that it is *the people* who want them to go. In
fact, it is just the Muslims and the secularists who want to expel or
disband the PAC.

So, here we have one more case of a press report giving facts that just
don't allow any other explanation than that Muslims started the
violence, and yet it ends with supporting the Muslim demands and blaming
the police. While such a single case does not give a conclusive picture
of who is most riot-prone, it does prove the tendency in the press to
gloss over Muslim violence and to blame those who get blamed by *the*
Muslims be they the police or L.K. Advani.

Let us formulate a working hypothesis for further research. Not using
any esoteric information, just carefully reading the newspaper reports,
I think there are strong indications that riots are in a majority of
cases started by Muslims, often after Friday prayers ; that Hindus
commit large-scale reactive violence, mostly against weaker and less
organized Muslim communities; and that the high incidence of
confrontations between police and Muslims is also often started by
Muslims, so that the police perceives its own action as self-defense.

These provisional conclusions are based on a limited number of cases. So
they can be amended once positive proof for alternative generalizations
is offered (but not earlier). However, these few riot reports and
comments have furnished some striking cases of blatant distortion
sneaking in on the way from *news* to *views*. When the report left no
ambiguity about Muslims having started a riot, still the editorial (or
even the peculiar terminology in the riot report) would blame the Hindus
or the police.

If taken seriously, the systematic blaming of the Ram Janmabhoomi
campaign for all the riots should make us very happy. Because, if all
the riots are caused by this one factor, then that means that there are
no longer any riots being caused by all the other factors that used to
cause riots in the past. So, most riot factors have been eliminated :
remove this one Ram factor, and there will be communal harmony.
Unfortunately, the secularist *blame Ram* explanation has little to do
with the real forces behind the continuing communal violence in India.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 11.6. Riot strategy

As for the latter-stage attacks by Hindu goondas on innocent Muslim
villagers, which took place in the huge riots of Bhagalpur 1989 and
Gonda 1990, both in reaction to the initial attack by Muslims on a Hindu
procession, these are equally hideous crimes as the original attack on
the procession. But the responsibility for this stage of violence is
shared with those who created the entire riot in the first place. For,
there is a system in the seeming madness of Muslims starting a riot in
which they know Muslims will be killed.

Syed Shahabuddin has once rhetorically asked how people could believe
that riots are most often started by Muslims, when in fact substantially
more Muslims get killed in riots than Hindus. Indeed, such suicidal
behaviour needs a good explanation. The paradox only exists when we
accept Syed Shahabuddin's communalist assumption that it is *the*
Muslims who get killed in riots. In reality, there are two very distinct
groups of people involved: those who start riots, and those who bear the
consequences.

Goondas have of course their own imponderable reasons for creating
trouble. But the assumption we must make in order to make sense of
crimes such as the communal riots, is that those who commit them expect
some real benefit from them. Now the benefit that communalist
politicians may expect from a riot in which people of their own
community get killed, is quite substantial. It makes the ordinary
people, who have no specific animosity against people of the other
community, perceive the latter as the enemy. You thereby strengthen
their feeling of being a community, in which the members have to depend
on each other against a hostile environment. This can go as far as a
physical migration from mixed neighbourhoods to *pure* ones. Moreover,
you make them feel they need a strong protector: in politics the
communalist MP or MLA, on the ground his goonda gang.

This scenario is not a hypothetical construction. It has been staged on
a very large scale in 1946, when the Muslim League felt that it was not
yet sufficiently supported by the common Muslims, and that the Hindus
had not yet unambiguously conceded Pakistan. To convince the former that
only the Muslim League and Pakistan could protect them, and to terrorize
the latter into the big concession, the Muslim League government in
Bengal organized a mass killing of Hindus (the Direct Action Day). They
knew fully well that the Hindus would end up retaliating by killing
innocent Muslims. Upon which more Muslims would kill Hindus, etc. The
important effect was that Muslims suffered at the hands of the Hindus ,
lost all faith in co-existence with them, and joined hands with the
communalist leaders. The pogroms against the Hindus caused a lot of
deaths among the Muslim population, but for the Muslim League this
brought resounding success.[¹⁸⁴](notes.htm#note184)

This scenario is being repeated on a small scale in many of the communal
riots in independent India. When in these riots Muslims get killed, it
is at least partly owing to a design by another class of Muslims.

What makes creating riots even more attractive, is the sympathy you get
for them from secularist politicians and intellectuals. When the Muslim
League killed thousands of Hindus in Calcutta, Congress leader
Jawaharlal Nehru looked the other way. But when Hindu workers staying in
Calcutta fled to their villages in Bihar and started killing Muslims
there, the same Nehru proposed to bomb those villages from the air. When
Hindus got killed, he didn't move a finger, but the killing of Muslims
was enough to blow off his Gandhian facade and make him demand
indiscriminate killing. When mass killing accompanied the Partition,
mass killings which both sides equally committed, and for which the
ultimate responsibility lay with those who had wanted Partition in the
first place, communist writer Bhishma Sahni wrote the novel Tamas, in
which the Hindus are painted as the villains.

When today Muslim goondas create a riot in Bhagalpur or in Gonda, the
secularist press will obscure this beginning (in both cases bombs thrown
from Muslim establishments at Hindu processions) and highlight the
ensuing Hindu part of the violence. Some M.J. Akbar will poignantly
describe the suffering of some Muslim villagers, and then blame the
atmosphere created by the Rathyatra in some distant town, without even
mentioning that the riot started with a pre-planned armed attack on a
Hindu procession. That is how the secularists assure communal
riot-mongers double fun : first the proper aim of the riot is achieved,
and then on top of that, your very enemies are covered with abuse for
provoking the riot.

Not only do you gain on the propaganda front, the press may even come
out in support of your demands. For some time, Muslim communalists have
demanded a ban on processions. More than 95% of religious processions
are Hindu processions anyway, for processions are a thoroughly Pagan
practice which in Islam can only be a heterodox oddity. Now, on 14
November 1990, Muslim communal groups together with Sikh communal groups
took out a demonstration through Delhi's Sadar Bazaar, and went violent,
killing several people. Oddly, the next day several editorials opined
that this spate of violence proved the need for a *ban on processions*.
The violent demonstration was a sadbhavana yatra, a *goodwill march*. It
was of course no procession, in fact it had nothing to do with religion
(it was neither a Sikh nor a Muslim festival, and they don't have common
festivals anyway). And yet, the secularists have made it an occasion for
support to the Muslim communalists' long-standing demand for a ban on
Hindu processions.

With its distorted representations of communal riots, with its guarantee
to Muslim communalists that they will never get the full load of
exposing and condemnation which they deserve, the secularist press, for
all its bla-bla about communal harmony, is effectively giving a measure
of encouragement to riot-fomenters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 11.7. A case study in riot comment

For one more example of secularist analysis of the riot problem, let us
take a look at the article Making a Lebanon of India? by Prem Shankar
Jha.[¹⁸⁵](notes.htm#note185) The article's object is to show that the
more compromising position of the new Chandra Shakhar government towards
the Ram Janmabhoomi campaigners, has been the cause of more communal
riots than V.P. Singh's and Mulayam Singh Yadav's confrontationist
policy had been (P.S. Jha had been V.P. Singh's spokesman). It advocates
a hard stand against the Ram Janmabhoomi movement and all that goes with
it.

*"For four years, the VHP has sown the wind of communal hatred. We are
now reaping the whirlwind. In a sustained blast of propaganda, each and
every real or fancied grievance of the Hindus has been pulled out of the
closet and aired till it has begun to look respectable."* For almost a
century, Muslim communal groups have been articulating their demands
mostly in terms of grievances. If four years can make us reap a
whirlwind, what about forty years, or ninety ? For more than a thousand
years, every Muslim has been drilled in the belief that all non-Muslims
are his enemies, that he should fight them, because Allah has said so
dozens of times in the Quran and the Prophet has set this example. If
four years of propaganda can make us reap a whirlwind, what about a
thousand years ?

Here come the *real or fancied* Hindu grievances. Referring to an
article by mr. K.R. Malkani, member of the BJP national executive, mr.
Jha sums up : *"India was partitioned on Muslim insistence. India is
having to spend thousands of crores of rupees every year on defending
itself against 'Islamic' Pakistan. Every census shows a Muslim
population growth well above the national average. They would not agree
to a uniform civil law, commended by the Constitution. The Muslim would
not agree to the relocating of a mosque or grave -- to widen a road or
right an old wrong -- something common in Muslim countries. And on top
of all this, they are complaining all the time."* This propaganda it is,
that has been causing communal riots, according to mr. Jha.

Actually, each of the contentions made by mr. Malkani, are pure fact. Of
course India was partitioned on Muslim insistence, no amount of
history-rewriting can change that. Of course this partition and the
immediate invasion by Pakistan in Kashmir, has forced India to spend a
lot on defense. It is a fact verifiable from the census figures that the
percentage of Muslims has been constantly rising since 1881, in British
India, in Pakistan, in India, and in Bangla Desh, in each of these
states and in each decade without exception.[¹⁸⁶](notes.htm#note186) It
is a fact that the leaders of the Muslim community, supported by many
secularists, have defended the Shariat as the sole Muslim personal law,
and go on refusing the implementation of the constitutional
recommendation of a common civil code. It is a fact that in at least one
case, *the* Muslims have been refusing the relocation of a mosque
structure. And it is a fact that they are complaining all the time,
witness the papers of each of the Muslims parties big and small.

In this complaining, they are supported by secularists like mr. Jha.
Further down he writes : *"Muslims too have their grievances against the
majority community, several of which have far more substance than those
articulated by mr. Malkani."* Personally, I think that mr. Malkani has
not even mentioned the most serious grievances of the Hindus. Anyway,
let's hear those of the Muslims.

Muslims are poor, under-represented in the bureaucracy, the armed forces
and the private corporate sector, over- represented in unemployment, and
very vulnerable to the effects of riots when self-employed as craftsmen
or shopkeepers.

These are grievances, but are they *"grievances against the majority
community"* ? Where Muslims live together with other communities, they
are often the poorer community, even if they are in power and declare an
Islamic republic. In Malaysia, the non-Muslim Chinese are far better off
than the Muslim Malays. In Egypt, the Copts are a prosperous business
community, though they often live in fear of the poorer Muslim majority.
Muslim poverty in India is largely due to factors unrelated to the
Hindus, such as large families, little education (these two are
related), and the fact that many rich Muslims in 1947 chose Pakistan. It
is a socialist mistake that economic inequality is the "fault" of the
government (here assumed to be a largely Hindu government).

The educational backwardness of the Muslims is again not the fault of
the Indian Constitution and laws, which give all due safeguards and even
privileges, it is not the fault of other communities. But the
educational backwardness itself is the single largest factor in the
Muslims' underrepresentation in the bureaucracy and the corporate
private sector, and their high unemployment rate. That it is not the
Hindus who keep the minority underrepresented in any sphere, can be
proven from the situation of the other minorities : Sikhs are quite
*over-represented* in government and army posts, Christians in
education, Parsis and Jains in business.

That Muslim shopkeepers are very vulnerable during riots, is a fact. It
also counts for Hindu shopkeepers. But I agree with mr. Jha that Muslim
craftsmen and traders have been singled out for attacks and destruction
of their trade equipment in many communal riots, the motive being more
economical than communal.

Now the riots themselves. Mr. Jha says that Rajasthan hardly knew any
riots until October 1989. The blame is of course on the VHP. They came
in with their propaganda *"in preparation of the centenary year of dr.
Hedgewar, founder of the RSS"*, so before 1989. They were followed by
*Muslim activists* who *"began to sensitize the Muslim masses of the
threat that the Ram Janmabhoomi posed to their religion"*. Can you
believe it ? This secularist is repeating, without any distancing or
questioning, the BMAC claim that *Islam is in danger* due to the Ram
Janmabhoomi ; a danger to which the Muslim *masses* have to be
*sensitized*. Anyway, these Muslim *activists* began arriving as late as
1988. And by the time they were all there, in 1989, the communal riots
started.

Then mr. Jha sets out to disprove the Hindu assumption that nine out of
ten riots are started by Muslims.[¹⁸⁷](notes.htm#note187) He gives the
list of communal clashes between 1 p.m. of 29 October, and 6 p.m. of 30
October, a time-span of 29 hours. No doubt he carefully selected a time
favourable to his case. He could have chosen any of the days of the
Hyderabad carnage, or any Friday, to disprove his own suggestion that
Hindus are more riot-prone. But no, mr. Jha wants to pull our attention
away from those more representative occasions, and towards this one day
when he counted more Hindu than Muslim violence.

In different places in Karnataka, four Muslims were attacked, one of
whom died, some Muslim property was set on fire, an attempt to damage a
mosque was stopped by the police, and an Idgah was damaged. A one-sided
struggle, indeed, but no proof that Hindus are just as good at starting
trouble : communal violence had been going on in the state, not too
intense but rather widespread, for most of October. Mr. Jha has merely
selected a time when it was the Hindus' turn.

In Andhra, a *person* was assaulted, and a workshop belonging to a
*Muslim* was burnt. Since *Muslims* are named as such, can we make an
inference about the religion of the *person* ? Further, a Muslim was
killed and an Idgah and a Dargah attacked. Then follow a number of
explosions and acts of arson not specified as to community, which
experienced readers tend to see as a strong pointer in a certain
direction.

In Jaipur, a Hindu succumbed to his injuries, stones were thrown at a
mosque, a Muslim was assaulted, a Muslim's shop set on fire. Alleged
BJP/VHP workers set four (empty) State buses on fire. A Muslim was
stabbed and two Dargahs desecrated.

In Ahmedabad, police *had to open fire*, killing a Hindu. A mosque was
damaged, two Muslims set on fire, of whom one died. In Baroda, two
bodies of Hindus were recovered. *"Two Muslims were Killed and four
injured in police firing"*, an event bracketed with an anonymous *"spate
of stabbing, mercifully not fatal"* (the toning- down and the anonymity
are unmistakable pointers). Elsewhere, *"the police had to open fire on
another mob, and one Hindu was killed"*. When Hindus get killed, it is
because the police had no choice but to fire on the *mob*. But when a
Muslim gets killed, it is a different story : *"No one needs to be
reminded of the outrage committed on Muslims by the PAC in Meerut,
Bhagalpur, or now in Aligarh"*. About Aligarh, I have fairly complete
information, and it is quite clear that the PAC was the target of
unsolicited attack by Muslim *mobs* on several occasions.

I cannot check the correctness and especially the completeness of this
overview of a day of riots. Though following the national press closely,
including the paper in which mr. Jha's article appeared, I have not
heard of a number of these incidents. But I have heard of ten or so more
people killed (and an unknown number injured) in communal violence
during the 29 hours under consideration, in a very well-known incident :
the shooting of unarmed Kar Sevaks in Ayodhya by the infantry of the
ruling secularist sect, around noon on 30 October. In spite of mr. Jha's
attempt to conceal it, most victims on his chosen day were Hindus, not
Muslims. Apart from that, one cannot fail to notice that mr. Jha's
interpretation of what happened and the terminology he uses, are far
from neutral.

*"Throughout the weeks that preceded the Kar Seva, the pattern had
remained unvarying from day to day. While miscreants of both communities
were active, the majority of the attacks took place on Muslims. There
was a pattern to the sustained provocation: mosque were attacked, Idgahs
and Dargahs desecrated, provocative and insulting slogans shouted, until
mayhem broke loose."* Like so many times before, a secularist builds up
this pre-riot crescendo, all the way up to the *provocative slogans*
stage, and then disappoints the reader by hiding in a cloud of
impersonal vagueness :*Mayhem broke loose*. What does he have to hide ?
If the slogans were provocative, does it mean that they effectively
*provoked* violence ? In that case, the implication would be that the
violence came from the other side. And that is precisely what so many
riot reports suggest : when Hindus appear in public and do something
that some Muslim care to consider *provocative*, they get a violent
welcome.

And in fact, mr. Jha almost concedes as much. If not in October, then
certainly in December. He says that the Muslim youth *"have slipped the
leash of their elders, and decided, as they see it, to defend
themselves. The lumpen and the criminals belonging to the Muslims have
therefore come into their own. That is why the death toll is so high
now. For unlike October, both sides are now \[mid-December\] indulging
in retributory murder."*

According to mr. Jha, the reason for the increasing resort to armed
struggle among the Muslim youth, is that the unflinching defense of the
Babri Masjid by V.P. and Mulayam, had been replaced with a policy of
*"compromise with Hindu communalism"*. Chandra Shekhar was in effect
pressuring the Muslims into giving up the Babri Masjid, or so it seem to
these Muslim youngsters.

And now that he was working out a compromise, rather than taking a 100%
pro-Muslim and 100% anti-Hindu stand, the country will have to face the
consequences :*"Worse, far worse, is yet to come. Hot-heads among the
Muslim youth are already saying that the only way to deal with the PAC
is with AK-47s. They are talking of dying with honour rather than
waiting to be extinguished. The search for Ak-47s may well have begun,
and the first signs of a link-up with Sikh extremists have already
appeared."*

So, the Janmabhoomi campaign is not taking India towards Ram Rajya, but
towards *"another Lebanon, Cyprus or Ethiopia, a country torn apart by
unending civil war"*. Incidentally, the comparisons are telling. In
Lebanon, the civil war started as an attempt by the Christians to stop
the progressive take-over of their country by the Palestinians (who had
tried this before in Jordan, but had been driven out). In Cyprus, it
started with a Muslim demand for a partition and a larger-than-
proportionate piece of the territory, which they got, by force. Ethiopia
is more complex, involving Communist as well as Muslim separatism in
Eritrea and a decade of Communist misrule and oppression.

But let us mention the more straightforward case of Sudan, which mr. Jha
somehow overlooked even though it is as much tormented by communal
violence as Lebanon is. In Sudan, a Muslim majority in the North has
imposed the Shariat on the non-Muslim South. Faced with this Islamic
oppression, the non-Muslim Dinkas and other peoples in the South want a
separate secular state. With Lybian aid, the Muslim North fights an
all-out war to keep the South down. When Muslims are in a minority, they
want partition; but when it is a non-Muslim minority that wants a
separate state, the Muslim rulers don't let their booty escape.

What is the practical conclusion of this article ? Does it condemn the
people who take up arms because they don't like a political compromise
on Ayodhya worked out by a democratic government ? No, it wants the
Hindus to make the concessions demanded by those who threaten with Ak-
47s. Mr. Jha writes in his conclusion that *"the only way to tackle
communalism is to tackle it head on, never, never compromise with it...
Compromising with the aggressor gives him legitimacy... Thus,
paradoxically, compromise hardens positions, increases self-
righteousness, and raises the level of violence in society."* I agree
with him, but for me that implies the opposite of what it implies for
him. He thinks it means no compromise with a basically non-violent
mass-movement for the symbolic redress of an old crime, systematically
inflicted on Hindu society by invaders who came with the medieval
equivalents of AK-47s. For him, it also means a pre-emptive compromise
with those who may take to the AK- 47 in the near future, in order to
deal with the police force and the *majority community*.

In my opinion, an essential part of any successful anti- riot policy is
that no compromise whatsoever is made with those who start or threaten
riots. If they find they can extract concessions by starting or
threatening riots, they are encouraged to continue and perfect this
strategy. It must be made clear to riot-mongers that their strategy will
not yield them anything. The Shah Bano decision, the ban on The Satanic
Verses and other books, the non-recognition of the Hindu rights over Ram
Janmabhoomi, have all been obtained by Muslim extremists by means of
actual or threatened *agitation*. All these concessions to extremist
threats have encouraged the same extremists to continue stoking violence
for new demands.

In autumn 1990, they knew perfectly well that riots would be used by the
secularist press to blacken the BJP/VHP and to intensify its opposition
against the Ram Mandir. When we see who gets systematically blamed by
the press and the politicians for any and every riot, then we know who
has no objective interest in fomenting riots. And when we see who gets
all the sympathy, and the support for their demands, whenever riots
occur, we know who has an objective interest in continuing the riots.

A very good illustration is the next and very important demand of the
Muslim communalists : a larger than proportionate reservation for
Muslims in the army and the police. With every clash between Muslims and
the PAC, we see secularists plead for the disbanding of the PAC, and the
granting of reservations of the Muslims (*the minorities*, as they say),
either in the existing forces or in a new anti-riot force, amounting to
some 25% or even 30%. In other words, we see those who started the
carnage in Bhagalpur '89, in Gonda '90, in Aligarh '90, in Hyderabad
'90, being rewarded with secularist support for their demands, and more
support with every riot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 11.8. Hindu riots

For good measure, I must not let the Hindu riot-mongers go scot-free
either. In the typical riot cases where Hindus merely react to attacks
by some Muslims, it is certainly possible to keep the quantity of
violent revenge at a lower level than is now the case. If the Hindu
organizations, when a communal crisis breaks out, immediately apply
themselves to limiting the damage, immediately move in to calm people
down and to effectively prevent the anti-social elements in their own
ranks from attacking Muslims, then the death toll could be far lower. I
have so far never heard from a Hindu activist being thrown out of these
Hindu organizations for irresponsible and violent behaviour. Yet, such
miscreants certainly exist, and if the RSS etc. fail to stop them or to
formally punish them, these organizations are co-responsible.

A plea which these Hindu organizations often make, is that goondas with
no affiliation to the VHP, RSS or BJP, merely use the riot, after others
have started it, to get their share of looting and raping. I cannot
judge in what percentage of the cases that this was what
happened[¹⁸⁸](notes.htm#note188), but suppose that it really goes like
that. Even then a determined move to restore order and discipline within
all sections of the local Hindu community would make a substantial
difference. That this is not being done on anything like a sufficient
scale, is clear to me from the fact that the apologetic
literature[¹⁸⁹](notes.htm#note189) of the RSS, while making a rather
strong case for this organization's non-riot-prone character, does
hardly say anything about the constructive role they have or have not
played in the process of stopping the violence once it has started, or
in the healing process afterwards.[¹⁹⁰](notes.htm#note190)

In my opinion, the virginity which the RSS spokesmen claim concerning
the start of riots, and their unimpressive record (relative to their
numbers and level of discipline and organization) in actively
intervening to stop violence against Muslims[¹⁹¹](notes.htm#note191),
are the result of one and the same fact concerning the RSS: it is not a
militant organization of vanguard troopers (as they are portrayed by
some secularists who like to clamour about *Hindu fascism*), but an
organization of quite ordinary people, shopkeepers and schoolboys, who
have no inclination to start real fights or to enter the battlefield
once the fight has started, even as peace- makers.

While RSS workers are killed by the dozens by the Khalistani terrorists
(and/or by Pakistani provocateurs dressed as Sikhs), we never hear of
any violent retaliation. This lack of retaliation is not just because of
a policy of not aggravating tension between *Sikh Hindus* and *other
Hindus*, but simply because the RSS doesn't have the capability to
strike. Incidentally, this frustrates the Khalistani and Pakistani
calculations : believing the secularist propaganda about the RSS as a
*fascist militia* ready to terrorize *the minorities*, they had hoped to
get another *Direct Action Day* going, with mutual killing of common
Hindus and Sikhs.

Apart from reactive violence against Muslim attacks, the Hindu groups
cannot disown some cases of unprovoked aggression on their own part.
While the Rathyatra had been peaceful, mr. Advani's arrest was the
occasion for a more grim and militant line of action on the part of BJP
workers. In Jaipur, the Bharat bandh on October 24 generated a series of
riots.

As any communist or trade-unionist can tell you, a strike is seldom a
collectively voluntary action. Most often, a motivated minority forces
the strike on the majority. In the Bharat bandh also, the BJP workers
went around the city to check that all the shopkeepers downed their
shutters. According to their own explanation, a shopkeeper refused to
comply with their demand that he close his shop, took out a gun and shot
at them. And that was the beginning of a week of communal violence. If
one analyzes the responsibility, one might say that the demand to close
shop was an encroachment on the shopkeeper's constitutional rights :
already more of a *provocation* than the legitimate though insensitive
use of free speech to utter *provocative slogans*. That doesn't justify
the use of firearms yet.

The readiness to retaliate against the most defenseless classes among
the Muslims, in reaction to well-planned Muslim goonda violence, betrays
that trait stereotypically attributed by Muslims to Hindus : cowardice
(not that the Islamic behaviour of throwing bombs at processions is all
that courageous). But it also betrays two things about which the Hindu
organizations can readily do something : despair, and a lack of
education. It is out of despair that people attack just whoever they can
get, feeling that they can not leave the Muslim attacks without a
fitting reply.

This irrational tendency to take revenge on just anyone belonging to the
Muslim community, can only be cleared away through education. The
short-term necessity in solving the riot problem is a more effective
police force and most of all an effective judicial prosecution of the
culprits (which implies breaking through the nexus of politicians and
criminals). But the long-term necessity for reducing the communal
violence is education.

I don't mean *education* with moralistic campaigns to tell them not to
do such ugly things, sadbhavana yatras and human chains for communal
amity : those things only convince the already-convinced, and they have
no impact once a crisis breaks out. What Hindu leaders should teach
their followers (and first of all imprint on their own minds), is that
*the* Muslims are not to blame for communal violence. Even when it is
established that a far more than proportionate amount of the communal
violence emanates from Muslim quarters, it should still be upheld as
dogma that he Muslim people are not to blame.

*"The Muslims"* are just people like the rest of us, but they happen to
be open to the influence of the Quranic ideology propagated by Islamic
religious personnel. In fact, the common Muslim is hardly aware of
Islamic theology. For him, being a Muslim means being what he himself
is. And for his, *the Muslim* are not so much the followers of Mohammed,
but simply the community to which he belongs. And he will intensify his
bond with his community whenever it is in confrontation, offensively or
defensively, with another community. Not because of a theology of Momins
vs. Kafirs, but out of a natural tribal instinct. Unfortunately, there
are leaders who take these common people with them, in actions inspired
by this theology of which the common people know so little.

The common Hindu has so often heard of or been confronted with Muslim
violence, that he has come to associate Muslims with violence. On the
other hand, he is taught by his leaders to only see the face value of
this violence, not the ideology behind it. An RSS man told me that one
day Guru Golwalkar gave a speech, saying that *Mohammed was a great
prophet*, and that *Islam is a great religion*, but that,
inconsequentially, *the Muslims are big fools*. What nonsense : the one
thing that defines Muslims as a group, is their adherence to Islam and
the Prophet. How can you make a collective allegation against *the
Muslims* if you first praise that which makes them into one collectivity
?

One should look for the reason for the apparently typical Muslim
proneness to riots, in that which defines the Muslim collective
identity, the Islamic ideology. It would have been more fair, and
historically more accurate, to explain Muslim violence by saying that
*the Muslims are our brethren*, but they or their leaders are mentally
in the fangs of *"Islam, that religion of jihad"* created by *"Mohammed,
that prophet of icon-breaking"*. That way, you distinguish between the
human and the ideological level, and then you can educate the people and
make them see the key formula that will take the sting out of Hindu
vengefulness against their Muslim countrymen : the problem is not the
Muslims, the problem is Islam.

Of course, once a procession is being attacked, it is too late to say to
the crowd :*"Hey, don't attack the Muslims, attack Islamic ideology"*.
At that time, they are confronted with a physical enemy, and they will
react physically. However, in the longer run, some education in
comparative religion is the solution, or at least a central part of the
solution.

Today, Hindus have to swallow all kinds of negative image-building
concerning Hinduism. Islam, by contrast, is depicted as a liberator from
inequality, a religion of peace and brotherhood, and more such fictional
terms of praise. But then, after being fed all these nice things about
Islam, they find that their procession is being attacked by Muslims.
This anomaly they cannot understand. So they are left to the immediacy
of the situation, and even afterwards they cannot comprehend what
happened, as long as they are not informed about Islamic doctrine.

Well, some secularist Swami may tell them that all prophets are great,
that it is only their followers who err. In fact, this sweet little lie
is the worst contributor to the communal violence on the Hindu side : it
is not true that the Muslims *err* and *"mis-apply the teachings of that
great prophet Mohammed"*. Most of them just follow the lead given by
fanatical Imams, and these fanatical Imams can at worst only be blamed
for *not erring* and *fully applying* the doctrine of the Prophet. So,
Hindus should know that these Muslims are only sincerely applying the
teachings of the real culprit of most of the communal violence in India
: Mohammed.

There is every reason to tell them the truth about Islam. Hinduism
should not be painted in rosy colours, but evaluated in a fair and
truthful way. The treatment Islam receives, should be the same. Now, a
fair and truthful presentation of Islam will include : the absolute
inequality of believer and unbeliever, the boundless self-righteousness
of the Prophet and the believers who imitate him, the crudely physical
nature of the Islamic precepts (the complete lack of a consciousness
dimension), the strongly political and anti-secularist objectives of
Islam, and the logical absurdity of the very idea of prophethood.

Once this distinction between Muslim human beings and anti-human Islamic
doctrine is clear in people's minds, you can demand from them a Gandhian
self-restraint in the face of terrible provocation. When your procession
gets attacked, you will still not set the Muslims' shops on fire. This
distinction between the ideas working through some people, who in turn
can set entire crowds and gangs in motion, and on the other hand the
people themselves, will make a crucial difference.

Secondarily, the curbing of Hindu retaliation will also have its effect
on the propagandistic and political front. At present every riot,
regardless what the facts and who the victims, is held up as a proof of
the *rabid* and *fascist* character of the *Hindu communal forces* who
are *stirring the communal cauldron*. The secularist agitprops should be
starved of every semblance of evidence. In this respect, it is better to
get killed than to kill.

Or at least, anything is better than to kill innocents. Against
terrorists, using force is the most effective way to stop them, because
it is the language they understand. But that job should be left to the
legitimate security forces.

This work at the level of thought should also deal with the communal
attitudes that have crept into Hinduism during its confrontation with
the Muslim onslaught. Islamic thought has deeply influenced the Indian
intelligentsia, including champions of Hindutva. Thus, Dayananda
Saraswati espoused monotheism, denounced idol- worship, and treated the
Veda like a revealed, complete and final Scripture. V.D. Savarkar
thought that Hindus have to borrow forms of organization and lifestyle
from the Muslims in order to overcome them. He has been accused by the
secularists (and with him, the entire Hindutva movement) of reducing
Hindu identity to an *us vs. them* pattern of enmity against the
Muslims. The secularists correctly denounce such an attitude, while
glossing over the fact that this enmity is intrinsic to Islamic
doctrine, and has only, crept into Hinduism reactively, during the long
self-defense of Hindu society against Islam. Anyway, they do have a
point when they perceive this enmity as a strong factor in the current
activist Hindu identity.

So, Hindus should weed out these Islamic attitudes of *us against them*
from their thought. Their Hindu identity should not be centered around
their attitude towards another doctrine, but on Hinduism's own genius
and effectiveness as a cultural framework for social integration and
individual happiness.[¹⁹²](notes.htm#note192) And they should not define
people in terms of their communal identity, which is but the Islamic
game of judging people on their being Momins or Kafirs, rather than on
their merits. Unlike Islam, they should dis-identify and distinguish
human being from the religion they profess ; so that, if ever the need
arises, they can attack and expose Islamic doctrine without any mental
or physical hostilities with the Muslim people.

To sum up, the *communal problem* in India is largely the *Muslim
problem*, or rather, the *Islam problem*. Islam is communal through and
through, preaching a total abyss between its own community members and
the rest of humanity. So, very generally, the cause of communal riots is
Islam. The cure is Sanatana Dharma. It teaches that everything is
generated by thought. While seemingly a difficult notion, in this
context it is very easy to understand : the physical problem of communal
riots is but the materialization of communal thinking. This communal
thinking should be identified : its most potent and consistent form is
the Islamic doctrine of the struggle between Momin and Kafir. Other
communalisms like Sikh separatism and the anti-Muslim animus among some
Hindu people, are but the indirect effects of this Islamic doctrine.
Then, this communal thinking should be removed through dialogue and
education. No matter what law and order measures will further be needed
before the age of communal riots is over, at any rate it is this work at
the level of thought which will ultimately solve the problem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 11.9. Riots in Muslim countries

In order to keep an assessment of riot patterns in perspective, we
should compare with the situation in Pakistan and Bangla Desh. The
general pattern there is :

1.  Roughly 100% of Hindu-Muslim riots are started by Muslims.
2.  Roughly 100% of the victims in the actual communal confrontation are
    Hindus.
3.  Those few times the police intervenes, it does have the decency to
    stop the attackers rather than their fleeing victims, so the vast
    majority of those killed in police firing on the e occasion of
    riots, are Muslims. But like in India, the police often fails to
    intervene, which may get interpreted as a form of passive connivance
    with the majority community.

The secularist theory that there is no ideological (as opposed to
socio-economical) explanation for the different degree of riot-proneness
between the different religions, and their denial of this very
difference, both fall apart when called on to explain the riot pattern
in the Islamic republics that used to be parts of India. If Muslims are
not more riot-prone than Hindus, then why do you never ever hear of a
Hindu attack on mosques in Bangla Desh, but a lot of the reverse ? Or,
for that matter, why not Christian attacks on mosques, even while
Christians do get their share of attacks and harassments from the
Muslims? In these Muslim-majority countries, communal violence is a
completely one-directional affair. Even when Muslims destroyed hundreds
of Hindu temples on the pretext of protest against the Shilanyas in
Ayodhya, there has not been any report of similar retaliation by the
Hindus.

We may safely say that in Bangla Desh, the Muslim participation in the
starting of riots, is more than their percentage of the population :
about 100% as against some 87%. In Pakistan also, even though Muslims
form about 97% (including Ahmadiyas) of the population, they still
manage to have an even larger share in the starting of riots.

The secularist theory that whatever slight Muslim over- representation
in riot-starting they are willing to concede, is attributable to the
*insecurity* to which Muslims are subjected, can also not hold. Firstly,
in India there are minorities who simply don't start riots (Jains,
Parsis), or only few (Christians), and yet they are fewer in number than
the Muslims and consequently more *insecure*. Secondly, in Pakistan,
Bangla Desh and Malaysia they have Islamic republics, and still that
doesn't stop them from maltreating the non-Muslims and attacking their
places of worship on the slightest pretext. Moreover, within Pakistan
there are also a lot of attacks by the majority Sunnis on minority Shias
and Ahmadiyas, and that again cannot be attributed to *insecurity*.

As a general rule, in communal conflicts the world over, you will find
majorities attacking minorities, seldom the reverse. Have you ever heard
of pre-1940 Jews attacking the German or Polish majorities in Central
Europe ? Have you ever heard of the Coptic minority in Egypt attacking
the Muslim majority ? They form about 6% of the population, but furnish
0% of the riots and other forms of harassment. And have you ever heard
of the Hindu minorities in South Africa, the UK, Singapore, the US,
starting riots ?

But in India, you do see one of the minorities on the offensive even
where it is clearly outnumbered. Even if their percentage of starting
riots was only proportional to their percentage of the population, i.e.
about 12% (and no secularist so far has been dishonest enough to suggest
this), then that would still be more than what minorities elsewhere, and
especially in Islamic countries, would dare to do. It becomes hard to
evade the conclusion that there is something in Islamic doctrine that
incites people to non-integration and even violent struggle with their
neighbours.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
