+++
title = "15 14.1.  Hinduism, Hitler's mother?"

+++
# 14. "Hindu Fascism"

## 14.1. Hinduism, Hitler's mother?

A Contention often heard in secularist circles, is that this Hindu
revivalism is a form of *Hindu fascism*. Specifically, a BJP in power
would soon reveal itself to be a Nazi government-- but then it would be
too late. I will not bother about quoting all the people who have made
such allegations (there are many), and just deal with the substance of
this allegation.

Actually, there are two radically different allegation of *Hindu
fascism*. One merely is an allegation against the current wave of *Hindu
communalism*. The other one says, that Hinduism is intrinsically
fascist. The best-known proponent of the latter theory is V.T.
Rajshekar, who publishes the fortnightly Dalit Voice from Bangalore. He
builds his views on Ambedkar's. But at the same time, he strongly
subscribes to the theory that the Aryans invaded India, and instituted
the cast system to preserve their racial purity, much like the Apartheid
system in South Africa.[²³⁸](notes.htm#note238)

In fact, all his anti-Hindu views are put forward in ethnic and even
racial terminology. The non-caste Hindus and the minorities are for him
the *oppressed nations of India*, oppressed by the Aryan invaders who
constitute the upper castes.

Of course, the racial view of caste, a product of the British
fascination for race theories, has been debunked
scientifically.[²³⁹](notes.htm#note239) Even Ambedkar rejected
it.[²⁴⁰](notes.htm#note240) By now, the whole notion of Aryan invasions
has come under fire. Western scholars start recognizing what many Indian
scholars have since long pointed out : that there is not a single piece
of proof for the whole theory, and that all the known relevant facts can
just as well be explained with alternative and equally coherent
theories.

But since is lost on Mr. Rajshekar. He has published a book in the West,
titled Dalit -- the Black Untouchables of India. On the cover is a
photograph of, I presume, the writer. And the first thing you notice is
: but this man is not black. He is quite a *Caucasian*, or white man,
though slightly more suntanned than Europeans, but not at all a negroid
type. And you start to realize : this man is a crackpot. In order to
attract American Black support, or for other propaganda reasons, he
makes the caste system into a racial issue. The rich white Aryan Brahmin
invaders oppress the poor black non-Aryan Shudra
natives.[²⁴¹](notes.htm#note241)

Now this has a lot to do with Hitler. He too was a crank racist. While
the reprehensible racism in South Africa is at least based on a actual
racial difference between black and white, Hitler based his anti-Jewish
racism on the erroneous notion that the difference between Germans and
Jews is racial, which is biological nonsense. Moreover, he too had
borrowed the concept of the *Aryan race*, which the British had
developed in India, but which was totally alien to the Hindu tradition.
Rajshekar has borrowed the same theory in the same place. He holds the
same kind of crank notion that the difference between upper and lower
castes is a racial one. So, Hitler-Rajshekar bhai-bhai. With them,
everything gets drawn into racial categories. The only difference is
that Hitler is on the side of the Aryan race, while Rajshekar is on the
opposite side.

Thus, in an article about the Israeli technician Mordechai Vanunu, Dalit
Voice says that he is a Sephardic Jew (migrated from the Muslim
countries), who are oppressed by the Ashkenazi Jews (migrated from
Europe, and founders of Israel). When the technician revealed to the
world some nuclear secrets of Israel, this was portrayed as an element
in the ethnic struggle of oppressed (*dalit*) Sephardim against Zionist
Ashkenazim, who also oppress the Palestinians. So it all fits : Dalits
and Muslims should form a front against the Brahmins, therefore Dalits
support the Palestinians, therefore they oppose the Zionists who are
Ashkenazi Jews, and link up with the oppressed Sephardic Jews. But here
the racist logic breaks down : it so happens that the hard-liners in
Israel, like many in the Likud Party, are precisely these Sephardim, who
have fled Muslim countries and have no love lost for the Arabs, while
the Ashkenazim are generally more liberal. This goes to show once more
the nonsense of these racial conspiracy theories on which the Hitler and
Rajshekars of this world feed.

So, what remains for the enemies of Hinduism to dub intrinsically
fascist about Hinduism? The caste system, of course. Even if it is not
racist, it is not equalitarian and institutionalizes inequality on the
basis of people's birth (just like in racism). Therefore, the caste
system is reprehensible. And therefore Hinduism is reprehensible
(through a remote influence of Marxism, everything gets reduced to its
social dimension, so Hinduism equals caste system).

This matter is far too large and complex to decide in just one chapter,
so I will limit myself here to some general remarks. Firstly, there is a
distinction between theory and practice. This may seem an easy way out,
often used by soft-Leftists when confronted with criticism of the
implementation of socialist theory in the praxis of the Soviet system
(*But that is not the real socialism !*). But the distinction is
pertinent. On the one hand there were ideologues of the four varnas, the
functions in society with their allotted duties and privileges, and they
wrote Shastras in which they tried to fit reality into the scheme,
complete with a slant in favour of their own caste. On the other there
was the existing reality of jatis, roughly endogamous groups, roughly
coinciding with occupations, but far more diverse and in motion than the
crystalline theoretical framework of Chaturvarnya.

Secondly, this social system did not exist in isolation. Thus, centuries
of foreign domination must have had an impact on it. We can say a priori
that when leading groups in society come to groan under the weight of
foreign oppression, they themselves will weigh heavier on the lower
groups. That would not be the case if the new rulers would engage in
reform of the existing society, but the Muslims never did this (in spite
of the new myths about Islam as bringing socialist reforms). A society
that is put on the defensive, will harden and develop internal friction.
Again it may sound like an easy explanation, but it is just quite
plausible that a part of the *inhuman* traits of the caste system as
recent generations found it, must be attributed to later outside
influences like the impoverishing, brutalizing and demoralizing effect
of Muslim rule.

When we study its theoretical conception, we find that the caste system
is quite the opposite of Nazism in essential respects. Let us think
clearly about this very charged matter. In the caste system, we may
distinguish the following components:

1.  In society, different groups are recognized.
2.  These groups have their own mores and duties.
3.  Membership of a group is determined by birth.
4.  On the basis of their function, a ritual hierarchy exists between
    these group, which does not coincide with either wealth or actual
    social power.

The first point says merely that difference is recognized. This is not
as evident as it sounds. Islam and Communism champion *equality*, which
in practice means uniformity.

The second point means that these groups are defined by the role they
play in society, and that duties as also privileges are allotted
accordingly. This does not mean that the higher ones grab all the
privileges. Thus, one who has the duty to guide society by communicating
knowledge, commits a crime when he is untruthful, or drunk, whereas
these things are of no consequence when committed by a manual labourer.
This allotting of duties also concerns the different age-groups. As any
anthropologist can tell you, the distribution of duties among age-groups
is one of the most evident features of tribal society. That is why the
varna division is considered together with the division of life in
stages, the ashramas, so that Hindu social philosophy is known as
Varnashramadharma. While this recognition of different roles with their
own duties and privileges is by no means a complete answer to every
possible social question, it at least provides a framework which is
perfectly true to universal human experience.

The third point means that one's qualities are largely determined by
birth. The most natural division of mankind, the two sexes, a division
which brings with it a definite role, duties and privileges, is
determined by birth. One's gunas of qualities, which determine one's
vocation in society, are in turn partly determined by heredity. At this
point Hindu society has hardened a statistical law, which generally
makes people follow in their parents' footsteps, into a rigid steel
frame. In reality, an individual's swadharma (own duty, own way) may
differ from that of his parents, and that is why the Bhagavad Gita
(which is of course only one voice in the plurality of Hindu tradition)
simply states that one's varna is determined by one's guna (quality,
type), regardless of whether this guna is in turn determined by
heredity, by environment and education, or who knows, by the stars at
birth. Of course, this is a point where historically the divergence
between theory and practice has become quite substantial.

The fourth point is to modern socialists perhaps the most horrible : a
hierarchy between the groups. Well, there is an undeniable hierarchy
between social functions, even where an equalitarian law system has
firmly taken root. Thus, an employee is equal, as a human being and as a
citizen, to his employer; the work both do is equally indispensable;
yet, the employee's work is by definition determined by the tasks his
employer allots him. So, while there is equality between human beings,
there is a logical hierarchy between functions. In that sense, the
Vaishya function is *superior* to the Shudra function. Similarly, a
ruler, even while autonomous in his decisions (remember secularism), is
dependent on knowledge and a social philosophy, but the thinkers who
devise this intellectual and ideological framework, should be
independent in their thinking, free from the rulers' interference. In
that sense, the Brahmin function is logically *superior* to the
Kshatriya function, even while rulers are more powerful and wealthy than
thinkers.

In my opinion, it is this logical hierarchy of social functions which
the early ideologues of Varnashramadharma had in mind. It is but human
that people with a higher function were also honoured accordingly. But
in how far that was translated into a cruel anti-human inequality in
actual village and city life, is another matter. It is too vast to go
into it here. Suffice it to say that I have become a bit skeptical of
the abysmally grim picture of the caste system which all of us have been
fed, after actually living among Hindus of both high and low castes, and
after studying the research done by modern-educated Indian scholars. As
Meenakshi Jain has indicated, it is not because certain Brahmins were
particular about not eating with other people etc., that other castes
felt inferior or oppressed by this uptight and unprofitable kind of
behaviour (much less inclined to imitate the difficult Brahmin
lifestyle, as the Sanskritization theory would have it).

In Catholic circles, like in religion class, we used to get some
testimonies from the missions, now and then. When asked for examples of
how horrible the caste system is, missionaries would always mention the
distance Brahmins keep from the *inferior* non-Brahmins. But so what?
For orthodox Brahmins, as I have known some in Varanasi, I myself am an
avarna, and they will not have dinner with me. But I don't feel offended
by that. If they think I am impure (and I am : I have eaten many a beef
steak in my life), then that is their choice. I don't really care, and I
think most Shudras in India's long history didn't care. But they did not
*not care* in the intolerant way of the iconoclastic modernists, who
like to trample on somebody else's rules and taboos : while they
themselves did not observe the near-obsessive purity rules of Brahmins,
they would not think of forcing Brahmins out of their purist seclusion.

The effort to rewrite history and to see integration instead of
separation and enmity as the norm of interaction between the different
communities, should not be directed to the history of Hindu-Muslim
relations (where it is gross distortion), but at the history of caste
relations (where it is a correction of the extremely divisive picture
created by the missionaries and colonialists). There was plenty of
co-operation, amity and human concern across caste lines.

On the other hand, as in other societies, there has existed oppression
in Hindu society too. And this has been aggravated in the last few
centuries by the decreasing prosperity, which in turn was due to Muslim
oppression and plundering, to the disruption of India's economy by its
forcible integration into Britain's colonial trade system, and to the
victory of modern industry over the indigenous industries (which also
affected non-colonies like China and Iran). Increasing poverty
invariably increases social friction and oppression.

While rejecting the immensely black picture which the missionaries have
painted of Hindu society, and which has been very much interiorized in
the Indian collective consciousness and is still being reproduced by the
self- proclaimed Ambedkarites today, we need not deny that oppression
and misery existed. And it must have taken the shape of the social
structure in force, which happened to be the caste system. No-one in his
right mind is inclined to denigrate the efforts at *"bringing the
Backward Castes into the mainstream of Indian society"* (to use the
politicians' expression). On the stand taken by the Hindutva people on
the caste system, see [ch.14.2](#ch14.2). Now, in essential respects the
caste system is the opposite of Nazism. This counts not only for the
idealized theory but even for the raw practice. First of all, this
system is not at all centralized. The traditional Hindu society knows
many layers of social organization : family, kula, upajati, jati, varna.
Now, this layeredness of society, this devolution of many organizational
functions to intermediary levels, is the strongest possible buffer
against dictatorship and totalitarianism.

When analyzing why the French Revolution quickly degenerated into a
reign of terror and a dictatorship, Hegel state that it was the
destruction of the intermediary levels of social organization which led
to this polarization between the naked individual and the all-powerful
state authority.

The first task of totalitarian-minded people is to break down those
organizational units which they cannot control. In Orwell's Nineteen
Eighty-Four, the protagonist of the narrative regains a measure of
mental independence from Big Brother's total control, when he falls in
love with some girl. Suddenly there is an emotional relationship, i.e.
another form of human interaction than Big Brother's state, a bond which
escapes Big Brother's control. These simple natural forms of human
togetherness, like the family, the clan, the tribe, no matter what their
drawbacks, are the strongest possible protection against
totalitarianism.

Traditional societies all had clans and tribes. With the building of
empires, these lost some of their importance. But the atomization of
society into isolated individuals who find nothing above them but the
all-powerful state, is largely a modern phenomenon, and fascism is one
extreme outgrowth of it. It is not only factually incorrect to attribute
the characteristics of fascism to a traditional society like the Hindu
society, it also gives proof of a total incomprehension of larger
historical categories, like modern vs. traditional, hierarchy vs.
totalitarianism.

The unique thing about Hindu society is that it kept this tribe-wise and
clan-wise organization even after setting up very large integrated state
structures. By contrast, Mohammed, in his bid to form a state (after the
admired models of the Persian and Byzantine empires), wanted to destroy
these intermediary levels. Thus, he is not at all clan- and
family-minded. While Confucianism, Judaism or Hinduism are very
family-centered, Islam does not ordain family stability, but gives a man
all the freedom to break up the family he started, by simply declaring
to his wife: Talaq Talaq Talaq. Moreover, Mohammed explicitly wanted his
followers to put the loyalty to Islam above the loyalty to the clan.

One may consider this an element of universalim, rising above *narrow
loyalties*. That is certainly how Muslim apologetics puts it. But the
other side is that the primitive loyalty to the natural family unit
merely gets replaced by another, more demanding *narrow loyalty*: to the
Prophet, to Big Brother.

All dictators like uniformity. The Spanish dictator Franco worked hard
to destroy the linguistic diversity in Spain by suppressing the use of
Catalan and Basque. Similarly, Stalin wanted to abolish all ethnicity
and language diversity. These subnational identities were anathema to a
centralistic dictatorial mind. It so happens that Islam too insists on
uniformity, even in very small things. In world history, it is perhaps
only the Mao outfit of the Chinese communists that matches the
uniformity of appearance among Muslims. Women Should wear burqa, and men
should trim their beards after the Prophet's example. This outer
uniformity is expressive of an imposed uniformity of behaviour and
belief. I do not find this uniformist loyalty to the Prophet any more
open-minded or universalist than the "narrow loyalty" to a tribe.

There is reason for suspicion against people who need to trample upon
natural loyalties before they can establish their *brotherhood*. It is
like a scorpion, who lifts his prey up from the ground and then stings.
These natural social units are the ground under people's feet, and if
you want to enlist them in your own power trip, you have to take them
out of these natural units, and make them vulnerable to your claims on
them, by isolating them.

It is quite possible to teach people universal values and awareness of
the larger whole, without breaking open the existing divisions in
society. Actually, calling clans and tribes a *division* conceals the
fact that they are just as much *units*, levels of integration. Few
buildings these days are built from one massive rock ; the normal thing
to do is to integrate smaller units into bigger and yet bigger ones. The
global civilization which we are building today, will not be made up of
scattered individuals. Organizationally, it will be a hierarchy of
intermediary levels of integration, a two- way combination of unity and
diversity. The current revival of ethnicity throughout the world is just
one example of man's natural resistance against atomization.

The essence of Varnashramadharma, the social philosophy that allots
different duties to differently minded groups of people, as well as to
the different age-groups, and that allows communities to develop at
intermediary levels between individual and state, is quite the opposite
of the uniformization so typical of totalitarian systems.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 14.2. Hindutva and the "evils of Hindu society"

In the secularists' tirades, the Hindutva people are systematically
portrayed as upholders of inequality and of all the evils of Hindu
society.

Remark : the very expression *evils of Hindu society*, which Nehru
routinely used, is totally out of bounds when *Hindu* is replaced with
*Muslim* or another community. The expression *"the crimes of the Muslim
conquerors"*, or *"the evils of Muslim society"* (like anti-modern
backwardness, persecution of non-Muslims, slavery, the inferiority of
women), are sure to provoke shouts of *communal !* There is also no one
to describe the social problems in the West as *"the evils of Christian
society"*, as if all worldly problems can be reduced to the impact of
the prevalent religion.

In fact, the unity of Hindu society, and the promotion of the backward
castes in the mainstream of society, has always been a major plank of
Hindu organizations like the RSS. In its
literature[²⁴²](notes.htm#note242), the RSS boasts of having received
compliments from such non-communalist people like Mahatma Gandhi and
Jayaprakash Narayan, for its entirely caste-free structure and working.
Nonetheless, for decades after it was set up, it was mostly an
organization of Brahmins and, increasingly, Vaishyas.

It seems that recently, the caste-wise composition of the RSS is
changing. According to a recent report, *"much to the despair of the
Marxists and secularists alike, it is not the upper caste that dominates
the Sangh's shakhas. It is ironically the middle castes and rising
Dalits."*[²⁴³](notes.htm#note243) An RSS member is quoted saying :*"All
our best attended shakhas are in the poor areas, not in the alienated
middle class or rich upper caste suburbs or cities or towns. In simple
words, the new Sangh Swayamsevak is mostly a backward caste or Dalit."*

So, the following analysis by Sunil Adam is just another Leftist lie :
*"The Muslims only serve as a negative target of Hindu consciousness so
as to marginalize the contradictions of the Hindu social order and at
the same time maintain the social and political status quo, which is the
actual object of Hindutva."*[²⁴⁴](notes.htm#note244) While totally
denying the historical fact of the unprovoked all-out Muslim attack on
Hindu society during centuries on end, and while reducing the thrust of
the Hindutva movement to an anti-Muslim thrust, it repeats the classic
Marxist fallacy of reducing everything to a matter of class (c.q. caste)
*contradictions*. Moreover, it ascribes to the Hindutva movement an
intention of maintaining the social and political status quo: this goes
contrary to all statements of intention by the Hindutva leaders.

Of course, we may be dealing here with the rhetorical trick of ascribing
intentions to people : *"You say that this is what you want, but it is
not what you want. I will tell you what you really want."* This is a
venomous act of psychological imperialism : not even letting people
decide for themselves what they intend. Unless of course you can prove
from their actual behaviour that it is something else they want. But the
burden of proof is on the accuser. So, the Hindutva movement is innocent
of casteist conservatism until the contrary is proven. For establishing
such proof, Mr. Adam will have to explain away all the anti-caste
statements of Hindutva leaders (all eyewash ?) and all the testimonies
that the RSS and affiliated organizations are indeed caste-free.

But no, Mr. Adam gives no proof of anything. Assured that no-one in the
arena will contradict him, he continues :*"The economic and political
mobility of lower castes is one of the factors that stirred the upper
castes to resurrect the question of Hindu identity during the early
eighties. In other words, for Hindutva to succeed it has to accomplish
the twin and contradictory tasks of uniting the country's majority under
the Hindu banner and also ensure that a majority among them accept their
place in the social and political hierarchy prescribed by the pristine
Brahminical religion..."*

Now, this is where Mr. V.P. Singh's decision to implement the Mandal
Commission Report recommendations comes in. This Commission recommended
that, after the Scheduled Castes and Tribes, who have been getting 22.5%
reservations in recruitment and promotions in government service as well
as in education (though these quota have not been filled up in many
cases), the principle of reservation be extended to the Other Backward
Castes (*Classes*, says the Report, but then it enumerates castes). V.P.
Singh's decision was clearly meant to attract the Backward Caste vote
(46% of the Indian population, according to an old census). It could at
the same time split the Hindu vote, pitting high against low castes.

Opponents feared that this split would not be limited to election day,
and that Mandal would tear the whole social fabric apart. Enemies of
Hindu society also looked at it that way. Said Prof. Rajni Kothari
:*"The Mandal Report has the potential to finish off the supremacy of
Vedic Hinduism."* The effect of the caste-based reservations would be,
to strengthen caste identity (with opposing caste interest). But while
in traditional society the caste system was a harmony model (this
nice-sounding term is a curse to Marxist ears), this newly strengthened
caste consciousness would foment caste enmity. It would also frustrate
the drive to unify Hindu society.

As Mr. Adam says :*"It is this \[Hindu-unifying\] scheme of things that
the Mandal Report... is capable of upsetting. Whether the Hindu identity
will submerge caste identity or vice versa will depend on which is a
better agent of politicization, caste or religion. In other words, India
today has the paradoxical choice of choosing between caste, which has a
secularizing impact, and Hindutva which can lead the nation to an
unknown destiny."*

Paradoxical indeed. While anti-Hindu pamphletry and rhetoric largely
focuses on the horrors of the caste system, which is depicted as
intrinsic to this horrible Hinduism, we now get to read that caste will
break Hinduism. Caste is the *evil of Hindu society*, it is a *hierarchy
prescribed by the pristine Brahminical religion*, but now we get to read
that it *has a secularizing impact*.

It is not only a logical paradox, or rather contradiction. There is also
a moral contradiction in Mr. Adam's reasoning, which I would re-word as
follows :*"Hinduism is reprehensible because of caste ; because we want
to kill caste, we want to kill Hinduism ; now, in order to kill
Hinduism, we are going to strengthen caste."* These secularists have
been saying that they think they can use it as a weapon against
Hinduism, they have no scruples in promoting it as progressive and
*secularizing*. So, the Janata Dal people who have been decrying the
Janmabhoomi movement as a threat to national unity, as well as the
communists (from whom one had expected many ugly things, but not the
promotion of a non-Marxist category like casteism), as well as most non-
Congress secularists, have applauded the divisive Mandal plan.

Anyway, while the secularists use every occasion to demonstrate how
unprincipled they are except for their commitment to the destruction of
Hinduism, Hindus need not unduly worry over the issue of caste-based
reservations. Its impact would not be all that deep. In some southern
states, large reservation schemes have already been implemented during
the eighties. While it is said that these have harmed the efficiency of
the administration, they have not spectacularly affected caste
relations. And while it may be unfair against upper-caste people, it may
have the beneficial effect of encouraging them to enter and develop the
private sector, instead of settling for a life in the bureaucracy.

If I may make a few blunt generalizations about caste, I would venture
to say that the rise of the Backward Castes may well be a very
beneficial development for Hindu society. When I look at the caste
titles of the Communist leaders and of the most rabid secularists, I
notice they are mostly high-caste people. The upper castes have
intensely collaborated with the Muslim and then the British ruler, they
are largely an alienated lot with little sympathy for their own culture
and society. Some of them, in fairness, have fought until their back was
broken. Others have simply prostituted themselves with the rulers for
generations. By contrast, the lower castes have fought the Muslim
invaders tooth and nail. Contrary to the modern myths of Islam bringing
relief to the oppressed low-castes, they suffered badly under the
Islamic onslaught : e.g. the lands the Muslim rulers took to set up
their zamindari were mostly taken from these agricultural and
cattle-rearing castes.[²⁴⁵](notes.htm#note245) Moreover, thanks to their
limited schooling, these low-castes have not yet massively imbibed all
this pro-Muslim and anti- Hindu propaganda that passes as history in the
school curricula. So today, the Backward Castes are not only the
numerical centre of gravity in a democratic Hindu society, they are also
less contaminated with anti-Hindu bias.

With that, I have said more than enough in terms of caste
considerations. The real work for revitalizing Hindu society has to be
done by individuals, and these are found in any caste and community.

Incidentally, the upheaval over Mandal has brought out a fact which
should be rather embarrassing for the missionary propaganda. The *Dalit
Christians* are low- caste people who have been lured into conversion
with the promise of (1) eternal Salvation by Jesus Christ the Saviour,
our Lord, and (2) freedom from the low-caste status as well as from
poverty. These Dalit Christians held a demonstration in Delhi to demand
reservations, on the plea that they are still as poor and low-caste as
before conversion.

The Ram Janmabhoomi movement has demonstrated, more than anything else,
the fact that Backward Castes and Scheduled Castes and Tribes, in spite
of all the ploys to wean them away from Hinduism, still very much
identify themselves with Hindu demands, such as a symbolic restoration
of the damage Islam has done. In the tribal belt in southern Bihar, Mr.
Advani's rathyatra got a rousing welcome.

The communal riots too show how the efforts by Muslim parties and by the
anti-Hindu Bahujan Samaj Party to forge an alliance of low-castes and
Muslims against the high-castes, are not having much of the desired
result. In the Hyderabad riots, Muslims attacked a Harijan quarter,
primarily because they expected these Harijans to be unorganized and
weak. A local Harijan leader has confirmed this to me. Even more telling
was the violence in Bijnor, U.P. on October 30. There, the District
Magistrate confirmed to journalists that the violence had been
instigated by a local Muslim politician, and he added that the city was
a stronghold of the BSP, but that the communal riots had just as much
pitted the Muslims against the Harijans.[²⁴⁶](notes.htm#note246) The
Ghaziabad riot on 26 January 1991, with nine casualties, was nothing but
an attack of a Muslim pro-Saddam demonstration on Valmikis (a Scheduled
Caste) who were celebrating Republic Day.[²⁴⁷](notes.htm#note247).

These incidents conform to a larger pattern in Indian history. Contrary
to the fables of the low-castes being sympathetic towards Islam, it is
they who have always opposed it tooth and nail. Today in Pakistan, the
large majority of the remaining Hindus are very poor Backward Caste
people. If Islam is so good for them, and Hinduism so harsh, why have
they continued to stick to Hinduism and suffered so much trouble and
oppression by Islamic society for it? It is time we realize that the
caste system has in fact protected Hindu society against total
islamization, and that even low-caste people took pride in their caste
so that they preferred their place in Hindu society to absorption in the
atomized Muslim community.[²⁴⁸](notes.htm#note248)

So, the stand of the Hindutva people is not : Hinduism has sinned
terribly by having this caste system, therefore it has to imitate Islam
and abolish caste. It is rather :the caste system had its use sometime
in the past, over the centuries it has come to carry a lot of unhealthy
social equations and attitudes, and now it has become socially
irrelevant and a factor of divisiveness, therefore it is time for us to
abandon it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 14.3. Arya and Swastika

A very crude kind of anti-Hindu propaganda, sometimes used by American
Protestant sects in *warning* the youth against the dangers of Hare
Krishna etc., points out that Hinduism and Nazism have a central symbol
in common : the swastika. I have also heard the comparison from
Ambedkarites who, taking V.T. Rajshekar's lead, systematically refer to
Hindus as "Hindu Nazis".[²⁴⁹](notes.htm#note249)

For the latter category, it may be of interest to know that the swastika
is just as much a central symbol in Buddhism, Ambedkar's chosen
religion. In China, the swastika is known as a Buddhist symbol.
Moreover, in the Aryan mythology of the post-Ambedkar Ambedkarites (if a
teacher gets killed, it is by his pupils), the Hindus were invaders who
destroyed the Hindus civilization, of which the Dalits are the
legitimate descendants. Now, this *pre-Hindu* Indus civilization already
used the swastika. The swastika is quite a sanatana symbol, not bound up
with any nation or ideology. It is also found among peoples outside the
Hindu sphere of influence.

It is because of his fallacious doctrine of the *Aryan race* that
conquered both Europe and South Asia, and because of a mistaken belief
that the swastika was typical of the Aryan peoples, that Hitler adopted
this symbol as a symbol of his Aryan state. But of course, the
legitimate *Aryans*, i.e. the Sanatana Dharmins of whatever ethnicity or
race, and of whatever sect including Buddhism, cannot be blamed for
Hitler's misconceptions nor for Hitler's crimes that gave a bad
connotation to this symbol.

People who believe in magic, and in the independent power of symbols,
infer from this primary belief, that Hitler's spectacular rise to power
may have been due to the *power inherent in the swastika*. In a
moralistic variant on this superstitious theme, some people believe that
the evil which Hitler committed under the swastika flag, must somehow be
inherent in the swastika symbol. And from there, as they keep on
inferring, they start suspecting that some mysterious evil is inherent
in Hindu culture.

This reversal of the swastika's meaning, from a sign of luck (always
depicted on the hand of opulent Ganesh) to a sign of evil, is somewhat
like the story of the Christian image of the devil : he is depicted with
buck's horns, a clear reference to the *horned god* of Paganism (like
the Pashupati on one of the Indus seals). The positive imagery of
Paganism got integrated into Christian imagery, but then as the symbol
of evil. Now that we are no longer bound by the compulsions of the
missionary project, we may clear the horned god, as well as the
swastika, of the evil aura with which outsiders have covered them.

For Hindus who have migrated to the West, especially the U.S., there is
a practical problem : if they display the swastika on the gates of
mandirs, or other places, outsiders think that this is some Nazi outfit.
Worse, people who have personally suffered under the Nazi regime, may
feel painfully reminded. I think it is a matter of sensitivity to
display those swastikas only in very modest ways, for as long as people
who have lived through the horrors of the Nazi regime are with us.
Meanwhile, the Hindus abroad should educate the public about the real
meaning and hoary tradition of this symbol, so that some time in the
next century the Swastika may regain its rightful place as a profound
and timeless symbol, untainted by the accidental and misconceived
association with Nazism.

With all this talk about the misuse of the swastika, it may be useful to
briefly restate its basic meaning. The word comes from su-asti, *it be
good*, as in the Sanskrit greeting Pratah swasti, *good morning*. So,
swastika means *auspicious-maker* or *sing of auspiciousness*. What the
swastika visually depicts, is the solar cycle, be it during the day or
during the year. It shows the circular movement at the four cardinal
points : sunrise, noon, sunset, midnight ; or spring equinox, summer
solstice, autumn equinox, winter solstice. As such, it is a shorthand
for the Zodiac as well as for all macrocosmic and microcosmic cycles. It
signifies the completeness as well as the dynamics of the Whole. Being
primarily a solar symbol, it is normally (except in black-and-white
print) painted in solar colours like red, saffron or gold ; while the
Nazi swastika was black.

Like the swastika, the term Arya, which is rather central in Hindu
tradition and more so in Nazism, is in need of rehabilitation. Of
course, the term does not indicate a race, but a quality of
character.[²⁵⁰](notes.htm#note250) When Buddha gives a short formulation
of his teachings, he calls it the Arya Satyani, the four *Noble*
Truths.[²⁵¹](notes.htm#note251) If the secularists have been inhibited
about the use of the word *Arya* as proving the *Fascist* character of
Hinduism, it is partly because of this terminology used by Buddha, the
hero of their mythical anti-Brahmin revolution.

The term Aryan was used by the Nazis in opposition to the term Semitic.
It so happens that both have

1.  a primary linguistic meaning (the Indo-European and the Semitic
    language families),
2.  a fallacious racial meaning (with Semitic standing for Jewish), and
3.  a derivative theological meaning, derived from the language groups
    in which the main texts of two religion families have been written

the Hindu tradition in the largest sense, and the
Jewish-Christian-Islamic tradition. The Nazis used the terms in the
second meaning, vaguely basing it *scientifically* on the first meaning.
For the third meaning, they didn't have the brains not the philosophical
inclination to go into it.

Aryan and Semitic are shorthand for two radically differing approaches
to religion. With "Semitic" are meant the religions claiming revelation
from the one and only God. In primitive Shamanistic cults, there may be
spirits speaking through the Shaman, but that is never a unique and
definitive revelation from a unique Creator- god. Similarly, there were
oracles where a god was supposed to speak through a human medium ; the
point is that there were many of them. But the revealed monotheistic
religions carry with them a typical fundamental doctrine that sets them
apart from all other religions.

On the one hand, their God speaks to people at a specific moment in
history, at a specific place, so that the beneficiaries or immediate
witnesses are limited in number, certainly less than all of humanity. On
the other hand, their God is the only one, so that all the other people
on earth either have to get other revelations from this one God, or they
are not getting revelations at all, except false ones from false gods.
While the first option was theoretically possible, the *Semitic*
religions have effectively chosen the second. This implies that humanity
gets divided into two : those whom God has personally addressed, and
those whom he has ignored. So, we get Jews and Gentiles, Christians and
Pagans, Muslims and Kafirs.

Of course, every tribe used to divide the world into the tribe and the
rest. The tribe was home, the rest was unsafe and foreign. And every
group identity, tribal or other, can give rise to hostility against
other groups. As an application of this general rule, even religious
group identity could be the basis of polarization and conflict. However,
the polarization between the One God's Chosen Community and the rest of
humanity was of a radically different nature than these ordinary group
antagonisms.

The tribal division was a division between people on an equal footing.
The others had their own identity and interests, with which our own
might sometimes be incompatible, but there was nothing intrinsically
evil or wrong about them. We had gods, and so had they. Both of us
worshipped the sun god, or the goddess of fleeting time who devours us
all, or the Unknown god, with local accents and variations, but not
radically different. For instance, in Homer's epic about the Trojan war,
you see some of the gods *side* with the Greeks and other gods *side*
with the Trojans. They shared the divine sphere between them.

This basic equality is broken in the *Semitic* religions. There, one
part of humanity has God on its side. That implies that whoever stands
against it, stands against God, with no divine friends on his own side.
There is now a fortunate part of humanity, and another part which is
doomed and cursed. Religion in its public aspect used to be a unifying
thing, a celebration of a cosmic oneness transcending the biological
social and other differences between the realms of nature and the
members of a society. Now it became a divisive thing, pitting the Chosen
against the doomed.

In this psychology, it is quite normal that all the non- human layers of
the cosmos, who, just like the doomed part of humanity, were ignorant of
God's unique revelation, were all deprived of their sacredness. The
golden calf and other idols of the Gentiles were smashed. The sacred
trees of the Pagans were felled. The holy cows of the Kafirs were
slaughtered. And all this cosmos was given to Adam and Eve for their
pleasure. Henceforth, a tree was nothing but timber

Thus, the Semitic religions constitute a radical break with natural
religiosity, which had always made nature share in the manifestation of
the divine, and which had never thought of limiting the awareness of the
divine to one community.

In books written in a monotheistic cultural milieu, this *revealed*
monotheism is always portrayed as a great step forwards in the march of
humanity. However, in real terms I cannot see one genuine advantage that
has accrued to humanity thanks to the is revelation-based monotheism. It
is said that this monotheism meant the end of superstition, of people
praying to godlings for favours. But people have prayed to this new. One
God for the same favours. Worse, is there a bigger superstition than the
belief that you are specially favoured over the other part of humanity,
and that God is on your side ?

By contrast, the *Aryan* religious tradition has not pretended to be the
special recipient of a unique divine revelation. The divine is manifest
everywhere, be it in different ways and to different degrees. It is not
excluded that some elements/times/places/animals/people are more sacred
than others, but the difference is only gradual. There is a divine
oneness of all entities in the cosmos. If at all you want to give this
outlook a philosophical name, you could say that roughly, it is monism.
That means, the assumption or perception that somehow everything is of
one essence.

This Aryan tradition has found its classic formulation in the Sanskrit
writings of entire lineages of human beings, referred to as Rishis.
However, it is also present in Pagan traditions outside the area where
Sanskrit was the language of culture. There are outward differences but
a fundamental akinness with Pagan traditions the world over. If you
analyze Pagan practices of ritual, sacrifice, incantation, you find the
same presupposed attitude towards the cosmos : a basic awareness that it
is one.

This basic awareness will be present in the religious feeling of many a
member of the *Semitic* religions. But there, it is overlaid with the
doctrinal assumption of a fundamental and irreducible two-ness of the
cosmos : on the one hand God and His chosen ones, on the other hand the
godless remainder. The degree to which individuals feel bound by their
formal allegiance to this doctrine, may differ widely. And we will not
judge the individuals. But we may give an opinion on the doctrine of the
One God who reveals Himself to/through a specific individual, has
brought an absolute division of mankind in the minds of its adherents,
and this mental division has in turn caused untold suffering in
persecutions and holy wars.

So, I cannot honestly compare the *Aryan* and the *Semitic* approach,
and neutrally say that they are merely different. There is an inequality
between the two. I think the *Aryan* approach is fundamentally more
wholesome than the *Semitic* approach.

Because of this inequality, I think it is important to choose other
terms for these basic doctrinal categories, than *Aryan* and *Semitic*.
For, these terms also denote people. They may not denote races, as
Hitler thought, but they do denote language groups, and people identify
to quite an extent with their language. Moreover, these two types of
religious outlook do not historically coincide with the said language
groups.

The Bible was written in Hebrew and the Quran in Arabic, while Jesus
spoke in Aramaic (though his words were preserved in Greek translation),
all three Semitic languages. Nevertheless, there was a lot of Paganism
in this language area before revelation-based monotheism took over. It
is often forgotten that the Arabs whom Mohammed tried to convert, were
just as much *polytheists* as the Hindus, and that they fought equally
hard to preserve their Kaaba as the Hindus fought to repeat that the
Jewish tradition lost the aggressive edge, which form the most
reprehensible effect of the *Semitic* outlook, long ago.

Conversely, in Aryan Iran, under the Sassanian dynasty, we see the
*Aryan* religion of Zoroaster take on an equally exclusivistic attitude
as is typical for the *Semitic* religions, complete with
temple-destruction, idol-breaking and persecution of Manichaeans and
Buddhists. Later, many Aryan-speaking people have been converted tot he
*Semitic* creed of Islam. In Europe, most followers of the *Semitic*
religion of Christ, are speakers of *Aryan* languages. In Africa and
other places, the division in Aryan and Semitic has no linguistic (much
less a racial) relevance.

So, I propose to renounce the habit of using *Semitic* as shorthand for
*"revelation-based monotheistic"* religions. The use of the word *Arya*
as shorthand for Sanatana Dharma can continue, but one should be careful
not to give secularist slanderers a chance of falsely associating it
with the *Aryan race* nonsense.

But before renouncing the *Semitic* habit myself, I will use the term
*Semitic* one last time, in order to show how Nazism itself, for all its
anti-Semitic rhetoric, very much fitted into the *Semitic* tradition.

As Girilal Jain has convincingly argued, Nazism was an extreme
realization of the 19th century secular nationalism in Europe. This
secular nationalism was in its general attitude towards mankind a direct
heir to the *Semitic* legacy carried into Europe by Christianity. There
is a straight lineage from Moses' *Chosen People* to Hitler's Herrenvolk
(superior people). The radical division of mankind into the chosen
insiders and the lost outsiders is very much present in this secular
nationalism.

A not-so-secular slogan of the impeccably secular Nazi state, written on
the belt of the German soldiers, was : Gott mit unsp (God with us). This
notion can be traced straight to Moses, from whom it had made a second
lineage to Mohammed's jihad.

Because of Hitler's dislike for Christianity, and because of some Nazi
intellectuals' rhetoric involving the pre- Christian German mythology,
many people, especially Christians, have considered Nazism as a return
to Paganism.[²⁵²](notes.htm#note252) That is a case of being fooled by a
superficial semblance. In the Nazi ideology, the Germanic mythology had
no place whatsoever. There was a certain flirting with themes from
Germanic mythology since the mind-19th century at the latest, the
best-known being Richard Wagner's operas (as there had been an
exploration of Greek mythology since the Renaissance). So, by the time
of Nazism, there were some artsy upper class people and some weird
intellectuals playing with this ancient Germanic imagery, but there is
no trace of any ideological influence from those fairytales on the
actual political thought of the Nazis.

Incidentally, today there is a new revival of Pagan religion in Europe.
In Britain we have had the New Druids, both formal groups who claim to
revive the ancient Celtic traditions, and individuals who explore
whatever lore has survived, combining it with astrology, Oriental
mysticism, and more such ingredients. This movement started in the
romantic 19th century, in the same climate in which Wagner wrote his
Ring der Nibelungen and Lohengrin, and it has continued with ups and
downs till today. In Germany too, there is now a rediscovery of
pre-Christian Germanic religion. Apart from the fact that these New
heathens have to reconstruct this lost tradition from stray fragments
and outsiders' testimonies, they also face the problem of this
association of ancient Germanic lore with Nazism. But they manage to
convince themselves and others of the utter superficiality in the Nazis'
appropriation of this ancient imagery, and of the inherent tolerant and
open- minded attitude of the Pagan civilization. In today's Germany, an
estimated 20,000 people regularly participate in gatherings where the
ancient or neo-ancient rites are conducted, most of them intellectuals
with decent jobs.

If we look at the basic points in the Nazi programme, we do not find
anything there that can be traced to Germanic Paganism. Anti-Semitism
(i.e. anti-Judaism) has nothing whatsoever to do with Germanic Paganism,
it is a strong Christian tradition. Especially the Russian Orthodox
Church and the Roman Catholic Church in Hitler's Austria gave it
implicit or explicit ideological support. Authoritarian political
thought has nothing whatsoever to do with the Germanic tribal
organization, which was largely democratic, with an elected king and a
regular all-tribe assembly meeting. It had more to do with the secular
organization of the Roman empire (which model had loomed large over the
European polity all through the Christian period), which has also
influenced the Church organization. The same Roman influence we find in
outward forms like the uniformist discipline, the Roman salute and the
fondness of grand parades. Secular nationalism, glorification of the
state, genocide, racial purity and uniformity, all these essential
ideological elements of Nazism have nothing whatsoever to do with the
Pagan religion. Neither the Germanic Paganism, nor the Hindu Paganism
with its swastika.

It is important to stress this profound foreignness of Nazism to
pre-modern Paganism, because once Hindus set out to rediscover the
social philosophy and other elements of their own traditions, there will
of course be some secularist ignoramus who will say that *"this is just
what Hitler did"*.

The Nazi kind of nationalism was also of the *Semitic* kind. Rather than
seeing the nation as one step on the ladder in the organizational
hierarchy, below civilization and humanity, and above regional, tribal
and family units, it denied this gradedness. Instead, it divided the
world in outsiders and insiders, thus in principle opposing itself to
the rest of the world, and imposed uniformity on the nation,
discouraging all subnational groupings. Again, this exclusivistic and
uniformist nationalism is opposed to the Pagan outlook.

The dominance of monotheism has strongly promoted that single most
essential trait of the monotheistic mind : simplistic crudeness. For a
well-known example, monotheists are idol-breakers : they are for God's
unity, therefore they are against diversity. Their mental culture is too
crude to see that multiplicity does not exclude unity, even while
polytheists know fully well that there is one divine essence in all
their gods (who anyway are all projections of the one but multi-faceted
human consciousness). Most modernizers these days are appallingly
limited to black-and white categories in their thinking. For instance,
in the present discussion of multi-level integration, they are of course
for slogans like unity and integration, and therefore they are against
any *narrow* and *chauvinistic* championing of region, sect, language
group etc. Their only concept of unity is to raze everything flat, then
there will be no more difference and disunity, so that will be the
realization of unity, equality etc. This is Hitler's and Stalin's
approach to national integration.

Yet, real modern scientific thinking is gradual. It handles in-between
categories (such as probability between certainty and uncertainty). This
is formally a rediscovery of the old Pagan world-view. There is not just
the absolute one God and the absolutely profane plural world, as in
monotheism. There is a lot of life between the two. There is both
sacredness and profaneness within the world, as there is both oneness
and plurality within the divine. Similarly, there are in-between levels
between the individual and the state, with units who entertain a certain
specificity rather than submitting to uniformity.

A typically simplistic fallacy of the monotheistic mind is the one heard
so often in the anti-Mandir rhetoric :*"But Ram is everywhere ! Ram
would be ashamed if he saw how attached you people are to something as
profane as a spatial location and a structure of bricks !"* Of course
God is everywhere. And yet, there is a sanatana, ineluctable tendency in
man to make the sacred present within the world, by consecrating certain
parts of space and time, and demarcating them from the profane parts. We
like to create difference, and make some places and some times special.
Even the monotheists have had to yield to this natural tendency. Even
though Allah is not in any place and time in particular, the Muslims
have places of pilgrimage, festival days, a special day for prayer
(Friday), a special month for fasting (Ramzan). The uniformizing
monotheists can't help recognizing certain more sacred parts in space
and time. So it is quite alright for Hindus to say : no, not any place
will do, we want the one site that we have considered sacred since
centuries. Sacred means : not just any.

This *Semitic* simplistic crudeness, the same which prevents secularists
from properly understanding the Ayodhya issue, is present in many modern
unhealthy forms of nationalism, among them Nazism. They see their nation
in isolation, as an absolutely independent unit, which on the other hand
excludes all subdivisions within the nation. In a healthy international
set-up, there are grades of independence, which are proportional to the
grades of *separate identity* between ethnic and linguistic units.

A case in point is "Khalistan". The Sikh community is distinct by its
dress, and by its specific choice of Hindu scriptures and parampara. It
is not distinct by language, for Panjabi (if at all it can be considered
a language rather than a Hindi dialect) is also spoken by Hindus and
Muslims ; and its scriptures are in Hindi, the language of crores of
non-Sikh Hindus. It is not distinct geographically, for it has always
lived mixed with other communities. It does not have a separate
political history, for Ranjit Singh's empire was a state ruled by a
Sikh, but by no means a Sikh state in which Sikhdom was shared by all or
even the majority of the citizens. So, by the United Nations criteria
for recognition as a separate nation, the Sikhs don't qualify at all. To
the extent of the distinctness of their identity, they are entitled to,
well, cultivating the things that make up their identity, but not to a
separate state.

There has been a gradual increase of *Semitic* influence on the Sikh
community during this century, or rather, on the Akalis who have set
themselves up as the leaders. They have exchange the Hindu concept of
God's oneness, through many forms, for the Semitic concept of God's
unicity, inimical to all personified depictions or *goods*. They have
reshaped their gurus into *prophets*, intercessory mouthpieces of God,
with guru Govind Singh as the *"last and final prophet"*. These
*prophets* have *revealed* the words that make up Sikh *Scripture*, and
made the Sikhs into a *"people of the Book"*. The chief influence is of
course that of Islam, but the general depreciation for *polytheism* and
idolatry which the British brought, has also played a role.

It is no wonder that with this artificial *Semitic* identity, some Sikhs
have developed a *Semitic* concept of nationalism, not admitting of any
gradations. They began applying the crass simplistic reasoning of
absolutizing their small measure of distinctness into a separate
nationhood, and denying their internal differences and sub-identities
for the sake of uniformity. They have a separate dress, therefore they
have a separate identity, therefore they are entitled to an independent
state. On the other hand, within their own community, they accept no
differences and impose the Khalsa Sikh identity on the otherwise
pluriform Nanakpanthi community : any Sikh who is not a Khalsa Sikh is
not a real Sikh. Absolute cleavage with other communities and uniformity
within the community, these are the essential ingredients of *modern*
nationalism, generated in the *Semitic* cultural context of late-
Christian Europe.

For the sake of national integration in India, it is imperative to set
the record straight, to reverse this process of absolutizing any minor
difference in *identity* into a separatist claim to a *nation-state*. In
the specific case of the Sikhs, the obvious fact should be made clear,
that Sikh identity is integrated in a hierarchy of differentiation
within Hinduism : it is a Bhakti sect within the broad Vaishnava
tradition within Sanatana Dharma.

In general, a theory of graded integration of distinct communities via a
hierarchy of political levels that does justice to this distinctness
should be evolved. That is the *Aryan* answer to a world-wide problem of
plural- identity states, which has been aggravated by the *Semitic*
absolutist approach.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 14.4. "They killed the Mahatma"

*"It is extremely symbolic that Advani is the heir of Nathuram Godse
who, in pursuit of what he was convinced was his duty to India, shot
dead the man who had chanted the name of Ram all his life till his last
breath"*, writes M.J. Akbar.[²⁵³](notes.htm#note253) Many others make
the same allegation, mostly more sharply.

Before going into the facts of the matter, let us make the observation
that today the name and especially the murder of the Mahatma are being
exploited to the fullest by people who are crusading against that which
was Mahatma Gandhi's first concern and loyalty : Hindu society. As is
clear from the Mahatma's polemic against the Christian missionaries, he
was first and foremost a Hindu, who opposed all designs to destroy Hindu
culture.[²⁵⁴](notes.htm#note254) And it was because he loved and served
Hindu society, that he could take the freedom to criticize it. Those who
criticize Hindu society and its defenders today, not as its well-wishers
but as its enemies, and who do not hesitate to invoke the Mahatma's
authority to prop up their Hindu-baiting designs before a population
with an increasingly hazy memory of the Mahatma's real commitment, are
traitors to the Mahatma's message. These people, from the shameless
Jawaharlal Nehru down to his sycophants like M.J. Akbar, are in no
position to lecture Advani about Gandhi the Ram bhakt.

Now,let us get the facts straight. In 1948, Nathuram Godse was an active
member of the Hindu Mahasabha. Many workers and leaders of this
organization were also members of the Congress, the party which Akbar in
his article seeks to portray as the absolute antipode of the *communal
forces*. Since 1925 there existed another Hindu organization, the
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, which did not intend to be political.
Godse, who was a Maharashtra Brahmin just like the founders of the RSS,
had left this organization some time before he killed Gandhi, because he
didn't find it radical enough.

In 1947, the Mahatma's decades-long attempts to forge Hindu-Muslim unity
ended in utter failure, when the Muslim League, supported by an
overwhelming majority of the Muslim electorate, forced Partition on
India. It should be a lesson for those who talk lightly of national
integration and Hindu-Muslim unity, that even the Mahatma couldn't
influence the Muslim community leadership. In the perception of millions
of Hindus, especially those who had too flee their homes in what had
suddenly become Pakistan, this Partition was very much the Mahatma's
personal failure and responsibility : he had carried on a policy of
concessions to the Muslims in order to appease their ever-increasing
demands, and they had only become more arrogant in the process.

As if to confirm their views, he went on a fast to death in order to
force the Hindus and the Indian government into a number of concessions.
Among them: the Hindu refugees who were staying in mosques in Delhi had
to vacate them and find a place elsewhere, and the Indian government had
to pay Pakistan's share of the treasury which the British had left, to
Pakistan, a country with which it was actually at war in Kashmir. All
his demands were meet, and he stopped his fast.

This one-sided string of demands on the Hindus, and this masochistic
habit of instilling guilt into his own community and swallowing all the
Muslim crimes without protest, immensely angered many Hindus, among them
Nathuram Godse. He *couldn't take it any longer*, for him the very name
of the Mahatma *made my blood boil*. So, with the complicity of a few
friends, he murdered the Mahatma.

The Indian people, which was so angry with the Mahatma the day before,
now re-installed him as the living saint they used to venerate, and as
he was now dead, they made a myth out of him. A myth that contained the
beliefs which the day before had been seen by everyone to lie shattered
by reality.

Conversely, there was a lot of violence against the Hindu Mahasabha.
There was also large-scale violence against the Maharashtra Brahmin
community to which Godse belonged, much like the anti-Sikh violence
after Indira's murder (in both cases M.J. Akbar's Congress is generally
believed to have actively fomented this violence).

The great beneficiary of the Mahatma's murder was undoubtedly Jawaharlal
Nehru. It marginalized the Hindu Mahasabha, and whatever other Hindu
activist party existed, completely. Without the murder, Nehru and his
Congress would have had to answer for he betrayal of the election
promise that India would remain united, and for the immense suffering to
which they were a party by accepting Partition.Now, he had an occasion
to ban and possibly destroy what he hated most of all: the organizations
which championed Hindutva.

In this case, the fact that Nehru benefited immensely by the Mahatma's
murder, will not lead us to the conclusion that he must have been behind
it.[²⁵⁵](notes.htm#note255) For, the principle that he who benefits must
have committed the crime, only applies if people act rationally. Now,
Nathuram Godse's act was anything but rational. Not only did he do the
biggest possible damage to his own political cause. He also did not even
punish the source of the Partition disaster that had angered him so
much. If he had killed Jinnah, it would still have been murder, but it
would somehow have been logical. But killing the Mahatma was like being
beaten up by street toughs and then coming home and killing your father
in revenge. It was quite irrational.

It is therefore quite improbable that the Hindu Mahasabha as such had a
hand in the murder. In fact, Godse had been angry with party leader
Savarkara for being too co- operative with the new Indian government. At
any rate, the party leadership was not involved in the murder : that was
the judge's opinion, when he fully acquitted Savarkar, whom the
prosecutor for the state, at the express instigation of Nehru, had also
accused of complicity in the murder. The party leader's non- involvement
was so clear, that the prosecutor did not appeal against the acquittal.

As is well known, Godse and his accomplice Narayan Apte were hanged, and
several others were sentenced to life imprisonment, of which they
actually did some fifteen years.[²⁵⁶](notes.htm#note256)

Now, what does L.K. Advani have to do with all this ? He has been a
member of the RSS since decades. His party, the BJP, or at least its
earlier incarnation, the Jan Sangh, was formed by RSS members who wanted
to give a political dimension to the movement, in 1951. So, his party
did not exist at the time of the Mahatma's murder, but the mother
organization RSS was very much around (in fact, RSS chief Guru Golwalkar
was one of the first to condemn the murder as a *heinous crime*, but
that condemnation was of course so common that it couldn't prove much0.
So the question becomes: is the RSS anyhow *"the heir of Nathuram
Godse"*, as M. J. Akbar wants us to believe ?

After the murder, Nehru, who saw his chance, banned not only the Hindu
Mahasabha but also the RSS, and jailed many RSS workers. However, the
prosecutor could not find any trace of complicity, and did not prosecute
any RSS man. So, in a juridical sense, the RSS had nothing at all to do
with the murder. And M.J. Akbar and similar propagandists have to
exploit people's ignorance in order to pass off their association of
L.K. Advani with Nathuram Godse.

Now, one could say that the RSS was co-responsible for the murder in the
vaguer sense that they crated the atmosphere for it (the same way
secularists today allot guilt for the riots). And it is undoubtedly true
that the RSS was against Partition and therefore against the Partition
managers, including the Mahatma. He had done so many fasts unto death to
force Hindus, why had he not done one to stop the Muslims from
partitioning the country ? This question lived in the minds of many
Indians, and probably the RSS was vocal in expressing this anger against
the Mahatma's passivity in the face of Partition. There is no doubt that
they did their part in strengthening the anti-Gandhi mood in the
country. But they did not create the atmosphere for Godse's act : Godse
knew them since years and he was through with them. Godse didn't need
the RSS (on which he looked down as being merely a culture organisation)
to make up his mind about Gandhi and about how to *punish* him.

There is quite a difference between demolishing the Mahatma's myth (a
myth which M.J.Akbar's Congress Party continues to exploit even today)
or criticizing his policies, and killing the man. The anti-Mahatma
things which the RSS people said and wrote, were to my knowledge not
more vicious than the anti-Advani propaganda which the secularists
spread today (being a bigot, vicious, rabid, fascist, another Barbar,
Jinnah, Hitler, etc.) And if tomorrow a lunatic kills Advani, we will
not accuse the secularists of committing or even inspiring the murder.
They may be proven liars, but that does not make them murderers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 14.5. Hindu nationalism

*"The Hindu communalists' claim to being patriotic is wholly suspect.
The RSS and the Hindu Mahasabha have a shameful history of collaboration
with the British, especially in 1942. Their support to the colonial
state, unlike the communists', did not even have that redeeming feature
or fig leaf : the choice of a lesser evil against fascism. It came from
utterly despicable, base and crass motives."* Thus spake praful
Bidwai.[²⁵⁷](notes.htm#note257)

Praful Bidwai repeats here a classic from the communist gallery of lies
: that the communists collaborated with the British as a matter of
choosing the lesser evil and first fighting fascism. It is simply not
true that the communists joined hands with the British because they
wanted to fight fascism. When England formally, declared war on Nazi
Germany in 1939, the communists didn't move. Stalin had a pact with
Hitler, and so the communists did not fight Hitler. It was only when
Hitler attacked the Soviet Union, that the communists joined the anti-
fascist struggle. The communists' loyalty was not to India, not to
Britain, not to the cause of anti-fascism, but solely to the Soviet
Union. The only *redeeming feature* in the communists' collaboration
with the British, was that it was part of their collaboration with the
Soviet Union.

Praful Bidwai writes an articles against communalism and accuses
communalists of *"utterly despicable, crass and base motives"* for their
collaboration with the British. So that must be his judgment about the
Muslim League, which always consistently collaborated with the British,
and which was wholly unconcerned with fig-leaves like the anti-fascist
struggle. We may add that Bidwai's communist friends supported the
Muslim League's Pakistan demand, and that they spied for the British and
got many freedom fighters jailed.

The Hindu Mahasabha had always been in the anti-colonial struggle. Its
leader Savarkar had spent many years in a penal camp on the Andamans for
complicity in anti- colonial murder. We may disagree with what he said,
but as titles go, he had deserved his title Swatantryaveer (hero of
independence). When he wanted Hindus to join the British army during the
war (*"Hinduize all politics, militarize Hindudom"*), this was not a
betrayal of the freedom struggle, but rather a potentially very
effective strategy for obtaining quick independence. Savarkar's
calculation was that after the war, the British would find before them a
Hindu army, well-trained in the war against the Japanese, well-armed and
well-organized, against which they would not even want to wage another
colonial war.

Why does Bidwai mention 1942, and not, say, 1944? Because in 1944 all
parties including Congress collaborated with the British, while 1942 was
the year of the Quit India movement. This movement was no doubt
patriotic, but it was a great failure. It did nothing for independence,
and it did not even achieve its real objective : bringing Congress back
in the centre-stage of Indian politics. But at the same time, Subhash
Chandra Bose was joining the Axis powers and organizing the Indian
National Army to invade and liberate British India. Now, let's see who
collaborated with the British against his own people. Jawaharlal Nehru
declared that when Subhash Chandra Bose would set foot on Indian soil,
he would fight him. That is, Nehru would collaborate with the British
against the Japanese-backed Indian National Army. Taking our cue from
Praful Bidwai, we must ascribe to Nehru *"utterly despicable, crass and
base motives"*.

Anyway, what a strange exercise : dealing with the allegation that the
Hindu activist parties are not India nationalists. I had thought that at
least would be granted to them. It just goes to show how *rabid* (to use
one of their favourite terms) the secularists' hatred for the Hindu
communalists has become : they just kick around whichever way they can,
now reverting to the more familiar allegation of national revanchism,
irredentism (reclaiming territory on historical grounds) and narrow
chauvinism.

Let us consider these more familiar allegations, which would be an
element in common with the aggressive nationalism of Germany, Japan and
Italy in the thirties (and with that of China in 1950-62). Take
irredentism : designs to annex territory based on historical claims. In
some RSS publications, you see maps of Akhand Bharat, which are roughly
British India : including Myanmar (Burma), but not including
Afghanistan. So, it might seem they somewhere have a design to annex
Myanmar one day. In fact, Myanmar was never a part of India, it was only
the British who lumped the two together for a while.

On the other hand, Afghanistan was a full part of the Hindu cradle up
till the year 1000, and in political unity with India until Nadir Shah
separated it in the 18th century. The mountain range in Eastern
Afghanistan where the native Hindus were slaughtered, is still called
the Hindu Kush (Persian :*Hindu slaughter*.) It is significant that one
of the very few place-names on earth that reminds us not of the victory
of the winners but rather of the slaughter of the losers, concerns a
genocide of Hindus by the Muslims.

It seems that many people who champion the Hindu cause, do not have a
good knowledge of Hindu history. But others do at least know of
Afghanistan's having been a part of Hindu culture, for I have heard
once, as an illustration of the *expansionist ambitions* of the *Hindu
communalists*, that they want the *shuddhi of Afghanistan.* It was
quoted by a secularist, with the suggestion : isn't that irredentist,
and therefore fascist?

Well, no. As long as *shuddhi* means the Hindu variety of conversion,
there is nothing wrong with organizations like the Arya Samaj going to
Afghanistan and performing shuddhi of the Afghans, that is, ritually
leading them back into the Hindu fold. Of course, one doesn't see it
happen just like that. But then, one doesn't see it happen after
military conquest either. No cases are known to me of forced shuddhi,
even in the heady twenties when Shuddhi and Tabligh movements competed
for converts. Shudhi can only come after a conscious and free decision
of the human being involved. On that condition, there is nothing wrong
with the Shuddhi of Afghanistan.

There are also, no doubt, some cranks who think that all countries with
some Indian influence have to be brought together in a Greater India :
Iran, Tibet, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Thailand, Cambodia, Indonesia. But
since some of the same cranks also believe that everything comes from
India (my native tongue, Dutch, is said to have been brought by the
Daityas), this Greater India would really comprise the whole world.
Yeah, why not the whole world one big Hindu Rashtra? The thing is that
such people, while politically totally unimportant, are somehow visible
enough within the Hindutva movement, to give the whole movement a bad
name.

The one questionable and even objectionable element in the nationalism
of Hindutva prophets like Savarkar and Golwalkar, as well as of
Jawaharlal Nehru for that matter, is this 19th century European concept
of a territorial nationalism. Savarkar defined a Hindu as someone for
whom India is both his fatherland and holyland[²⁵⁸](notes.htm#note258).
The two words are important in the definition : a Chinese Buddhist may
consider India his holyland, but since he is not an Indian native, he is
not a Hindu; and an Indian Muslim, conversely, is not a Hindu because
his holyland lies in Arabia.

Now, why tie the definition of Hindu to this piece of land? The Hindus
in Bali, Guyana etc. are just as much Hindus as those in Bharat. One can
migrate and yet retain Hindu culture. Of course, the name Hindu is
really a geographical term (Hind is Persian for Sindh), but then the
task for Hindu thinkers should be to free Hinduism from this territorial
definition, rather than to confirm it.

It is said that Shintoism is Japan's *national religion* (as opposed to
so-called *universal* or imperialist religion). Alright, but Shinto does
not mean *Japan*, it means *the way of the gods*. So, if you define a
religion, you should say something about its contents, not just about
its geographical location. *"The way of the gods"* may be still very
rudimentary as a definition, but it says at least that it is a method or
practice (a way) involving the divine in a kind of personalized way (the
gods, as opposed to an atheist or nirguna system). That is more than
*Hindu*, which means just *of India*.

Savarkar put things upside down. He was a nationalist, pledging
allegiance to this piece of earth now called India. But what is special
about this country, so special that Savarkar builds a religion on it?
There is nothing special about this country, except that historically it
happens to be the cradle of Hindu society, and that society in turn
derives its worth from its practicing and embodying a certain culture,
Sanatana Dharma. It is because of Sanatana Dharma that this society is
worth serving and preserving, and in turn it is because of *Hindu*
society that *Hindusthan* is worth loving and defending. But this
culture can be transplanted or re- created elsewhere, and then that
other country is as much fatherland and holyland.

This territorial nationalism centered on Bharat Mata only confuses the
issues before Hindu society. For instance, it occasions all this silly
talk about Muslim Indians cheering for Pakistan in cricket games, and
having extra- territorial loyalties to the area from which their
religion was imported. But so what? The problem with Islam is not at all
that it is foreign. The problem with Islam lies not in its geographical
but in its ideological origins. The problem is not one of nationalism
vs. extra- national loyalties, it is one of culture and ideology : an
exclusivist anti-humanist creed vs. a pluralist and integrally humanist
culture. The Islamic problem is not one of loyalty to Pakistan or Mecca,
but one of self- righteousness and intolerance.

As long as the *Hindu nationalists* continue to define the Muslim
problem as a problem of nationality, of *"joining the national
mainstream"* and of *"being Indian first and Muslim next"*, they are
trapped in 19th century state nationalism, with all its puffed-up
patriotic emotionalism. They are evading the confrontation between two
incompatible ideologies/cultures, which no patriotism or loyalty to the
state can unit. For instance, asking the Muslims to identify themselves
as *Mohammedi Hindus* is not only very unrealistic, it constitutes a
refusal to recognize the true (exclusivist and therefore averse to
assimilation) character of Islam, in the name of a superficial *Hindu
nationhood*.

There is no good reason why Muslims or anyone else should direct his
first loyalty to the Indian state. That state is nothing but an
instrument to regular society and facilitate the citizens' fulfillment
of their own life aims. If Muslims want to direct their loyalty towards
an international religious community, they are free to do so, as long as
they abide by the law of the land. The way forwards for the Hindu
movement, is to redefine the problem in terms of ideology and
civilization, and to address the challenge of Islam not at the level of
ineffective emotional categories like *loyalty* and *identifying with
the nation*, but at the ideological level. And when it comes to loyalty,
this should not be directed towards such accidental matters as a
territory or a nation in which we happen to be born, but towards the
eternal values embodied in Hindu civilization.

Hindutva ideologue V.D.Savarkar was a territorial Hindu, but culturally
he was quite alienated. The well-known example: he advocated meat-eating
and even meet-eating. Savarkar reasoned: if beef is more nutritious,
then drop all the taboos, and kill cows for their meat. If seems many of
his (formal and informal ) followers still think that the Hindus can
only defeat the meat-eating Muslims if they give up vegetarianism. What
nonsense this is: what are you fighting for if you believe that *"in
order to better defend Hindu culture, I have to give up Hindu culture"*?
If you think you have to forsake your culture identity, you only have
this territorial identity left.

And then, paradoxically, you arrive at the same point where the
Nehruvian secularists are. They too advocate a culturally neutral,
territorial patriotism. Both in the Hindu movements and in the
anti-Hindu secularist movements, people are saying that you should be
*Indian first*. What is this, being *India*? What is that,
*Bharatiyatva*? Human beings are not different by the land they inhabit.
They develop a certain distinctiveness by the value-system they
practice, by the social ways that mould them, by the mental outlook that
is instilled in them. So you can have a commitment to certain values.
But a commitment to a certain piece of earth can only be superficial.
And if this basically superficial attachment to this territory gets
mystified, as happened with the secular nationalisms in some European
countries, then the consequences are evil.

Of course, when there is a football game, I want the team from my town
to win. If it's an international game, I want my country's team to win.
It would be a bit ridiculous to support the other town, the foreign
country. So, that much territorial patriotism is alright. But one's
basic commitment should be to more substantial things than that. A
country can only acquire a value, and be an object of commitment, if it
becomes historically linked with a substantial value. As long as India
is conceived as culturally neutral, it is just a piece of land, not
really worth any commitment. Forget about Bharatiyatva. The day when the
world has one global culture, and that day is not too far off, these
concept of territorial patriotism, of Indian-ness or American- ness etc.
will only apply in football stadiums.

However, today the Indian state has an important function as the abode
and defense of a culture which could hardly thrive otherwise. Since
Hindu society is surrounded by Islamic and Communist enemies out to
destroy Hindu culture, this state acquires a more than territorial
importance. India is not culturally neutral, because objectively it is
the only defense of Hindu culture against its enemies. So, as abode and
defense of Hindu culture, this land and this state can count on the
Hindus' allegiance and attachment. At this secondary level, nationalism
becomes meaningful.

That Savarkar, one of the foremost Hindutva leaders, could be so
careless about Hindu culture even while defending it, is significant for
the advanced state of self-forgetfulness that threatens to submerge
Hindu society. And in this nationalistic and directed to Bharat Mata,
than cultural and directed to Sanatana Dharma.

If at all the nationalism in the Hindutva movement would develop fascist
overtones (and I do not see that at present), it would be due to its not
being Hindu enough, and being too secular-nationalist. Compare with the
relative unimportance of national borders in medieval Europe when it was
all Catholic and unconcerned with nation-states. It was the larger
religious and cultural idea (the Brahmin level) that could keep in its
place the political idea of the state (the Kshatriya level). Similarly,
a deeper knowledge and understanding of Sanatana Dharma would soon
dedramatize and ultimately dissolve the problems of religionalism and
sectarianism.

For instance, Sikh separatism is based on externalities like beards and
turbans, and on a defective and distorted understanding of Hindu and
Sikh doctrine. If today Hindu politicians have to advocate a tough line
in Punjab, and sending in the army, it is because they themselves (as
well as all the traveling sadhus and other consciousness-raisers of
Hindu society) failed to check the spread of ignorance and
misconceptions about the Sikh tradition.

Saying that India only makes sense as the eggshell in which Hindu
society lives, and that India takes its identity from Hinduism, may not
be the position taken by Savarkar, who put this the other way around,
but at any rate it is the position considered *Hindu communalist* par
excellence by the secularists. Yet, the position is wholly correct. But
for Hinduism, there would not have been an Indian Union. Suppose that,
as some foresaw a century ago, all Hindus would have been converted to
Islam or Christianity. What would happen then, can be seen from such
happy Muslim-Christian bhai-bhai countries like Lebanon, Cyprus, Sudan,
Kosovo (Yugoslavia), Nagorny-Karabakh. The country would have been split
at the very least into a Muslim North and a Christian
South.[²⁵⁹](notes.htm#note259)

In the sense that Hinduism is the cultural reason for India's very
existence, India cannot exist but as a Hindu Rashtra. Let us see what
the secular alternative is.

In a secular India, there is room for different religions, right? This
pluralism is either a negative pluralism : we don't care, be whatever
you want to be. In that case, you have a neutral state. That is the
official position today, and it is not generating much enthusiasm. The
minorities don't want it, because they feel threatened by majority rule.
They fear that a neutral state regulated by majority vote, would
uniformize at the expense of the weaker elements in the plural set-up.
They allege that, against its own professing, the preserving of the
minorities' identity is made an issue, and when the majority of the
weak, an anti-democratic policy of championing the minorities against
the majority is enforced. And so, everyone is unhappy.

The alternative to this neutral pluralism is a positive pluralism.
Underlying it, there is philosophy that positively gives a full-blooded
foundation and justification to plurality. That philosophy exist : it is
called Sanatana Dharma, and a state founded on it could well be called a
Hindu Rashtra. In this state, the different components of the plural
set-up are recognized as such. This state would be different from a
uniform democracy, in that it would recognize plural subsystems. This
recognition of plurality is, once more, the very opposite of fascism.

Integrating different units of identity into a large identity, is one of
the foremost socio-political problems of today. And it is an issue on
which the Hindu tradition has interesting approaches to offer. Since it
is such a vast and important issue, I will limit myself in the following
chapter to the one aspect of it that is highlighted at present in this
discussion : *minorityism* vs. *majoritarianism*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 14.6. Majorityism

The BJP has been saying that the government and some political parties
indulge in *minorityism*. This means that they have promised or given
special privileges to the minorities, chiefly the Muslims, in exchange
for their political support. Two other reasons for this *pampering the
minorities* may be *" the approval of the Muslim countries*, with whom
Nehru and his successors established a special relationship (party made
necessary by the Nehru-created Kashmir problem, on which a united Muslim
front had to be prevented), and the satisfaction of a mental desire to
be *secular*. In my opinion, the last factor, the mental cluster of
*secularism*, the need to prove oneself non-Hindu and pro-minorities, is
the most important one.

The examples of systematic institutional *minorityism* cited most often
are the separate personal law based on the Shariat, the special status
of the Muslim-majority state Jammu and Kashmir, the immunity of minority
schools and places of worship from government interference or take-over.
Examples of occasional political minorityism are the numerous unequal
treaties before independence between Congress and the Muslim league, the
creation of a Muslim-majority district in Kerala by redrawing of
district borders, the overruling of the Shah Bano verdict with
legislation, the creation of a *minorities commission* (under the Janata
government of which some BJP leaders were Cabinet ministers). These do
not add up to a full *oppression* of Hindu society by the Muslim
minority, but they do constitute real discriminations.

Opposing this minorityism, the BJP has put forward the slogan : *Justice
for all, appeasement of none*. This means that there should be no
discrimination between individuals, between states, or between any
intermediary levels of organization, on the basic of religions. Thus,
instead of a *Minorities Commission*, there should be a *Human Rights
Commission*, because members of the majority can have *grievances* too.
Instead of immunity for minority schools, there should be immunity for
schools run by any community. In fact, many members of the Constituent
Assembly who voted this Articles 30 giving guarantees to the minority
educational institutions, acted on the assumption that majority
institutions would wrong, the Article should be reconsidered. A common
civil code should be enacted. Articles 370 should be scrapped and
Kashmir should be fully integrated.

So, what the BJP demands here, is that the rules of democracy be applied
without any exemptions or exceptions on communal grounds. To any
democratic-minded person, this would seem quite unobjectionable. Not so
to the Indian secularists.

Of late, they have coined a new term, which should brand this democratic
equality as really a component of fascism: majoritarianism. The right
term to oppose minorityism would have been majorityism, i.e. espousal of
the majority cause, but they chose the uglier majoritarianism. This is
too bad for them, because the term can be analyzed as *"espousal of the
majoritarian cause"*, so not championing a (majority) community, hence
communalism, but championing the majoritarian principle. And there is
nothing objectionable in the majoritarian principle: it is the very
working principle of our democracy.

In fact, the secularists are quite correct in not describing the
opposition to minorityism as majorityism. Opposing the favouring of
minorities need not indicate a favouring of the majority, it may just as
well stem for a concern of the working principle of the current from of
democracy, viz. decision by the majority.

*"The true test of a democracy is the justice that the minority gets in
the system. The majority will always get its share whatever the
system"*, writes M.J. Akbar[²⁶⁰](notes.htm#note260).

With that, white minority rule in South Africa certainly passes *the
true test of democracy*. M.J. Akbar implies that all struggle against
minority regimes oppressing majorities was futile, since majorities
cannot possibly be oppressed.

But Hindus point out that they are really discriminated against in the
laws of the land, and that minorities do get privileges which are
unthinkable in most genuinely secular states.

If we apply Bipan Chandra's definition of *communalism*, viz.
attributing common secular interests to people on the ground of a common
religion. then we must consider M.J. Akbar's statement as an application
of communalist thought categories. There is absolutely no questioning of
the religious rights of the minorities in India, so if Mr. Akbar raises
issues involving the minorities, it must be non-religious issues, in
which the category of religious community (*minority*) does not properly
apply. &gt;From the moment the religious rights of the minorities are
guaranteed, any other talk of *minorities* is fundamentally communalist.
Every single article of law not dealing with the exercise of religious
community as a legally relevant unit of organization, is an element of
communalism in the legal framework of the state, and should be
repudiated in a truly secular-set-up.

A religious community is only a lawful category in strictly religious
matters. In these, there is already discrimination against the Hindus.
The state governments can (and do, as recently in Kerala) take over the
management of Hindu temples, not of minority places of worship. They can
(and do, as in West Bengal) take over school started by Hindu
organizations. Apart from the secular aspects of education, there is
religious discrimination against the Hindus in that the imparting of
Hindus tradition is hampered, as well as the creation of a Hindu
atmosphere in a school (e.g. through the selective recruitment of
teachers, to which the minority schools are fully entitled).

Both in the letter and spirit of the Constitution and in actual
practice, Hindus as a religious community are discriminated against in
matters of temples management and education. These discriminations are
at least partly encroachments on the exercise n the exercise of the
Hindus' constitutionally guaranteed religious freedom. Just imagine what
rhetoric and agitation would be lunched if such discriminations had
applied to the minorities.

Then there is the matter of the separate civil code for the minorities.
Marriage and inheritance laws are, perhaps on top of some sacramental
dimension, quite secular matters. Recognizing and institutionalizing
inequality between the citizens of India in these secular matters on the
basis of their religion is definitely a case of constitutional
communalism. Or rather, let us not be too harsh on the Constitution
itself, for it does call on the law-maker to eventually abolish the
religion-based law systems. It is political communalism on the part of
the parties that refuse to implement the constitutional provision for
the eventual enactment of a common civil code.

It has been said, by commentators ranging from Girilal Jain to Mani
Shankar Aiyar, that this common civil code should not be forced on the
Muslims, that they should agree to it voluntarily, without any pressure
being put on them to do so. As a matter of practical policy in the given
situation, that makes good sense. However, as a matter of principle, the
position that a common law decided on by a democratic majority, should
not be imposed on an unwilling minority, opens the door for all kinds of
minority veto rights that make a mockery of the democratic principle
that decision are taken by majority vote. One can justify this position
by saying that a minority's personal law is not the whole country's
business, so that the relevant majority whose choice should determine
the democratic decision, is not the majority of the entire nation, but
merely the emerging in the democratic process within the community.

This reasoning would from part of a philosophy of multi community
integration, in which as many powers as possible are devolved to the
lowest possible level, in this case the religious community (since
personal law is associated with religious commandments). This philosophy
is currently gaining in relevance in a world which, with its increasing
global integration, is discovering the socio-political value of
decentralization: while matters of global concern are to be decided at
the global level, national decisions should be retained at the national
level, which in turn should not usurp decisions that can be taken at the
regional level, and this in turn should devolve to the local level
decisions that can be taken at that level. This decentralization trend
(which is visible, for instance, in the increasing recognition of the
substate regions as political units in the European Community) is linked
with the modern *small is beautiful* philosophy, applied to political
decision-making.

Of course, this decentralization of power to the proper and lowest
possible level, is akin to the decentralized structure of Hindu society,
which always was commonwealth of (occupational as well as religious)
communities. It is quite in the spirit of Hindu tradition, tough not in
the spirit of the Constitution, to leave the Muslim community its
personal law.

The separate status for the state of Kashmir (Article 370) is again a
discrimination in secular matters on the basis of religion, viz. its
being a state with a Muslim majority. Nehru sycophants have tried to
explain this irresponsible and communalist Article as follows: *"The
special problems of Jammu and Kashmir do not arise only out of the fact
of its being a Muslim-majority state. It is also a state coveted by a
foreign power which has thrice gone to war with India to capture the
state,... whose territory is partly under hostile foreign occupation,...
which is geopolitically located in the cockpit of international
intrigue."*[²⁶¹](notes.htm#note261)

In fact, each of these problems can be reduced to this one fact that it
is a Muslim-majority state and is therefore claimed by Pakistan under
the terms of the Partition of British India. With a Hindu majority this
would be radically different, and it would not even want the separate
status granted by Article 370. Moreover ,none of the said problems
justifies a separate status. On the contrary, in most countries they
would lead to an extra strong integration into the Union, if not
permanent central rule

But our Nehruvian knows it all better: *"It is with a view to addressing
ourselves to these very special problems... that the constitutional
device of Article 370 was evolved."* If that is true, then we must
recognize in all sincerity that this *device* has been ineffective. It
has not stopped the Chinese from annexing parts of Karakoram and Ladakh,
it has not stopped Pakistan from invading it twice more, it has not
prevented the ongoing skirmishes over the Siachen glacier, it has not
prevented the general spread of secessionism, it has not prevented the
Kashmiri Muslims from practicing *majorityism* at the expense of the
Hindu and Buddhist areas of Jammu and Ladakh and from hounding out the
Hindu minority of the Kashmir valley, and it has not given private
investors the confidence to go in and bring some genuine economical
development. Short, in every geopolitical, communal and even economical
respect, it has been an outrageous failure.

But our Nehruvian spokesman remains, like his mentor, adamantly blind to
the feedback from reality :*"In the circumstances, the demand for
abrogating Article 370 is totally misplaced. It would only result in the
further alienation of the people of Jammu and Kashmir..."*

Firstly, subtract *people of Jammu*: they would welcome the full
integration with India, either through the abrogation of Article 370 of
through separate statehood for itself and Union Territory status for
Ladakh. Secondly, subtract *Hindus of Kashmir*: they would gladly
welcome full accession to India. But then, they have already fled to
areas that are really India. Thirdly, why would the people of Kashmir
feel *alienated* by integration? That seems a contradiction. It might be
more accurate to say that Nehru has treated the Kashmiri Muslims like
spoiled children, afraid to refuse them anything, so if you tell them
now that they will get equal treatment with the rest, they become very
nasty.

The blatant communal discrimination that guarantees the Muslim majority
in Kashmir by forbidding non-Kashmiris to settle there, is also defended
by our Nehruvian :*"There is little practical scope for settling any
considerable body of outsiders in the valley. What land there is, is
already under the plough."* By these standards, outsiders should be
prevented from settling in Bombay.[²⁶²](notes.htm#note262)
Moreover,*"there would not be many Indians from elsewhere in the country
who would wish to actually settle there..."*

But abrogating communalist Articles is a matter of principle, of
upholding the basic constitutional and democratic principle of
non-discrimination, and is not dependent on just what number of people
it will affect in practice. As BJP spokesman K. L. Sharma said :*"Equal
status to all states and equal rights to all citizens is the BJP
secularism."*[²⁶³](notes.htm#note263) Moreover, as a political
precedent, Article 370 affects millions of people, viz. those in states
where separatist movement are encouraged by it and use the demand of the
extension of Article 370 to their own state as a propaganda item or
bargaining chip (*"our ultimate concession short of independence"*).

Of course, it is not certain that the abrogation of Article 370 will
make much of a practical difference for Kashmir itself in the near
future. As long as the secessionist terror continues, and even for some
time after that, not even the refugees will go back, let alone other.
But at least the principle of India's integrity will have been restored.
And it will discourage the secessionists in Kashmir and elsewhere, as
well as the Pakistani agents, to see that India is reasserting its
integrity on at least the level of legislation, that one level where
terrorist created *ground realities* need not be taken into account and
where principles can be upheld without compromise.

The argument of the *secularists* against the allegations of
*minorityism* is that Hindus should be generous, and that they are not
entitled to a *persecution complex* since their very majority makes it
impossible for them to become the object of injustice. Moreover, the
Muslims are a poor and wretched community who must be suffering a lot of
discrimination otherwise they would not be so *underrepresented* in
government jobs, business, the army, the universities: how can Hindus
claim they are put at a disadvantage by this pitiable minority?

As often, the secularists defend their case by confusing issues. There
is a difference between suffering legal constitutional discrimination,
and being poor. In the Islamic Republic of Malaysia, the Chinese are
second- class citizens, legally discriminated against as being
non-Muslims, yet they are very successful in business, and considerably
wealthier than the Muslim Malays. If the Muslims in India are poor, it
is not at all because of discrimination, as should be clear from the
record of other minorities. If Sikhs are *overrepresented* in government
services and the security forces, if Christians are *overrepresented* in
education, if Jains are *overrepresented* in business, it is not because
of preferential treatment by the law or by the executive. In fact, if we
drop the false socialist parlance, these communities are not
*over-represented* in the said fields, it is more accurate to say they
are *great achievers.*

And the Muslims, unfortunately, are on average poor achievers. That is
almost entirely due to one single factor: their poor schooling. This
factor in turn may be reduced to Islamic factors like large families,
low status of women (keeping them uneducated and thus less able to teach
their children and to create an education- friendly atmosphere for
them), and stress on Quranic rather than secular studies. Short, the
hold of Islamic orthodoxy over the Muslim community is by far the
largest factor in Muslim community is by far the largest factor in
Muslim backwardness (as well as fostering its ghetto
mentality).[²⁶⁴](notes.htm#note264)

By contrast, while Hindus may be doing alright economically etc., they
do objectively suffer legal discrimination. They are denied certain
constitutional rights and guarantees, as well as many political favours,
and that constitutes a real inequality even if it is not impoverishing.
The secularist line that Hindus should bear discrimination without
complaining, since there are worse things in life (such as this abysmal
poverty which these wretched Muslims have to suffer), presupposes that
Hindus have no sense of honour. It assumes Hindus don't mind being
second-class citizens, as long as they make a decent living. This
presupposition certainly fits the stereotype, created in the centuries
when Hindus were sharply discriminated against in the laws laid down by
Muslim rulers. But that does not justify continuing legal
discrimination.

Moreover, on top of this undeniable political and legal discrimination,
Hindus perceive a serious threat to the very existence of their culture
and society, when they look across the borders and into the future.
Their acute sensitivity to *minorityism* is strengthened by the
perception that the minorities indulge in aggression against the Hindus
wherever they get the chance, and that they are also growing stronger by
the day.

When you consider the population trends in the Indian Subcontinent, it
seems inevitable that Muslims will make up 50% of its population in less
than eighty years. Extrapolating the trends within India, it will be
less than fifty years until the Muslims are again 24% of the population,
the percentage which in the forties was enough to enforce Partition. Add
to that the millions- strong illegal Muslim immigration into India,
which will only accelerate as population pressure increases in Pakistan
and Bangla Desh. So, the *majority* status of the Hindus is by no means
guaranteed. Moreover, the so- called minority is in fact the Indian
department of a world-wide movement, from which it effectively gets
moral and financial support.

It is no fable or prejudice that Muslims as a community have the highest
birth-rate in practically every country where they co-exist with other
communities. In some article that set out to *debunk* this *propaganda*,
three countries were cited as counter-examples. Unfortunately, the
writer had not chosen his concocted examples very well : one of them was
Lebanon. The cause of the civil war there, apart from the legitimate
reaction against Palestinian take-over tactics, has been the fast rise
in Muslim population, which rendered the earlier power division on a
communal basis disproportional. The Muslims, now in the majority, want
to abrogate the old power division and freely exert their majoritarian
powers. The Christians fear that this will cause a speedy end to their
age-old presence in Lebanon.

In Pakistan, family planning is a joke. The responsible ministry is at
present headed by a fundamentalist Muslim, Saddar Niazi, who boasts of
being one of fifteen children. He has declared that the pressure for
family planning was *a holdover from the liberal secularism of Benazir
Bhutto*, and that he did not intend to implement the policies of a woman
charged with corruption and overwhelmingly voted out in the 1990
election.[²⁶⁵](notes.htm#note265) His stand is not exceptional, rather
it is the rule among Muslim governments. At any rate, Pakistan's birth
rate stands at 3.2%, almost the doubt of India's.

Bangla Desh, the world's most densely populated country and perhaps the
only Muslim country that ever seriously considered a family planning
policy (apart from the moderate states Egypt and Indonesia, and in
contrast to Malaysia, which has actively encouraged a high birth rate
among its Muslims), today also has a birth rate markedly higher than
India's. Both Pakistan and Bangla Desh consciously seek to solve their
overpopulation problem at least partly by dumping excess people in
India, where they can be useful for the long-term pan- Islamic design.

Kashmir has been an eye-opener for the Hindus if one was needed. In the
first part of 1990, more than two lakhs of Hindus, practically the
entire non-Muslim population, were driven out from the Valley. Refugee
Arvind Dhar testifies: *"The aggression has been entirely one-sided. All
central government employees (generally Hindus) were asked to leave
their jobs, and those who did not were placed on a hit-list. One
newspaper (Al-Safab) had a headline in March asking all Hindus to vacate
within 48 hours of face bullets"*.[²⁶⁶](notes.htm#note266)

Predictably, secularists and Muslim communalists have joined hands to
deny the *propaganda* that Kashmiri Muslims have unleashed a purely
communalist campaign of violence against the Hindus. Some papers
declared that it was actually the Hindu refugees who were *"creating a
communal crisis"*[²⁶⁷](notes.htm#note267) by fleeing to Jammu or Delhi.
In their Newspeak, which calls terrorists *militants*, the refugees are
called *migrants*, and it is an interesting illustration of the
perversion of India's political parlance to see how even the refugees
themselves have sometimes adopted this secularist-imposed usage.

Syed Shahabuddin declared, along with some *moderate* Kashmiri Muslims,
that the Hindus could come back to Kashmir, and that their property was
being looked after by their Muslim neighbours.[²⁶⁸](notes.htm#note268)
But the first- hand information of refugee Arvind Dhar tells a different
story:*"All my movable property has been stolen and my house was burnt a
month ago*. But Mr. Shahabuddin says that migrants' property is being
looked after.

Bhushan Bazaz, president of the terrorist-sympathizing J&K Democratic
Forum pontificates:*"As far as the migrants are concerned, they should
show boldness in returning to their native land. They committed a great
blunder in migration... The migrants should take it for granted that
they will not be harmed, physically or emotionally, if they return to
the valley immediately"*.[²⁶⁹](notes.htm#note269)

It is worth quoting a reply: *"By advising the migrants, many of whom
live in squalor in camps mourning the death of their kith and kin, to
'return to the valley boldly, taking it for granted that they will not
be harmed...', Mr. Bazaz is mendaciously suggesting that these hapless
people have fled the Valley out of an imaginary fear at someone's
instance. The naked truth is that the peace- loving and peaceful
non-Muslims were forced to flee... when they found that the goodwill of
their well-disposed but unarmed Muslim neighbours... was of no avail to
them against the orgies of selective murder, rape and arson perpetrated
by armed Pak-trained militants... Considering that even a few gullible
migrants, including a lone woman, were recently gunned down within hours
of their return, one wonders whether Mr. Bazaz's facile assurance of
safety to migrants emanates from his desire to fool the uninformed or to
propitiate India-baiters in Pakistan"*.[²⁷⁰](notes.htm#note270) The
kashmiri *militants*, Bushan Bazaz, Syed Shahabuddin, the Nehruvian
defenders of Article 370, they are all, each in his own way, objectively
part of the strategy of the anti-Hindu forces on the Kashmir front.

The Kashmir Samiti has produced a report titled Riots in Kashmir,
listing 85 temples destroyed in the valley, and claiming that 550 Hindus
had been killed (630 with security men included; official figure 495) in
the Islamic purification campaign in 1990.[²⁷¹](notes.htm#note271) And
one cannot just blame Pakistan, for even a secularist paper admits:
*"There is no evidence to suggest that the average Kashmiri is fed up
with the militants. Everywhere ordinary people are sheltering 'the boys
fighting for a cause"*.[²⁷²](notes.htm#note272) The common Muslims in
Kashmir believe in the two-nation theory. After all, Islam itself
instills the communal separateness in its followers. It is a communalist
ideology through and through, and all the talk of Kashmiriyat as a bond
between Hindus and Muslims have proven to be just wind as soon as the
call for a separate Dar-ul-Islam was spread.

In Pakistan, the dwindling percentage of 1% Hindus ekes out an existence
in constant fear of the never-ending harassment=92s and attacks by the
Muslim majority (which is untroubled by any *minoritism*). A secularist
paper, prudishly and secularly titling: *"Ethnic violence drives Sinhis
across the border"*, lets out the truth in the small print: *"According
to \[refugee Sukh Ram\], most of the Hindus are forced to desert their
homes because of their religion. 'We are not allowed to pray peacefully
in the temple of celebrate Hindu festival=92s he
said"*.[²⁷³](notes.htm#note273)

Moreover, at several places in Sindh, cremation grounds had been usurped
by Mohajirs[²⁷⁴](notes.htm#note274), funeral procession were attacked
with stones, and women were not safe either. Pakistan Hindu leader Raja
Chander Singh, who left Benazir's Pakistan People's Party to form the
Pakistan Hindu Party, says that the Hindu migration to India is now
(proportionally) bigger than during the Partition day: *"The future of
Hindus in Pakistan is very bleak... They are leaving because of
fear"*.[²⁷⁵](notes.htm#note275)

So the Hindus flee, and Pakistan likes it that way :*"The Pakistani
leaders... seem to be encouraging Hindus to leave the
country"*.[²⁷⁶](notes.htm#note276) A 16-year-old boy is quoted saying:
*"We all think here that Pakistan is a country for Muslims and only
Hindusthan is the country for us Hindus"*. Perhaps this accomplished
fact had better be faced: Hindusthan is the homeland and refuge for the
Hindus fleeting Muslim states. Since India is not willing to defend the
rights of the Hindus in the Muslim neighbour states, it should
automatically grant citizenship to Hindu refugees (as Israel does to
Jews).

With all this persecution of Hindus by these poor wretched minorities,
it is quite understandable that Hindus feel they should reassert their
own democratic rights. They have done enough for the minorities by
recognizing their democratic rights and religious freedom. Justice for
all without any unequal appeasement of any religious community should be
enough in a secular democratic state. But here they have to confront the
watchdogs of secularism, who know it all better.

A.S.Abraham writes: *"The observes side of the coin of 'minoritysim' is
that the majority is held is to the victim of discrimination by the
state. To indulge the minorities is automatically to discriminate
against the majority. On the other hand, 'majoritarianism' cannot, in
this scheme, entail discrimination against the minorities because,
unlike 'minorityism', which is an unnatural distortion,
'majoritarianism, is natural and healthy"*.[²⁷⁷](notes.htm#note277)

The last sentence is merely a *scheme* attributed to the Hindus by Mr.
Abraham, as part of the old rhetorical trick: if you can't beat their
argument, attribute to them a weak or stupid argument and attack that
instead. The very term 'majoritarianism' is not a Hindu *scheme*, it is
of the secularists' own making , coined as a swearword for *religiously
neutral democracy*. It is obvious that to *"indulge the minorities"*
automatically means discriminating against the majority. Privileges mean
inequality, and if one party is more than equal, the other is less than
equal. No-one would object to the minorities' right to open (subsidized)
schools, were it not that the majority is denied this right. Today, this
*right* is a *privilege* of the minorities and a *discrimination*
against the majority. Of course, there is nothing objectionable or
anti-national in this right of the minorities, so the discrimination
should be abolished by extending the same right to the majority
(incidentally, this discrimination, laid down in Article 30, is glossed
over in mr, Abraham's column).

For Mr. Abraham's brand of secularists, constitutional guarantees of
religious freedom and non-discrimination are not good enough:*"The fact
is that 'minorityism' inheres in the very idea of secularism."* So, he
concedes to Mr. Advani that the Indian secularists are indeed champions
of *minorityism*.

However, as a citizen of a fully secular state, I strongly object to Mr
.Abrahams minorityist statement. I have never heard of *minorityism*
either as a term or as a concept somehow functional in our secular
system. We do not give religious minorities a veto against decisions
enacted by a democratic majority.

Let us take the example Mr.Abraham himself gives. He concedes that
*"superficially, the Advani position looks unexceptionable"*, consisting
of *"reasonable demands for secularizing our affairs"*. However, it is
not truly secular, for if it were, *"then they would also have to stop
demanding a ban on cow slaughter, which is a religiously motivated
proscription that cannot be endorsed by a secular state"*. As usual, out
secularists prove their point by mixing things up. There is a difference
between the motives for which a state enacts a law (which in a secular
democrat is not Scriptural authority but the will of a majority of the
people), and the motives that make the people favour the enactment of
this law (with which the state has no business: they may be religious
motives as well as any other).

The nice thing about democracy is that it allows for difference between
countries. If a majority of the people in my country favor cow
slaughter, then we can practice cow slaughter; and if a majority in
India opposes it, then the Indian state can ban it. Both countries
adhere to the political form of democracy, but the contents of their
policies are different, reflecting the different will of the respective
nations. Democracy is a formal concept, it is a procedure of decision
making, not concerned with the contents of (nor with the motives for)
the decisions.[²⁷⁸](notes.htm#note278) so if a majority of the Indian
citizens favour a ban on cow-slaughter, then the secular state does not
avail of a Thought Police to check out their religious or other motives
or this political choice. A secular democracy merely registers the will
of the majority and enacts laws and policies accordingly.

At this point, there might be one limitation: unlike the Islamic
republics, who ride roughshod over the religious rights of minorities, a
secular state should safeguard the religious community in India that
imposes on its adherents the duty to slaughter cows. So, from a secular
viewpoint, no compromise whatsoever is needed, and nothing stands in the
way of enacting a ban on cow slaughter, provided a majority votes for
it. And at any rate, there is nothing objectionable, or threatening to
the secular character of the state, in a citizens' initiative to create
opinion in favour of such a ban.

The Muslim League always objected to a ban on cow slaughter, and
demanded a veto right for the Muslim community on every issue. Today,
many Hindu politicians have interiorized this demand for a minority veto
right, and don't ever dare to suggest a ban on cow slaughter for fear of
provoking the Muslim veto. In a secular democracy, the veto right of a
religious minority is limited scrupulously to those decisions that
directly the exercise of their religious freedom. Banning cow slaughter
is not among them, so the democratic secular republic of India can
certainly enact a ban on cow- slaughter the day a majority of citizens
decides in its favour.

As Mr. Abraham himself writes: *"A secular state, such as we are
committed to building, is one in which the religious beliefs of its
citizens are of no consequence to it. It regards them indiscriminately
as equal citizens are of no consequence to it. It regards them
indiscriminately as equal citizens under the law."* More precisely: the
religious beliefs of the citizens are of no consequence to the form (the
procedure) of the decision-making, but they may of course be an element
in the contents of the decisions, to the extent that the sovereign
citizens choose to take them into account.

Minorityism, by contrast, means that you give special legal rights and
political favours to citizens on the basis of their professing certain
religious beliefs (or rather, on their belonging to certain religious
communities with political clout). Minorityism does interfere with the
form of democracy. In India, while not overwhelmingly affecting the
democratic policy, it does thwart the principle of equality in several
domains.

Mr. Abraham attributes the wrongs of minorityism to another ideology,
invented by his own tribe for the sake of rhetoric, majoritarianism:
*"Just as 'minorityism' is indispensable to secularism, so
'majoritarianism' is its antithesis. To be 'majoritarian' is to want the
religious beliefs of the majority to colour, indeed to determine, the
values, goals and institutions... This is an agenda for theocracy
masquerading as 'genuine' secularism."*

All decisions are determined by beliefs. To adapt an example from Indian
tradition: if you believe the rope in the dark room to be a snake, your
decision not to go in will have been determined by the belief that it
was a snake, not by the reality that it was a rope. Instead of belief,
we could better say more neutrally: perception. If a majority of the
representatives of the people decide to have a state-run economy, then
that decision has its roots in a belief or perception that such an
economical system will be best suited to realize national goals (of
which the choice again is based on the belief that, for instance,
distributive equality is more important than wealth creation etc.). It
is for the democracy not important whether this belief is correct.
Observers of economical history may believe that the faith in a
state-run economy is unfounded, but before this minority belief can
democratically influence policy, they will have to persuade a majority
to adopt this belief.

You cannot get out of this: in a democracy, decisions are made on the
(issue-related) belief of the majority. One may deplore that these
beliefs are often inadequate but it is beyond the role and the power of
the state to help it; the thinkers and educators of the people have to
raise the people's consciousness so that its beliefs become more
adequate to reality. Non-despotic democracy can only register and
translate into policy the actual perception of a majority of the people.

So, by definition, *"the beliefs of the majority do colour, indeed
determine, the values, goals and institutions"* of a secular democratic
state. Sometimes, some of these beliefs are codified into a doctrine
roughly called a religion. Well, the secular state has no business with
that, as long as these beliefs do not interfere with the formal
principles of the secular democracy itself. Thus, the Islamic belief
that non- Muslims must be treated as third-class citizens and debarred
from taking top government jobs, is intrinsically incompatible with
secular democracy, and must on that ground be prevented from determining
the institutions of the state.

But legislatively acting on the belief that cows are worth protecting
against slaughter, is quite compatible with secular democracy, even if a
minority doesn't think that highly of cows. After all, imposing the
order "Keep off the grass" in city parks does just the same thing as
imposing a ban on cow slaughter in India. There exists a minority of
people who don't believe parks ought to be equipped with healthy lawns.
They don't mind healthy good-looking lawns, just like beef-eaters don't
mind unslaughtered cows, but they believe that for themselves the
freedom to take a shortcut across the lawn is more valuable. Others may
respect the lawn, but they don't feel any duty to respect it themselves.
Yet, nobody in a secular democracy objects to the imposition of the
majority's respect for nice-looking lawns on this unrespectful minority.

This imposition of a uniform behaviour on a population with non-uniform
beliefs is unavoidable in government relative to public affairs, and is
no way a threat to the secular and democratic character of the polity.
It become undemocratic only when a minority imposes its chosen rules of
behaviour on a majority, and it becomes unsecular only when a religious
authority rather than the will of a majority lays down the rules.

Now, what is the fuss about this *majoritarianism* effectively about?
What possible policies would constitute this threatening phenomenon of
majoritarianism, it cannot be the issue of cow slaughter, or the
re-adoption of Vande Mataram as the anthem, much less the abolition of
the discrimination against Hindus in education or temple-management. Mr.
Abraham gives exactly one example, and I don't think he has another
:*"When the \`majority'... wants to build a temple on a site which the
\`majority'... believes is the birthplace of Ram, then the proper course
of action for the state is to assist, and certainly not to hinder that
project. If it so happens that a mosque stands on the site, then not to
allow the temple to be built for that reason is to be guilty of
\`minorityism'."* this argument deserves some scrutiny.

First of all, the word *majority* as the term for *Hindu society* is a
creation of the secularists. If Mr. Abraham distances himself from it
here, through the quote marks, it is because he is using the term here
in another sense, in fact its proper, democratic sense :a majority of
opinion on the specific issue under consideration. By distancing himself
from the term in this meaning, he wants to sow doubts that it is really
a majority of the Indian people that want the Mandir to be Built. Well,
that can be ascertained by a referendum, as the BJP has demanded.

Secondly, democratic states the world over do have the right to
expropriate people or communities when they consider it necessary for
the common good- a category to which a concrete meaning is given by the
perception of a majority. Not only are roads built on land expropriated
from unwilling landed farmers :sometimes as a matter of social reform
policy, poor landless peasants are given lands expropriated from
unwilling landed farmers. The majority of poor people can impose harsh
measures on the rich minority. Stealing from the rich to give to the
poor, you may consider it just or unjust, but it is one of the options
in a democracy. And it is sometimes done, and then mostly justified as a
corrective measure for past injustices (a case in point : positive
discrimination policies like job reservation). So, if a majority decides
to take something from a minority, it is not yet fascism, in fact it is
more probably socialism.

Nevertheless, the point which Mr. Abraham makes, is that in a
majoritarian (i. e. democratic) system, no minority is safe from the
possible extortions by the majority. For instance, in Bangla Desh the
property of the Hindus has been threatened by the Enemy Property Act
(the democratic caliber of Bangla Desh is poor, but it is quite certain
that even otherwise, no majority would have come forward to prevent the
enactment of this law). In fact, in most countries, democratic or not,
minorities are at the mercy of the majority. What protects the
minorities is not so much the democratic character of the state, but the
effective rule of law and/or the kindness and tolerance of the majority.

Let us narrow the discussion down to the example under consideration :
taking over a place of worship. On what ground was it reprehensible that
the Soviet government, claiming to be a people's government, claiming to
be a people's government (a claim which we will concede here for the
sake of the argument), expropriated the places of worship in order to
transform them into temples of modernity and socialism (like factories
and bureaucratic offices)? The majority of dialectical-materialist
peasants and workers took from the minority of feudal and
petty-bourgeois obscurantists their places of worship. This was
reprehensible because (granting all other claims) it interfered with the
exercise of these people's religious freedom.

Taking a single, or let's say three, mosques from the Muslim minority,
is less than a denial of their religious freedom. But it is a small
factual encroachment on the material exercise of their religious rights.
As such, it can be justified as a, merely symbolic, righting of an old
wrong. In a juridical sense, the communities that own and use the
mosques, or their Waqf boards, can certainly be considered the
successors to the rulers that built these mosques and initiated the
worship that is continuing there. So, demanding from them these few
places as a delayed and merely symbolic compensation for the wrongs
inflicted by the erstwhile mosque-builders, while leaving them all the
freedom and maybe even financially assisting them to set up alternative
mosques nearby, is not at all misplaced, nor unjustifiable, nor in
violation of internationally accepted limitations to a government's
rights of expropriation.

However, the point about *majoritarianism* is not so much whether the
expropriation of three contentious mosques is justified. The point is
that a majority has the power to enact such expropriation regardless of
its being justified or not. Conversely, a minority does not have the
power to enact a similar expropriation, even if justified. A case in
point: the Hindus in Bangla Desh have no democratic power to reclaim
some of their sacred places which the Muslims laid waste, not in Babar's
or Aurangzeb's time, but the last few decades. This separation between
justice and power is of course one of the most fundamental political
problems that humanity faces. A minority cannot democratically enforce
its claims, even if justified; while a majority can, even when its
claims are unjustified. A majority can democratically enact blatantly
unjust laws and constitutional provisions ( as it effectively does in
Pakistan, Malaysia and other Muslim countries).[²⁷⁹](notes.htm#note279)

That possibility of the majority riding roughshod over the minorities is
indeed present in the democratic system. Yet normally it doesn't happen.
Most *majoritarian* democracies do not oppress their minority
communities. The very fact of running a pluralistic democratic polity
will condition people to be respectful towards all the different
components of their society. The outright oppression of a minority by
the majority almost exclusively happens where other ideological factors
condition the majority community to disrespect towards the minorities.
The most important such factor in the world today, you guessed it, is
Islam.

So, it is not he system of majoritarian democracy that will make
minorities oppressed and reduce their members to second-class citizens.
It is the contents that the majority gives to the polity, that may have
this effect. In Bangla Desh and Pakistan, Hindus have been oppressed by
the Muslim majority in almost equal measure under dictators as under
democratic governments. Not the political system, but the chauvinistic
anti-Kafir attitude of the majority community brought this about. In
Hinduism, such fostering of intolerance towards non- Hindu communities,
let alone active oppression, is not sanctioned by Scriptures or other
sources of doctrine. Even if the continuing Islamic aggression against
Hindus, both in the Islamic republics and in India itself, provokes
Hindus to an anti-Muslim polarization, this will remain a peripheral and
occasional tendency.

There is simply no danger at all that the normal majoritarian form of
democracy will lead to any oppression of the religious minorities in
India. By contrast, it is already a fact that minorityism, the policies
with a bias towards the religious minorities, has effectively led ( even
within a formal structure of majoritarian democracy ) to a number of
discriminations against the Hindus on the basis of religion. In most
majoritarian democracies in the world ( all except the few Islamic
republics that know democracy ), there are no legal or political
discriminations against the minorities ( first of all because minorities
are only recognized as a relevant category in some very few contexts,
otherwise there are merely individuals).

But then, in most majoritarian democracies in the world, there is no
minorityism either. The recent claim of some secularists that
*minorityism* is essential to democracy. That Hindus suffer from
discrimination favouring the minorities, is not an effect inherent in
the prevalent political system. It is a policy followed by Hindu
politicians of their own free will. And it can stop the moment these
Hindu politicians come to their senses, and stop enacting or maintaining
discriminating laws against their own people.

This minorityism is not a legislative or constitutional problem ( except
secondarily ), it is primarily a problem of mentality. And it is not so
much a problem created by the aggressive minorities, it is at least
partly created by the morbid willingness in Hindu politicians to appease
minority arrogance. So, solving the problem of minorityism requires
chiefly a change of mentality in Hindu society. It should free itself
from the wholly mistaken notion that it owes the minorities anything. It
has not done them any injustice ( which is more than what at least the
Muslim minority can say ) even in centuries past, and fully discharges
its human and democratic duty by giving members of minority communities
full citizen's rights and equality before the law, as well as full
religious freedom. Hindus should realize that there is no reason at all
for them to co-operate in policies that impose on them an inferior
status in matters like education, settling in Kashmir, temple
management, or marriage rights. Hindus should shake off the mental
chains ( nowadays called secularism )that make them tolerate these
political and constitutional injustices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 14.7 Targeting a minority

*"Majority communalism is far worse than minority communalism, for
minority communalism can only lead to secessionism, while majority
communalism leads to fascism"*, so some secularists say, citing Nehru as
their guide in this vision of things.

It is what the white minority in South Africa has been saying for some
time : if we oppress them, it is only oppression, but if they get a
chance to oppress us, we will be exterminated. No Indian secularist is
known to have come out in support of this reasoning. The comparison with
South Africa is fair to this extent that, generally, the problem posed
is the same : in how far does democracy (in South Africa called
*majority rule*) have to modified in order to give safety and autonomy
to non-territorial sub-units of a nation ? India need not be apologetic
about having this problem in common with South Africa: it is one of the
main political problems of today's world.

It is a fact that majorities can do a lot more harm to minorities, once
they really want to, than the reverse. The Germans never could have
taken on the Jews the way they did, if the Jews had formed the majority.

Then again, it is not the number of heads that counts, but the effective
power. When as army invades a country, it is mostly outnumbered by the
populations it is out to subdue. The Conquistadores who committed the
*final solution* on the native American population of the Caribbean and
much of the South American continent, were vastly outnumbered by the
population they exterminated. It is not just numbers and military might
that count, but also the unscrupled will to go to such an extreme.

Moreover, what is a majority ? In Western Armenia in 1915, the Christian
Armenians outnumbered the Muslim Turks. But the Turks on Armenia were
not left to themselves, they had a support base in Turkey proper. And
they exterminated the Armenians in that area. The same thing, minus the
genocide, we have seen in Cyprus: the Turkish minority, claiming
oppression by the Greek majority, called in big brother Turkey, and
imposed its will (Partition) on the helpless *majority*.

So, calling the Hindus a majority, is a statement that must be qualified
in different respects. They are fragmented. They are outnumbered by the
Muslims worldwide. In the Subcontinent, the Muslims already number one
third of the population (in 1981 it was 28% and increasing fast). Most
of all, the Hindus don't have the ruthless determination to impose their
will, of which the Muslims gave proof when they forced Partition on the
country.

But going by secularist parlance, and calling the Hindus the *majority
community*, there is still no reason to postulate an imminent
re-enactment of the German vs. Jewish story of 1933-45, with the Hindus
exterminating the Muslims.

First of all, the relations between the communities concerned are very
different in two cases. The Jews had not forced a Partition on Germany.
They had no history of Persecuting and massacring the Germans. They were
not sending infiltrators from a neighbouring Jewish Republic (they were
actually preparing to set up a Jewish state in far-away Palestine). They
were not forcibly occupying a piece of German territory. They were not
starting riots.

The Jews were blamed for all Germany's problems. The economic crisis was
because of : *"Jewish capitalists"*. So was the German defeat in World
War I (in which many Jews even outside Germany had in fact supported the
German war effort). Decadence was attributed to Jews like Sigmund Freud.
The Communist threat was attributed to the *Jew* Karl Marx (who merely
had a Jewish-born, but converted, father).

This does not apply to the Muslims in Hindu perception. Poverty, the
defeat against China, the non-victory against the Tamil Tigers,
corruption, unemployment, India's poor showing in the Olympics, all
these are not blamed on the Muslims. The Muslims are blamed for creating
riots (which is at least partly correct), for oppressing and hounding
out the Hindus of Bangla Desh, Pakistan and Kashmir, for having
inflicted Partition on India (all correct, except that it is done by
*some* rather than by *the* Muslims, but it is certainly done under the
banner of Islam). Then there are some allegations of things that in the
short term are not actual problems for the Hindus, such as refusing
family planning and a common civil code. But it is absolutely not true
that Hindus attribute all their problems to the Muslim hand, the way the
Germans (and generally also the Poles and the Russians) used to do with
the Jews.

According to M.J. Akbar, : *"just as Hitler had given a frustrated
Germany a target and that target was the Jew, so through the Ram
Janmabhoomi movement, a frustrated country was given a target and that
target was the Muslim"*.[²⁸⁰](notes.htm#note280)

Before we analyze this comparison, I would like to point out that Mr.
Akbar is in absolutely no position to blame anyone for making people
into a target the way Hitler did with the Jews. Mr. Akbar is a Muslim, a
congressman , and a Nehru worshipper.[²⁸¹](notes.htm#note281) Now, the
Muslims are still doing what Hitler did : blaming the Jews for all the
problems. So many Muslim or Arad resolutions on any topic include
condemnations of *the Zionist entity*. When someone falls out of favour
with a Muslim dictator, he tends to get *caught spying for Israel*, and
hanged. When Khomeini counter-attacked Iraq, he declared his real goal
was Israel. When Muslims made a slander film about Rushdie, he was
portrayed as *a Zionist playboy*. Stereotypes about the influence of
*the Jewish-controlled press*[²⁸²](notes.htm#note282) and *the Jewish
capitalists*, which in Europe count as unpermissible expressions of
anti-Semitism, are current in Arab and pro-Arab comments on the
Arab-Israeli problem.

And don't try to be clever by making a distinction between Jews and
Zionists. In Europe quite a few bomb attacks are committed by
anti-Zionist Muslims against Jews, including doctors, schoolchildren and
citizens who have no plans of settling in Zion. The Islamic terrorists
are not making that distinction, and neither are the Islamic governments
who plan to destroy the state of Israel. If Israel will be destroyed, it
will be with a chemical or nuclear holocaust killing millions of Jews.
And then the Congressmen who have continued Nehru's policy of total
support for the anti-Israeli cause, will say :***Wir haben das nicht
gewusst***.[²⁸³](notes.htm#note283)

In fact. Nehru himself fluently went from anti-Zionist to anti-Jewish.
This is what he wrote: *"In practice the Hindu is certainly not tolerant
and is more narrow-minded than almost any person in any other country
except the Jew"*.[²⁸⁴](notes.htm#note284) (in practice, Nehru was
certainly not tolerant and he was more narrow-minded than almost any
other person in any other country except Hitler)

So, before Mr. Akbar starts to elaborate comparisons with Hitler's
propaganda of blaming everything on the Jews, he should first of all
belongs, are reiterating Hitler's propaganda till today.

Now, in M.J. Akbar's comparison, Jews were made a target for Germans by
the Nazis, and Muslims are made a target for Hindus by the Hindutva
organization. At one point, which M. J. Akbar does not mention, the
comparison is correct: in both cases, the hatred aroused was nothing
new, but a centuries-old animosity with stable historical roots.

While Islamic anti-Judaism (or "anti-Semitism") had three causes :

1.  The belief that the Jews killed Christ (who was himself a Jew, cfr.
    blaming Hindus for killing Gandhi), which was a lesser factor in the
    secular Nazi movement, but which till today is a reason for the
    Russian Orthodox Church to foster anti-Jewish attitudes.
2.  The association of Jews with Muslims During the Middle Ages, when
    many Christian lands had been overrun and forcibly converted to
    Islam, while in the Mediterranean many Christians were made slaves
    by the Muslims. By these experiences, Christians decided on a
    forward strategy known as the Crusades, they started by attacking
    the non-Christians in their midst: the Jews.
3.  The fact that the Jews, or at least a conspicuous section among
    them, were rich an powerful. This was a modern phenomenon due to the
    18th century *Jewish Enlightenment* (or Haskala), when the Jews came
    out of the ghetto and involved themselves in society at large, and
    yet retained a separate identity. This kind of hatred against
    successful minorities occurs in many countries, such as against the
    Chinese in Malaysia and Indonesia, or against Indians in some
    African countries. In Europe, it got blown up into a suspicion of a
    Jewish conspiracy to take over the world.

Let us compare this with the Hindu attitude towards the Muslims:

1.  The traditional Sikh animus against the Muslims has a lot to do with
    the murder of the fifth and the ninth guru by the Muslim rulers.
    Unlike the allegation that the Jews killed Jesus (more probably the
    Romans did it, but the later Gospel-writers absolved the Romans and
    blamed the Jews for reasons of mission tactics: blaming the weak and
    wooing the strong), blaming Muslims for killing these gurus is
    historically correct. Thousands of sadhus were also killed,
    thousands of temples demolished, etc. But unlike the killing of
    God's only-born Son, this was just a huge crime committed by people,
    not a God-ordained event with cosmic dimension. And unlike the
    killing of Christ, it was not distant history, but recent history
    continuing till today in the Muslim parts of the Subcontinent, and
    the actualization of a doctrine that could any moment give rise to
    new crimes of the same kind. Jewish Scripture does not say that
    Christ must be killed, but Islamic Scripture does ordain an all-out
    struggle against the unbelievers. So, while the Christian's
    allegation that the Jews murdered Christ is largely mythical, the
    Hindu resentment against the Muslims is firmly historical.
2.  Hindus have not attacked others (including
    Jews[²⁸⁵](notes.htm#note285) to avenge the crimes of Islam. Neither
    have they attacked Muslims to avenge the crimes committed by others
    (the way the German flare-up against the Jews was partly a reaction
    against the unjust treaty of Versailles imposed by France and
    Britain). If they have a dislike for Muslims, it is not by
    association, it is not because of a general fear or hatred of
    Non-Hindus, it is a precisely directed reaction to a collective
    memory of Islamic atrocities heaped upon them as unbelievers.
3.  If Hindus dislike Muslims, it is certainly not for their being rich
    and powerful. In fact, Hindus have not started hating any other
    minorities for acquiring a disproportionate share of the wealth and
    the power positions. On the other hand, most Muslims who remained in
    truncated India, are not at all rich, though as a collectivity they
    are rather powerful. The suspicion of an international conspiracy is
    in this case not without foundation. The Muslims do have
    international co- ordinating bodies like the Rabita (the World
    Islamic League), with huge sums at their disposal for furthering the
    cause of Islam in any area deemed strategic. Unlike the Jews, the
    Muslims do have a doctrine of world conquest. Unlike the Jews, they
    effectively oppress other religions, and they do convert secular
    countries into Islamic republics (e.g. Malaysia, Libya, Iran, Bangla
    Desh, Sudan): there is no guarantee that they don't have similar
    plans for India.[²⁸⁶](notes.htm#note286)

So, these are the suspicions Hindus have against Muslims. It is possible
that inflammatory speeches occasionally manage to transform that
suspicion into violence. But M.J.Akbar is trying to fool us if he says
that it is the BJP/VHP campaign that has created this suspicion and made
the Muslims into a targeted group. Firstly, the collective memory of the
crimes of Islam is quite established among the Hindu populace, which
doesn't need campaigns for knowing about these crimes. Secondly, if
there has been a Hindu awaking in recent years, it is not thanks to any
campaign, but thanks to reality. It is the stands taken by the Bukharis
and Shahabuddins, the plight of the Hindus in Kashmir, Punjab, Bangla
Desh, and the endless riots started by Muslim criminals, that has caused
the Hindu masses to stop and think. The BJP/VHP have not created the
Hindu wave, they are merely riding it.

It is not entirely impossible that the Hindu-Muslim conflict will
further escalate and turn India into a giant Lebanon. As Hindus are
afflicted more seriously with more Muslim violence, they may start
reacting in kind. It is the secularists, like Tavleen Singh and Madhu
Limaye,[²⁸⁷](notes.htm#note287) who are painting this picture of the
near future. While I am 100% sure that Hindus will not start a conflict
on that scale, they may join it unreservedly once a *minority* really
gets it going. It is certainly not the *Hindu communalists* who will
create such a situation: they wouldn't know what to do with it, they
just don't have the martial character and equipment for it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 14.8 Authoritarianism

It is alleged that the Hindu movement is against democracy:*"For the
VHP, Ayodhya is not an end but the means to an end. It has become both
the justification and the rallying point for a coldly calculated bid to
mobilize support under the banner of recalcitrant, vengeful Hinduism.
What it is doing is not to defend Hinduism - the very idea that this is
necessary in a country where 85% of the population is Hindu is ludicrous
- but to hijack the symbols of Hinduism to serve the political end of
creating an authoritarian state"*.[²⁸⁸](notes.htm#note288)

There are not too many facts known that could give rise to this
allegation. And in fact, I am sure the allegation has not grown out of
interpretation of given facts. It has grown out of the slogan *fascist!*
When someone is called fascist, on the basis of whichever aspect of his
behavior or thought that the may have in common with historical fascism,
the (intended) effect is to associate him with all aspects of fascist
thought and behaviour. So, if someone is a fascist because he *"singles
out a minority for attacks, like Hitler did to the Jews"*, he thereby
also becomes an imperialist, anti- democrat, advocate of violence,
genocide-planner, racist, etc. That us the most important reason for the
sloganesque allegation of being anti-democratic, which has been levelled
against the whole Hindutva movement.

During the Janmabhoomi controversy, the BJP has demanded a referendum.
Is this anti-democratic ? It is a shortcut to deciding on the will of
the people, cutting through the corrupt horse-trading of the political
parties, through the perverse arithmetic of the British
constituency-based (first-past-the-post) election system, and through
the *secularist* mental inhibitions of Hindu politicians. As demanded in
South Africa, democracy will imply that the majority has the freedom to
act as the majority.

Another case of implied anti-democratic bias among the secularists,was
all this nonsense of accusing politicians of *building vote banks*.
Well, that is precisely what the democratic game is all about : pleasing
the voter. If the secularists are against this (though they support
politicians in building Muslim vote banks), then they should say clearly
that they are against rule by the voters. They could take the
aristocratic line, like Plato, who pointed out that democracy could only
be the rule of the vulgar, the uninformed, the people with no vision,
because they are the most numerous. They could say: we are elitist, we
advocate the imposition of our own principles as a state policy, and we
don't want voters to come in our way.

Of course, it is a fact that far-sighted leaders are often unable to
rally a majority, and have to give way to demagogues. That is one of the
problems of democracy, and those who decry others as anti-democratic are
themselves not sufficiently conscious of the inherent imperfections of
democracy. They should admit that democracy as we know it is not the
final word in *government by the people*. At any rate, the solution for
this distance between principle and popular support has so far been, to
consider this as a challenge to the politicians. They have to convince
people of the correctness of certain views and policies. So, rather than
imposing principled policies on the people, as aristocrats would do,
they should endeavor to make the people a party to the principled
policies they propose.

So, far, the Hindutva politicians have not anywhere advocated the
abolition of the democratic system (as opposed to the communists, who
openly advocate the installment of the Dictatorship \[of the Proletariat
through its Vanguard Party). The BJP stresses that it wants a common law
for all and equality for all regardless of religion, things that are
considered evident in all democratic countries in the West.

One thing that might be mentioned against the democratic credentials of
the Hindutva movement, is that Bal Thackeray, the Shiv Sena leader, has
made some naughty remarks about dictatorship. In some interview I read,
he was asked what he thought of Subhash Chandra Bose's remark that India
needed one year of dictatorship to get on the right track. And he
replied with a grin that he fully agreed. But so what? For such remarks,
the secularists call Thackeray *an unabashed advocate of dictatorship*,
but they don't do the same thing about Subhash Bose, just mentioned as
saying the thing which Thackeray merely confirmed. They don't mention
the numerous well-meaning foreign commentators who have opined that
India is too vast and complex and backward for democracy to function and
to preserve the country's unity.[²⁸⁹](notes.htm#note289) Anti-Hindu
anti-fascists of Congress obedience, like M.J.Akbar and M.S.Aiyar also
tend to gloss over Indira, who actually practiced dictatorship. They all
forget to point out that Marxism-Leninism, a strong component of the
secularist front, by definition aims at the establishment of
dictatorship. And they all forget that the point is not what off-hand
remarks Mr. Thackeray makes in casual conversation, but what his party
offers as a programme. In the Shiv Sena programme, you do not find any
demand for the establishment of dictatorship.

There have been a few incidents of the Shiv Sena using muscle power
against opponents. But this again does not prove authoritarian
ambitions, unless you add that other parties, who use large-scale muscle
and gun power especially at election time, have even stronger ambitions
for dictatorship. But the parties I mean have succeeded each other in
forming the government at the centre, so they have been in the best
possible position to launch dictatorial rule, and yet they stepped down
when they lost their majorities. So I don't think their authoritarian
thrust is that strong, and the same thing counts for the Shiv Sena.

About the RSS, it has been said that its organizational structure is
authoritarian. In an interview, Subramaniam Swamy (an erstwhile Jan
Sangh leader, presently Commerce Minister in Chandra Shekhar's cabinet)
once said that the RSS could not be called fascist because it did not
advocate or organize violence, but that its authoritarian structure as
well as its anti-intellectural bias are elements which the RSS has in
common with fascism. And the two are related: an anti-intellectual bias
inculcated in the rank and file, implies that the leader is doing the
thinking for them, and they just obey.

The structure of the RSS is at least partly democratic. The general
secretary, or Sarkaryavaha, is elected by the 450 district leaders, who
meet twice a year (the Pratinidhi Sabha). The constitution of the
central executive (Karyakarini Mandal), with about fifty members, is
more intricate, with both elected and nominated members. The really
controversial point is that the RSS top man, the Sarsanghchalak, is not
elected at all, but appointed by his predecessor, like in a monastic
parampara (teacher-pupil lineage.)

I do not know of any statement by any RSS leader in which he advocates
the RSS organizational structure as his chosen model for the
organization of the state. So, a distinction must be made between the
political programme (which the RSS as a self-described cultural
organization does not have, but which may be surmised from the programme
of the affiliated BJP) and the internal functioning.

We may compare this with the Roman Catholic Church where the pure is
elected by bishops who themselves have been hierarchically appointed,
not elected. The idea is moreover that it is the Holy Spirit who
arranges the election result by inspiring the bishops. So, the Church is
not a democracy. Nor is the Jesuit order or any other Catholic order.
Nevertheless, it does not follow that the Church, a nonpolitical
organization, intends to reshape the secular polity after its own model.
And it doesn't follow that Catholic politicians are anti- democratic and
planning to impose the organizational model of the Church on the secular
polity.

It would only give proof of historical incompetence, if one starts using
the typically modern category *fascist* for those pre-modern and
pre-democratic types of organization. In the general polity, everybody s
entitled to participation in the decision-making process. But in a
private organization, the founders may reserve themselves the right to
select candidates for leadership functions on the basis not of
popularity but of loyalty to the project which the founders had in mind.
They have the right to set up such an *undemocratic* structure, without
being deemed an enemy of the political democracy in society at large. In
the Communist Party, they do not allow just anyone to become a member,
take part in the decision-making, elect the leadership, and thus perhaps
force policies on the party for which it was not created (in which case
the party would be helpless against a hostile take-over by a large group
who collectively join and claim a majority). There is nothing democratic
about the Communist Party, yet it is the communists' democratic right to
privately run an undemocratic organization. By being a member of
society, you have the right to political participation; but that does
not necessarily count for private organizations.

So, an organization can follow a Parampara-system of appointment of the
leader without being politically anti- democratic. Nevertheless, the
leadership of the RSS is partly elected, though not by the mass of
ordinary members, but by a group of people who have already climbed
several steps on the RSS leader.

In its actual functioning, it seems there is a stable consensus between
the different components of the RSS leadership. A Sunday Mail report
states that "the titular head, like the pope, remains infallible as far
as far as orders go. Never has a single order of the Sarsanghchalak been
questioned till date in the Sangh's history. This is not due to any
totalitarian dictate, as the Left would believe, but because the Mandal
and the Pratinidhi Sabha are like huge counter weights in a balance
checking the powers of both the Sarsanghchalak and the
Sarkaryavaha."[²⁹⁰](notes.htm#note290) It is therefore not accurate or
objective to describe the RSS structure simply as authoritarian, much
less as fascist.

Nonetheless, it is still quite possible that a certain *follow the
leaders* spirit prevails in the RSS rank and file, and that independent
thinking is not encouraged. I have been told that the late Guruji
Golwalkar got angry when he saw people reading papers or books. He would
ask : *"Don't you have anything more useful to do for the Sangh?"* And
when you see the total intellectual output of the RSS people, it is not
much. Subramaniam Swamy is probably right when he ascribes an
anti-intellectual bias to the RSS.

Now, if they would compensate for this near-absence on the intellectual
front with great activity on the street violence and terrorist front,
then they would be feared and dangerous, and their role would be
comparable to the Nazi squads around 1930. But they are not active on
the violent front, in the spite of all the propaganda put out by
allegation journalists. Several times, dozens of their people got
massacred by the Khalistanis: what violence has ensued? Compare with the
massacre of Sikhs that Indira's followers committed after Indira's
murder : who is a *fascist* then ? They do not even react in kind when
they are violently provoked. It is therefore that they are not getting
much respect. The secularists despise people who don't take to violence,
like the Tibetans, and they support people who take to terrorism, like
the Palestinians.[²⁹¹](notes.htm#note291)

If they replaced thought with muscle, then others would be victims of
their anti-intellectual bias. But now, it is they themselves who are
paying dearly for their refusal to develop an intellectual dimension and
to wage the struggle on the ideological front. There they leave the
field entirely to the Leftists and secularists. One cannot even say they
are on the defensive. Look at the humiliating consequences which their
anti-intellectual bias has had on them. Whenever anything happens, they
are accused and spit at, by those who are having the entire debating
arena to themselves.

In the forties, they opposed Partition, together with the Hindu
Mahasabha. Everyone else ended up agreeing to it. Yet, in articles
written then and today, you find that they are being accused, without
any proof, of "provoking" Partition by "frightening" the Muslims into
support for the Muslim League.[²⁹²](notes.htm#note290) Unbelievable: the
only innocent ones are being made the culprits by the united front of
culprits. This shows how weak they are: it is always the week who are
being blamed[²⁹³](notes.htm#note293)

By contrast, the Communists, who betrayed their compatriots to the
British, and who actively worked for Partition, were back on top within
a few years, respected and imitated by many other politicians including
Jawaharlal Nehru. Why ? Because they had a thought system which was
widely broadcast and fashionable, and by which everyone was influenced,
so that everyone owed them a certain ideological allegiance. But the
Hindutva force were mute cows without an ideology, much less any
intellectual or media impact on the general public. Even the millions of
refugees from Pakistan, who should have become a reliable popular basis
or vote bank, could not be attracted with a political analysis that
could pinpoint the causes of their problem and indicate a solution: the
Hindutva people had no analysis, merely some emotions and slogans.

During the Emergency, many socialists were left untouched by Indira,
while the RSS was made to bear the brunt of the repression. But when the
Janata government was formed, the same socialists, who had come to power
on the blood and sweat of the RSS workers, demanded that the RSS members
of the government choose between their seat and their RSS membership.
There was no come out in their defense, no front or committee of
intellectuals of expose the utter dishonesty and absurdity of the whole
*dual membership* issue. Everybody thinking was moulded by the Left, and
had no affinity or sympathy with RSS *thought*. Everybody felt some
allegiance to socialism and would not go against a socialist demand. And
in shame the RSS people were sent into the wilderness.

These events prove at least that the RSS is not at all a fascist
movement. Hitler would not have been treated like that, and otherwise he
would not have borne it without protest (in fact, having made it into
the government, he would never have given it up). But more importantly,
these events prove that the RSS is totally absent from the debating
arena. Their anti-intellectual bias makes them into a passive object of
abuse and ideological vilification. They don't have an intellectual
apparatus with which they would be able to put their enemies in their
proper places. They also don't have a propaganda apparatus to put
forward their viewpoint (which would have been the first priority of any
fascist, as of any communist party.) Therefore, they are at the mercy of
their enemies. *Fascism* should be made of sterner stuff.

Even when they got the largest mass movements in Indian history going,
the Ram Janmabhoomi campaign, they were not capable of putting the
secularist Babarwadis on the defensive. While in the historical Ayodhya
debate the secularists had no case at all, still they could get away
with depicting the solid Ram Mandir case as *distortion of history*,
*myth* etc. On the strength of the evidence, the Hindutva leaders should
have been capable of instilling a massive confidence in all struggle of
truth against falsehood. But no, they resorted to the weaker,
anti-intellectual and somewhat dishonorable line that it is faith and
not historical evidence that has to decide the issue. And even among
their own followers, they did not wage a campaign to inform them about
the hard facts of the matter and the larger issues at stake, assuming
that the massive *Hindus sentiments* were
enough.[²⁹⁴](notes.htm#note294)

Sentiments are enough to get a Ram Janmabhoomi movement going, they are
perhaps enough to make that one-issue movement succeed, but they are
utterly insufficient when it comes to building a long-term movement for
the defense and development of Hindu society. A purely physical
movement, of which the intellectual dimension is limited to rumours and
slogans, cannot realize (in fact, not even formulate) its
goals.[²⁹⁵](notes.htm#note295) Any movement can only succeed if it has
an ideological backbone. So, the point about this unwillingness to
develop an intellectual thrust is not that it is fascist : it isn't. The
point is that it is a sure formula for not achieving anything in the
long run.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 14.9. Fascism in India : where is it ?

L.K. Advani is described by M.J.Akbar as having *"an interesting blend
of falsification of history and his own cool and convincing
personality"*.[²⁹⁶](notes.htm#note296) What is more: *"He and Vajpayee
are the careful camouflage of decency' over a nasty, vicious and
blood-thirsty movement."* Now, I wouldn't dare to say such crass things
about a fellow human being, but since Mr. Akbar has said them himself,
he will allow me to leave the sentences intact but with himself as the
subject : Mr. Akbar has an interesting blend of a convincing personality
(he has convinced many that he is an authority on communalism) and
shameless falsification of history. Moreover, he is the careful
camouflage of decency over a nasty, vicious and blood- thirsty movement.

That M.J.Akbar is a falsifier of history, should be clear from his
postulation, in the very same article, of *a thousand years of
brotherhood and amity* between Hindus and Muslims, and *"of shared
culture, of a shared civilization, a shared vision"*. In reality, as can
Islamic history, Islam in India was *"a nasty, vicious and blood-thirsty
movements"*. It is never preached or practiced *brotherhood and
friendship* with the Hindus. It has never *shared* Hindus society's
*culture* and *vision*. That one occasion when emperor Akbar ceased
persecuting the Hindus, there was a Sirhindi to reprimand
him.[²⁹⁷](notes.htm#note297) That one occasion when Dara Shikoh
translated Hindus writings and considered them *the mother of the Book*,
there was an Aurangzeb to kill him. Islam was out to exterminate the
Hindus civilization, as it has exterminated the cultures of Arabia, West
and Central Asia.

To this vicious and blood-thirsty movement, M.J.Akbar is giving a
camouflage of decency.

If *fascism* is to erupt in India in the sense of organized attempts at
extermination of selected minorities, it will be in the pockets where
Hindus are the minority, and it will be Hindus who get singled out for
massacre. So far, the massacres in Punjab and Kashmir have not been
intended as steps towards extermination, merely as a tactic to scare the
Hindus into fleeting, which has worked very well in Kashmir, and has not
been entirely without results in Punjab. If this gets really out of
hand, Hindus may retaliate with mass-slaughter wherever they can. While
the minority separatists have the guns, the enraged Hindus will have the
numbers.

So, a mass killing of minority people is not excluded as a possibility.
However, it will only take place if minority terrorists first go very
far in their violence against Hindus. Unlike the entirely unprovoked
Nazi terror against the peaceful Jewish minority, Hindus will attack
*the minority community* only after being very heavily provoked. The
entire history of jihad in India, of communal riots, and of the
Partition story, corroborates it. When M.J.Akbar compares the riots of
1989-90 with those of 1947, he is mistaken as to the magnitude of the
riots, but the may be right in the tacit analogy that in each case
(1947, Bhagalpur, Aligarh, Hyderabad) the Hindu violence was merely a
reaction to *minority* violence.

A tendency of fascism taking shape in India exists among the
self-proclaimed leaders of a different majority, or pretended majority.
There are attempts to forge an anti- Hindu front including all the
minorities, the Scheduled Castes and Tribes, and the Other Backward
Castes, against the upper-caste Hindus. One of the embodiments of this
drive is V.T.Rajshekar's writing, another is Kanshi Ram's Bahujan Samaj
Party. These people claim that all the said groups are the big majority
(Bahujan) of India, oppressed by the minority of Aryan invaders. They
are finding that many of the groups they are claiming as belonging in
their anti-Hindu front, are strongly attached to Hinduism. Nevertheless,
their ideology claims that the majority is in fact not Hindu, and that
this anti-Hindu majority should remove the upper castes from their
positions and seize power. And they are quite unabashed about favouring
ruthless methods to root out *Brahmin rule*. Kanshi Ram is on record as
saying about the Khalistanis, that he personally doesn't care for
Khalistan, *but I like their methods*.[²⁹⁸](notes.htm#note298)
V.T.Rajshekar announces: *"As the 20 the century comes to an end, the
Aryan imperialism must also come to end.... A bloody revolution is in
the offing. Don't miss this historic
opportunity"*.[²⁹⁹](notes.htm#note299)

An earlier anti-Brahmin activist, Ramaswamy Naicker, had said that *"we
will do with the Brahmins what Hitler did with the Jews"*. Another
slogan of his was: *"If you see a snake and a Brahmin, kill the Brahmin
first"*. While the comparison of the German anti-Jewish attitude with
the Hindu anti-Muslim attitude doesn't hold in most respects, the
comparison with the *Dalit* (including missionary, Dravidian,
Ambedkarite etc.) anti-Brahmin attitude is more exact. Just like the
Jews, the Brahmins get depicted as: foreign (Aryan invaders), keeping
themselves separate, observing maniacal purity rules, having a large
inter-state network employing a common language (Yiddish/Sanskrit), very
book-oriented, deceivers, always favouring their own kind, dressed
distinctively and ridiculously, cowardly but cunning, rich and keeping
the others poor.[³⁰⁰](notes.htm#note300) Most of the things the Nazis
said about the Jews, are being said by the anti-Brahmin movements about
the Brahmins, including that they are a mere minority, and that they
have to be shown their place by the majority, and be deprived of the
undeserved power they wield.

That may not yet add up to Nazism but when I see the potential for
violence in this movement, as well as its increasing self-righteousness,
I know where in India a kind of fascism may erupt. But in the near
future I don't see this budding fascism catch on among the masses. For
that, they are all still too Hindu, not inclined to self- righteous
fanaticism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 14.10.Who reads Hitler anyway ?

When you are accused of a crime, you are considered innocent until
proven guilty. There is one exception :the meta-crime of making false
allegations, or slander. When you utter an allegation, you are guilty of
slander, while the other party remains innocent. This changes when you
furnish proof for your allegation: then the other party is considered
guilty and you cease to be a slanderer.

By these standards, all the people who postulate an ideological lineage
from Hitler to Advani, are guilty of slander. For, so far I have not
seen this oft-repeated allegation substantiated by any evidence
whatsoever. For instance, Madhu Kishwar.

In an article with the promising title In defense of our dharma, she
writes that the BJP, RSS and VHP *"display much greater fascination with
Hitler's ideas and campaigns than with the Ramayana or other Hindu
religious texts"*.[³⁰¹](notes.htm#note301) That the ruling secularist
dispensation has strongly discouraged the study of Hindu tradition, is a
fact of which even the Hindutva movement shows the consequences, and the
study of Hindu tradition in Indians schools and other media should be a
top priority indeed. But that is not Madhu Kishwar's point. Apart from
saying that the Hindutva campaigners are illiterates, she also says that
they seek inspiration in Hitler's ideas and campaigns: *"Their
inspiration comes from Hitler, not from Ram"*.

Now, this is a statement which can easily be checked. First of all, both
the Hindu Mahasabha (1906) and the RSS (1925) came into being before
anyone in India knew Hitler. Savarkar's Hindutva (1923) was published
three years before Hitler's Mein Kampf. Clearly, the inspiration to
organize and defend Hinduism at the political level, does not stem from
Hitler, and it did not need any outside impulse.

Secondly, the RSS and the Hindu Mahasabha existed when Hitler came to
power. Have they sided with Hitler ? Have they even called on its
followers to follow Subhash Bose and join the Axis war effort against
the British ? Subhash Bose's title Netaji was just the Hindi equivalent
of the German Fuehrer, Hitler's title, and the Italian Duce, Mussolini's
title, yet he is not, for that, accused of being *Hitlerian*. But of
course, since the Hindutva people are at the receiving end of all the
blame, their non-support to Hitler is being turned against them, as
collaboration with the British in 1942 and supported them in 1944, and
yet they are accused neither of effectively supporting the Axis nor of
collaboration with colonialism. The Communists opposed the British in
1940 (under Stalin's pact with Hitler) and supported them after 1941,
yet after independence they have not been branded as collaborators with
either fascism or colonialism. They can get away with it, while the
Hindu parties are covered with abuse regardless of the stand they take.

The RSS has not glorified Hitler when he was successful in any larger
measure than most Indians at that time (the facts of the extermination
camps were not known until 1945, and for the rest most Indian were
skeptical about the British propaganda). It would not even prove genuine
fascist convictions, for many non-fascist leaders outside Europe were
very impressed with the material success of Hitler's non-colonial
empire, and with his formidable challenge to the colonial powers.
Whatever the evil inherent in fascism, what outsiders got to see in the
thirties, was that Hitler succeeded where democratic republics failed,
and in the early forties, that he captured or threatened the centres of
several colonial empires. So many leaders outside Europe, from
Argentina's trade-unionist Juan Person to the Multi of Jerusalem, were
enthusiastic about the Axis successes. And yet, where is the proof that
took inspiration from Hitler, though at the time his name didn't carry
the stigma it carries today ?

Hitler applied some general principles in order to achieve success. He
strengthened discipline in German society. Just like Indira Gandhi
during the Emergency. Just like Mao Tse-tung in China : what little
positive achievements are to his credit, follow from the fact that the
he could actually enforce his laws whereas the previous regime was
hampered by chaos. Hitler didn't invent discipline, it was always a
formula for effectiveness, and if the RSS believes in cultivating
discipline within its organization (and that merely as a matter of
*character building*, not as a model for running society as a whole),
then that is just an application of universal principle, not Hitlerian
or fascist. Unless and until Madhu Kishwar comes up with proof that the
RSS chose its ideology and methods in express imitation of Hitler (and
explains why in spite of such borrowing the differences are so big), she
is a slanderer.

Hitler had made it perfectly clear where he stood and what he wanted, in
his book Mein Kampf (My Struggle), written years before his take-over.
His speeches are also available. So, please point out where Mr. Advani
and other Hindu leaders have quoted Hitler. Failing that, apologize for
the slander.

Another case of slander is Mani Shankar Aiyar's article The Saffron
Swastika.[³⁰²](notes.htm#note302) Since I don't want to feel like a
schoolteacher, I will not bother about the string of mistakes Mr. Aiyar
makes about the pre-Nazi German politics and politicians. It is indeed
very difficult to write about some distant country without making
mistakes. But saying that Gustav Steersman, a true statesman who had
nothing to do with majority-baiting or minority appeasement, was
*"remarkably like Nehru in his commitment to democracy and his
opposition to majority communalism"*, is of course an unabashed
declaration of his intention to distort the German situation any which
way so as to make it comparable with the Indian situation.

Before we listen to Mr.Aiyar=92s pontification about the Jews in
Germany, we should make it clear that here is yet another Nehruvian with
an anti-Israeli bias which sometimes comes close to anti-Jewish bias. I
have been quoting him enough in this book, so let me rather quote with
approval a reply to one of his tirades against Israel: *"I was surprised
to read in the article **A catechism for communalists** (July 29) the
false information about Israel. Israel is a secular state, and Muslims,
Christians and other minorities have the same rights of Jews. Mani
Shankar Aiyar mentions the Muslims 'driven out or Israel but nowhere
once does he mentions the thousands of Jews killed, massacred and driven
out of curious. Arab, where Jews lived as third class citizens and in
constant fear. In fact, the largest ethnic group in Israel today
consists of refugees from Arab and Muslim
lands"*.[³⁰³](notes.htm#note303)

Now, the comparison with Nazism. It is of course a plain lie, Mr. Aiyar,
that Hitler ever campaigned on a platform *Appeasement for none, justice
for all*. it was never the Nazi perception that the Jews were being
appeased by the state. It was there perception that the Jews were
accumulating wealth and power through violent *agitation* etc. There was
no *appeasement* issue miles around.

When economic crisis struck, *"Hitler blame it all on the Jews. The
BJP...blames it all on...our largest minority."* This again is simply
not true . The economic non-success of India is first of all the
handiwork of Soviet-infatuate sleepwalker Jawaharlal Nehru, and more
recently things have been made worse by the socialist policies to which
most Indian politicians still subscribe (not only V.P.Singh, under whose
tenure things suddenly looked critical). But no one is blaming the
Muslims for this.

If the Jan Sangh/BJP had been a fascist party, it would have grabbed
power long ago, and kept it. Since the fifties, it has had the
percentage of votes Hitler had in 1928. The percentage of unemployed
youth available for enlistment in Private militias has been continually
higher in India than in Germany before Hitler's rise to power. The Jan
Sangh formed part of the government in 1977-79: unlike the Nazi party,
it did not take the occasion to liquidate democracy altogether.

Mani quotes an apocryphal statement attributed to Hitler by Thomas
Mann:*"I am not an anti-Semite. It is just very regrettable that the
Jews have this unfortunate identification with Marxism"*. And then he
equates this with an imaginary statement which he thinks sums up
Advani's views:*"I am not an anti-Muslim. It is just very regrettable
that the Muslims have this unfortunate identification with Babar and
Aurangzeb."* Of course, one shouldn't really walk into the trap of
replying to Mr. Aiyar's rhetoric. He is a proven liar, and there
comparisons are not really meant to inform or to argue a point. They are
meant to put Hindus on the defensive and make them waste time on coping
with such Hitlerian allegations. Nonetheless, it may be instructive to
show up the falsehood to which the secularists have to resort in order
to be able to blacken the Hindus.

Firstly, while Mr.Aiyar has yet to prove that Mr. Advani is *an
anti-Muslim*, it is clear enough that Hitler lied when (if ever) he said
that he was *not an anti-Semite*. This is not only clear when one has
the benefit of hindsight, it is quite clear when one reads Hitler's own
big statement Mein Kampf. Hitler did not cultivate a Jewish following,
the way the BJP woos the Muslims and counts two Muslims in its
leadership. Even without wooing the Muslims, without organizing
*minority cells* in its party units, and without this rhetoric of
Muslims being *mohammedi Hindus*, the BJP would not be anti- Muslim in
any way comparable to Hitler's anti-Jewish stand. The most important
ideological difference is that Hitler was against a group of people, the
Jewish *race*, regardless of their behaviour (including their
confabulated *identification with Marxism*); while the Hindutva people
are against a particular doctrine and attitude, the anti-Hindu stand of
some Muslim leaders, rooted in the anti-Kafir doctrine of Islam. Hitler
wanted to exclude the largely well-integrated Jews, while the BJP wants
to *"draw the minorities (who are kept in the ghetto by their bigoted
leaders) into the national mainstream."*

Secondly, the Jews' *"unfortunate identification with Marxism"* is not
only a fable, it is also based on the crank racist assumption that Marx
remained a Jew even after his father had converted to Protestantism and
he himself had become an atheist. By contrast, the Muslims'
*"unfortunate identification with Babar and Aurangzeb"*, while never
postulated by Advani (except in Mani's slander story), does make sense
in the case of a few vocal Muslim leaders, who insist on continuing
Babar's and Aurangzeb's occupation of Hindu sacred places even while
knowing fully well (in contrast to the common Muslim) that they had
built their mosques in Mathura. Varanasi and Ayodhya for the sole reason
of terrorizing and humiliating the Kafirs . In that sense, some Muslim
leaders are indeed the ideological descendants of Babar and Aurangzeb.

Thirdly, Marx did not invent his theories in the name of Judaism, while
Babar and Aurangzeb did commit their crimes in the name of Islam. Marx
had no *identification with Judaism*, while Babar and Aurangzeb had of
course a strong identification with Islam. But I repeat that L.K.Advani
has never attributed any *identification with Babar and Aurangzeb* to
the Muslim community in India. It is significant that Mr. Aiyar has to
make his case on the strength of imaginary statement.appeasement to
strengthen his association of the BJP with Nazism. The BJP uses the word
*appeasement*. It was the hard-line enemy of Nazism (or rather, of the
German threat to British hegemony), Winston Churchill, who lambasted the
*appeasement* policy of the soft-line enemy of Nazism, Neville
Chamberlain. The latter though he could *appease* Nazi aggression by
making concessions to it, such as Czechoslovakia. Similarly. the soft
line opponents of Muslim communalism become in effect collaborators with
it by conceding its demands and thus whetting its appetite for new
concessions. Rajiv Gandhi thought he could *appease* Islamic agitation
by conceding legislation enforcing the strict Shariat rulings concerning
alimony to a divorced woman. But Islamic agitation found a new focus in
the ban on the Rushdie book, which was also conceded,. and in the
renewal of Babar's claim ton the Hindu sacred site of Ram Janmabhoomi;
so that today' secularists are advising Hindus to *appease* threats of
Muslim youth taking to arms (or of Muslim retaliation against Hindus in
Muslim countries[³⁰⁴](notes.htm#note304)) by conceding the Babri Masjid.
The term *appeasement* is quite appropriate.

If at all Mr. Aiyar wants to link the use of this term to the politics
of the 1930s, he should infer that the BJP, or whoever accuse the
secularists of *appeasement* of Muslim arrogance, attributes to :the *"
Muslims (i.e. those Muslims that wrest concession by means of threats)
the same arrogance that the democracies perceived in the Nazis"*. Well,
the scale is certainly different, but in both cases the democratic
forces are indeed dealing with the same phenomenon : the Nazis demanding
territory through force, and Muslim fanatics demanding privileges and
indeed territory (first Pakistan, now Kashmir) through force.

It is not Hindu society that will bring forth fascism, not even through
this Boy Scouts-like unarmed kind of militantism embodied in the RSS.
Hindu society just doesn't provide the necessary cultural basis for
fascist politics. But Islam has an effective track record akin to that
of fascism, with large-scale acquisitions of territory, extermination of
unwanted communities ,ruthless oppression and reduction of whole
populations to the status of third-class citizens, and most of all, with
a similar mind-set : division of humanity into chosen ones, inferior
ones and doomed ones, and glorification of war and conquest.

To conclude this chapter about the allegation of *Hindu fascism*, it
deserves mention that most original Western publications dealing with
the Hindu Mahasabha, RSS, Jan Sangh or BJP, just don't seem to be aware
of the notion that these could be fascist
movements[³⁰⁵](notes.htm#note305), or they reject the allegation
explicitly after closer consideration.[³⁰⁶](notes.htm#note306) Objective
outsiders are not struck by any traces of fascism in the Hindutva
movements, let alone in the general thought current of anti-imperialist
Hindu awakening. While one should always be vigilant for traces of
totalitarianism in any ideology or movement, the obsession with fascism
in the anti-Hindu rhetoric of the secularists is not the product of an
analysis of the data, but of their own political compulsions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
