+++
title = "16 15.1 Symbolic issues"

+++
# 15. The Hindu movement after Ayodhya

## 15.1 Symbolic issues

The Ayodhya issue is a symbolic issue. Non-sympathetic people will say
*only* a symbolic issue. But for people who are part of it, symbols do
matter. The Indian Constitution specifically demands respect for the
flag and the anthem, even though these are *only* symbols. So, all due
respect for symbols. Nevertheless, a symbol is only a symbol of
something. It is this something that makes the symbol into something
that matters. And the care extended to the symbol, is only a symbol of
the care extended to that something.

Ram is the symbol of dharma. Ram Rajya represents Dharma Rajya, the Rule
of Righteousness. The attention which in a symbolic moment like the
present Janmabhoomi-building is given to the symbolizing entity, Ram, is
itself a local-temporal representation of the general attention given to
the symbolized entity, the Dharma.

So, the Hindu activists should impress upon their minds that the
struggle is not for a brick structure, though that is a legitimate
symbolic part of it, but for Dharma. After centuries of Muslim
oppression and Western indoctrination, even activist Hindus have become
self- alienated and forgetful of the true values of their own
civilization. Do they know what Dharma means?

In all modesty, let us attempt to define the fundamental distinction
between Hindu dharma and the monotheistic religions. The fundamental
problem in Hinduism is avidya, lack of consciousness. The goal of life
is peace or happiness, the place and means to achieve it is
consciousness. Therefore, techniques of consciousness culture have been
developed, and they are available for everyone to choose from, according
to one's own character and level of development.

In Islam, consciousness has no role at all. It suffices to be in the
right club, the Muslim millat. Secondarily, it is expected that you
conform to the common rules of Islamic law and morality, and that you
serve the interests of Islam, if need be through armed struggle against
the unbelievers. Consciousness is nowhere in the picture. In
Christianity also, there is a strong stress or morality, though
ultimately it is not your moral calibre but only Jesus who has the power
to save you. At any rate, it is not consciousness. In Marxism,
consciousness is even denied any independent status. Mao Tse-tung
rejected all soulculture as bourgeois diversion from the class struggle.

When some secularists have said that the Ram Janmabhoomi movement was
not truly a Hindu movement, they were right in the sense that it was a
consciousness movement. It involved a lot of physical locomotion, a lot
of people giving their lives, and all that for a physical structure that
would undo the physical harm which Islam has done to the physical
temples of Hinduism. But then again, in the circumstances, such a
physical movement was probably the best reminder and
consciousness-raiser.

Hindu society may take up several more symbolic issues after this temple
business is over. A very important one for most Hindus is cow
protection. In fact, in calling it merely a symbolic issue, I may well
betray a bias or lack of empathy resulting from my non-Hindu roots. I
have never been taught to venerate the cow, but it a majority of the
people in India think that what is sacred them, deserves protection,
then they can enact a law enforcing cow protection in every nook and
corner of the country. It is in keeping with the injunction of the
Constitution.[³⁰⁷](notes.htm#note307)

Is it unsecular to ban cow slaughter? To answer that question, let us
first make a comparison. The Catholic Church is very strongly opposed to
abortion, and encourages Catholic politicians and votes to prevent its
legalization. In Ireland, the people recently voted in a referendum to
ban abortion not just by law, but in the Constitution. So now, the
unborn children are the sacred cows of Ireland. Was this unsecular? No,
it was perfectly secular, because the secular democratic procedures laid
down by law were followed, the sovereign people and no one but the
people made the decision, and the Church or any other religious
authorities were nowhere in the picture. If some people had based their
viewpoint an abortion on their commitment to the Catholic faith, then
that was their own private affair, with which the secular state had no
business.

Conversely, in Belgium, a law allowing abortion was passed, in spite of
the Catholic bishops' opposition to it, but in conformity with an appeal
by the Humanist \[i.e. atheist\] League. The same thing happened in
Italy. In these countries, the voters who were sufficiently committed to
the Catholic faith to uphold its rejection of abortion, as well as the
non-Catholic opponents of the abortion law, had dwindled and become a
minority. So the secular procedure was to count the votes and legislate
accordingly, without anyhow bothering about the religious or
non-religious reason why people had voted the way they did.

So, a secular democratic decision is not defined as that one which will
make the *bigots* the most unhappy. It is simply the decision supported
by the majority in the relevant round of voting. It is secular from the
moment no religious Scripture or authority came between the voters'
preference and the actual legislation. So, if cow-slaughter is banned
because the Shankaracharya demands it, it is not secular. If it is
banned because a majority in parliament decides so, it is secular. And
it remains that, even if the politicians or their constituents have
autonomously chosen to follow the Shankaracharya's advice.

My impression is that a clear majority of the citizens of Bharat would
favour a comprehensive legal ban on cow- slaughter. Given the right
intellectual climate, talented politicians should be able to transform
this majority opinion into a parliamentary majority, and finally into a
law. If sacred places can be protected by law, so can sacred animals. Of
course, if another community has another sacred animal, than can be
protected as well as. A law protecting animals is in fact much more
humane and progressive than a law conserving the status quo of places of
worship.

Another symbolic issue, in fact symbolic par excellence, is the question
of restoring old names. Local Hindu groups have demanded and sometimes
enacted the adoption of re-adoption of Hindu names for cities, replacing
names like Aurangabad which only served to eternalize Muslim fanatics
like Aurangzeb. One that would be a very resounding international
statement, is the replacement of Delhi by Indraprastha.

Some people who think a centuries-old name is more sacrosanct than a
millennia-old name, predictably come out with their bored non-interest,
asserting that there are better things to do. It is an old trick: when
you oppose a change, you say there are so much more important things to
do. Thus, when the Link Language problem became acute in 1965 (according
to the Constitution, the change-over from English to Hindi had to be
completed by then, but those in power had sabotaged the process
completely), the English-speaking elite had no intention of giving up
its language privileges, so it said that you cannot feed Hindi to the
poor, and such hollow excuses more. A cartoon showed ship sinking into
an ocean of problems (unemployment, poverty, etc., the *real* problems),
with the crew fighting each other over English and Hindi instead of
saving the ship. This disgusting trick of declaring other people's
demands (even if they are for the implementation of the democratically
accepted Constitution) to be beside the point, instead of addressing
them, is always used by people who have *arrived* and settled into the
comfort of power.

There is no conflict between solving the *real*problems, and taking
decisions regarding symbolic issues. The two are not in each other's
way. Other countries, far poorer than India, have changed names. Burma
became Myanmar, Batavia become Jakarta, Leopoldville became Krishnasa,
Lourenzo Marques became Maputo, Rhodesia became Zimbabwe, etc. These
countries also took down most statues of the colonial heroes, unhindered
by any Babri Masjid Committee. So it is entirely in the hands of the
sovereign people whether they want to retain the imposed name or restore
the indigenous name, and whether they want to create, abolish or change
national symbols.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 15.2 The need for a Hindu programme

The Hindutva people should develop a clear programme of where they want
to go with Hindu society. The slogan *Hindu Rashtra* has so far
attracted a lot of bad press, with secularists misrepresenting it as a
Hindu theocratic state, with Hindu Khomeinis and a Hindu inquisition.
This nonsense can only be countered by an ideological offensive which
articulates the values the Hindu movement wants to realize, which weeds
out obscurantist or otherwise negative elements within the current
Hindutva ideology, and which defines goals and indicates the means. But
first of all the Hindus should be clear in their own minds about what
contents they intend to give to a *Hindu
polity*.[³⁰⁸](notes.htm#note308)

The last half-century or so, the only ones with an articulate ideology,
were the communists and their softer variety, the socialists. Everybody
was constantly imbibing and reproducing their thought categories. In
Europe, that dominance was never that complete, and it was overthrown
radically in the seventies, when ex- Marxists turned against the dogmas
they had adored, and intellectuals took a new pride in developing
freedom- oriented and reality-based social thought. In India, the
Leftists are still the only ones with an ideology, and the rest is still
mentally fettered by thought categories copied from the Left. The time
is ripe for a change.

What movement in history has ever succeeded, that was not based on a
sustained intellectual effort to analyze the factors determining
reality, to formulate the goals of the policy, and to outline
strategies? If you want to achieve something, you have something, you
have to know what you are doing. A movement merely based on emotion will
get entangled in situations it cannot comprehend. It is bound to lose
its momentum and peter out, or to discredit itself.

The secularists have been very unfair in their writings on the Hindutva
movement, when they ascribed to it a grand design of a theocratic Hindu
state. In bracketing *theocratic* with *Hindu*, they displayed their
contemptuous willful ignorance about Hinduism; but the more important
point is that they were wrong in ascribing any grand design to the
Hindutva movement. The fact is that this movement has not more than a
vague intuition about where it is going.

At the political level, there is a party that does the practical
business of governing several states, like Madhya and Himachal Pradesh,
and that has a few Hindutva- oriented programmed points, like the full
integration of Kashmir into India, and the termination of appeasement
policies for the minorities. But nowhere in its party documents, or even
in the scarce ideological literature to which it may refer, do I find an
outline of the grand political coal of the Hindutva movement.

At the popular level, there is an enthusiastic movement aroused by
emotionally charged issues like the Ram Janmabhoomi. The common people
involved are, however, little informed about any larger scheme in which
this movement fits. When communists organize a strike, they make it an
opportunity to educate the workers about their ideology and long-term
goals, But what has the common Ram bhakta learned about Hindu Rashtra?
The consciousness-raising for which such a mass movement would normally
be an excellent occasion, has been limited to some flag-waving and some
slogans. Slogans are alright when they are the summary of a considered
political programme. but by themselves they are
nothing.[³⁰⁹](notes.htm#note309)

At the academic level, there is just nothing at all. Communists have
produced a vast literature. Not just party literature, not just
pamphlets. Thousands upon thousands of academic studies, including
graduate dissertations, consists of little more than the application of
Marxist concepts to a given issue. On almost anything, you will find a
number of books that give *the Marxist View*. On a slightly lesser
scale, there is a large body of Islamic literature. Not just historical
studies of what the medieval doctrine of Islam about such and such a
topic was, but also studies on Islamic economics and banking, on Islamic
social policies, on the Islamic answers to problems of development, of
justice, of emancipation.

There is no such Hindu literature. Except for disinterested and
esoterical studies of the past, there is no academic articulation of the
Hindu approach to any relevant issue. There are professors who privately
express their sympathy with Hindu viewpoints, but they are too timid to
come out openly with a rebuttal of the arrogant secularist statements.
And even if they are bold enough to do that, that still does not amount
to building a Hindu ideology that can stand up to the modern world.

The vocal Hindutva advocates of this century have produced little more
than a ***Bunch of Thoughts***, as Guru Golwalkar's work was aptly
called. A very large percentage of the pages of all the books together
which you may find in RSS-affiliated bookshops, is devoted to the trauma
of Partition. Another large percentage is devoted to comment on other
misfortunes that have befallen Hindu society, or to the glorification of
Hindu leaders. This may be useful to strengthen the enthusiasm and
devotion of Hindutva militants, as well as their anti-Pakistan pathos,
but it is ideologically not going very far. It doesn't develop a
wellfounded coherent vision on a range of topics which any social
thinker and any political party will have to address one day.

There are a few basic statements of the Hindu view, but they are at best
sketchy, like Balraj Madhok's Rationale of Hindu
State[³¹⁰](notes.htm#note310), or Jay Dubashi's columns (in Organiser as
well as in other papers). The best achievements of the best minds among
the Hindutva people still do not exceed the length of a speech or an
article, and seldom do they have more ambition than to comment on one
past or present event. There is as yet very little original or
comprehensive work being done. Moreover, they are all isolated: never is
there any Hindutva ideologue who sits down to make a critique of the
worm of one of his predecessors, or who takes up a line of research
where an earlier writer had left it. So, there is no growth, no
progress, no building on top of what has earlier been achieved, and no
weeding out of what was wrong or poorly formulated. Short, there is no
intellectual life in this Hindutva movement.

To an extent, that is due to the general culture and intellectual
situation in India. When you read the works of these Indian thinkers who
are still being praised in yearly memorials by their sycophantic
followers, it is all very disappointing. It is the same from Left to
Right: M.N.Roy,Jawaharlal Nehru, Subhash Bose, Bhimrao Ambedkar, Ram
Manohar Lohia, Jayprakash Narayan, Vinoba Bhave, V.D. Savarkar, Guru
Golwalkar, Deendayal Upadhyaya, they are all pretty elementary and
second- hand. Of course, they were involved in social and political
work, they did the writing in between other things. But the fact remains
that they were no comprehensive thinkers who independently applied their
minds to the political and cultural problems of their time: they just
borrowed some basic ideas, wrapped them in their own personal style of
rhetoric, and that was it.

Yet, there are papers today who adorn every issue with a words-of-wisdom
column devoted to some words of these thinkers: Thus Said Nehru,
Thoughts Waves (mostly Golwalkar) and Thus Spake Ambedkar. If these
quotes were taken as starting-points for critical comments, they could
be useful; but they function merely as calligraphed verses from
Scripture, to be repeated and repeated again.

If not among social and political leaders, have there been among
armchair thinkers some who really developed their thought, and made it
available to those who wanted to serve Hindu society in the
socio-political arena? After Sri Aurobindo, who produced some powerful
thought both during his politically active life and after, I don't see
too many of them. Mahatma Gandhi, of course, though a man of action,
found time to produce insights that still make interesting reading for
those who can read him with a learner's, not an admirer's mind. But
these great men have attracted nothing but followers. No one is building
on them, taking their line further from where they left it.

Looking specifically at the Hindutva movement, I may give two example of
how thought built on top of earlier thought could have made a
difference.

Secularists often quote Guru Golwalkar as saying that *"Muslims can only
live in this country as guests, claiming nothing, no privileges, not
even citizen's rights"*. Since they always quote that line, I presume it
is the worst and most fascist thing they could find in Golwalkar's work.
Now, if there was an intellectual effort going on the Hindutva movement,
this statement, which has been available for thirty years or so, would
have been commented on, critically discussed, put in a certain context,
and by now it would have been amended, rejected, or given a specific
interpretation. When a secularist would quote it, the Hindutva think
tank would reply that their though had much developed since, that they
had outgrown this crud viewpoint. Or they could stick to this hard-line
statement, and argue, and support with illustrative facts, that
reciprocity with Pakistan (which doesn't give full citizen's rights to
Hindus) is the only fair and fruitful policy. Or they could up with some
refined reinterpretation, or with whatever product of thirty years of
thought progress. But no, the statement is still there as it was, a line
in the Canon of Guruji's words of wisdom.

A second example is Deendayal Upadhyay's Internal Humanism. If I
understand the historical context correctly, this doctrine was developed
in reply to M.N.Roy's Radical Humanism, which after Marxist fashion
reduced man to his economical dimension. Against that, Deendayal
restored the four purusharthas (aims of human life: pleasure, wealth,
duty, liberation) as the co- indispensable components of a fully human
life. I cannot find fault with that. It is very similar to the stand
taken by the Christian-Democrats in Europe against the Socialists:*Man
liveth not by bread alone*. Moreover, I think Hindu tradition is in this
regard more sophisticated than the sources the Christian-Democrats have
drawn. So, this Integral Humanism has potential. Nevertheless, it is
extremely elementary. It is not a developed ideology with which you can
analyze all the actual social and political problems. Or maybe you can,
who knows, but at any rate it has not been done. There has been no
follow-up on Deendayal's thought, neither to develop it nor to demolish
it. It is now just another murti put up for paying respects to.

So, I see little of a Hindu Rashtra ideology expressing itself through
organizations like the RSS, parties like the BJP, or campaigns like the
Ram Janmabhoomi Mukti campaign. The whole Hindutva movement is still now
a body without much of a mind. It is looking for a mind.

This ideological work is in the first place a task for intellectuals,
not for political parties.[³¹¹](notes.htm#note311) Today's thought
determines tomorrow's politics. So, intellectuals have to create an
intellectual climate in which the aspirations of Hindu society can be
put forward as a realistic political as well as culture programme.

In the first place, they have to break the anti-Hindu bias that now
dominates and positions the intellectual atmosphere. They have to put
the secularist vipers on the defensive, by exposing their lies and
distortions, and by exposing the abysmally black record of the
ideologies and systems which they champion. This is not the most
important and certainly not the most pleasant part of the work, but in
the present situation which Hindus have allowed to develop, it is
necessary to cut through this thick mud of slander and falsehood.

The intellectual war is largely a matter of terminology. So far, the
Left has been dictating the terminology and thus it has determined the
values that everyone tries to live up to. Secularism, need I repeat, has
been given a wholly distorted meaning, and it has been prescribed as the
norm by which every non-Muslim has to be measured. The Hindutva people,
who have no thought and no terminology of their own, have therefore been
dancing to the Leftists' beat, and have tried their best to be
recognized as secularists Instead of proudly saying :*We are Hindus*,
they are saying :*"We are the real secularists, they are
pseudo-secularists"*, a new variation on: *"We are positive secularists,
they are negative secularists"*.

This is a losing game. When country to live up to the hostile party's
norms, you can at best give a good imitation, never the first-hand
product. You had better put your own product in profile.

Of course, the Hindutva people are right when they call the secularists
pseudo-secularists (L.K. Advani has managed to drive this point home in
the public arena, which may well prove a decisive reversal in the
terminology battle). If secularism means what it really means, as in
Europe, then the people who make common cause with Muslim
fundamentalists and defend a separate status for a state with a Muslim
majority, religion-based personal laws, and religion-based
discrimination in education or in temple management, cannot count as
secularists. They are pseudo-secularists, and their opponents are
genuine secularists. But now in India the term *secularism* has become
so contaminated through systematic distortion and misuse, that it cannot
be saved anymore. In the short run, it cannot be restored to its
rightful meaning. And it can never be restored to its proper meaning as
long as it is in the political arena. Therefore, the word secularism has
to be dropped.

Why would the Hindutva people go on proclaiming that they are *true
secularists*? Either the term means *anti- religion*, and then it
doesn't apply, and it should not be held up as an ideal except by
Stalinists; or it means a mutual non-interference of state and religion,
and on that everyone agrees (except for some Muslim fundamentalists), so
it should not be an issue. On the whole, the claim of being genuine
secularists is justified, but it should no longer be shouted out loudly.
Secularism is a matter of course for Hindu, and merely making it an
issue is already to the Hindu-baiters

For instance, the amending of Article 30 of the Constitution so as to
abolish the discrimination against Hindus in the matter of opening
schools: should it be demanded in the name of *secularism*? Of course,
in a really secularist country, the Constitution would not impose
discrimination on the basis of religion. But the issue is far simpler,
and can be formulated in terms of a less controversial and more
fundamental principle than secularism: non-discrimination. The words
*religion* and *secularism* need not even figure in the discussion.

So, the term *secularism* should be de-emphasized and removed from the
political debating scene. It should be dismissed once, and never
mentioned again. By contrast, the term *secular*, which is not an
ideological but a legal term, figures in the amended preamble of the
Constitution, and it can continue to be used as a legal term in specific
contexts. It should no longer be an issue in the political debate,
except the day when Muslim fundamentalists want to abolish the secular
character of the state.

Conversely, the frantic efforts to shake off the stigma of *communalism*
should also be given up. I could understand, if they call you *fascist*,
you feel the need to disprove this allegation. But *communalism*
shouldn't put you on the defensive. First of all, growth-up English
speaker outside India don't even know this term, and if asked what it
means, they would probably attach a positive meaning to it. Perhaps
*"stress on community value"*, or *"living in a commune"*, or *"communal
living, as in a joint family"*. In French and German, the term
*community* means *municipal*. No one would think it means "We are not
communalists, we are the real secularists. It is they who are the real
communalists". Just change the rules of the game, ignore this
terminological terror, and get down to the real issues.

So, what value should the Hindu movement put towards as the real issue,
instead of the failed god of socialism and the fake god of secularism?
As I have said, there is not much of a tradition of modern Hindu
political thought on which to build. But it is immature to insist on
starting from zero, let us just proceed from where we are. The latest
thing in Hindutva-politics, still unsurpassed, was Deendayal's Integral
Humanism. Underdeveloped as it is, it will do for a little experiment.

Let us confront integral humanism with the still-dominant ideology in
India, socialism. But let us not do it the wrong way around, as the
Hindutva people have been doing for too long. Let us not measure
integral humanism by the standards of socialism, and demonstrate what a
nice socialism this integral humanism really is. Let us, on the
contrary, measure socialism with the yardstick of integral humanism.

Socialism has reduced man to his socio-economical dimension. Actually,
it is worse than that. It has denied some dimensions in human life, but
even of those of dimensions which it did recognize, it had a very
confused notion. The economical dimension is the dimension of gain
(artha). But socialism denied the individual the right to pursue gain.
It wanted to create the new man, who would only act out of a sense of
duty (dharma) towards society, i.e. the state. But duty is narrowed down
to a sense of serving, people who have the qualities for private
undertaking are not allowed to take a role (dharma) convenient for their
character (swabhava), they all have to conform to the one uniform role,
servant of the state. Man would not seek excellence in order to gain
from it, but merely to better serve the state. So, in the economical
domain, man's natural striving for gain was outlawed, and replaced with
a demand for a kind of servile devotion. The state itself took over the
economical life. In chaturvarnya terms (but in Hindutva circles, few are
as yet prepared to use these terms, for fear of being labeled a caste
obscurantist), the Kshatriya sphere was usurping the Vaishya sphere.
Moreover, to state decided to re-educate the people, so it also usurped
the Brahmin sphere. Everybody was to become a Shudra, an employee of the
omnipresent state. Since power corrupts, the inflated Kshatriya sphere
generated a lot of corruption among its far too large army of people
empowered to meddle in other people's lives (even while, in India, not
discharging its proper function of protecting the people against gonads
and terrorists, and the territory against hostile and greedy
neighbours).

Well, this is still not much, still very crude, but it already makes
clear that the general social vision of integral humanism can show up,
and avoid, the defects of socialism. So, integral humanism, which is
nothing but a new name for traditional Hindu social philosophy, has
potential. It should be developed into a modern ideology that can give
practical guidance in real-life politics.

This is not to say that there should be complete; break with all recent
thought currents in social philosophy, has potential. It should be
developed into a modern ideology that can give practical guidance in
real-life politics.

This is not to say that there should be a complete break with all recent
thought currents in social and political philosophy. It is not that all
*foreign* ideas have to be rejected. But they should be re-evaluated in
terms of this integral and humanist framework, and on that basis, some
may have to be rejected, others accepted or adapted. Revolution and
wholesale rejection of the present is not a Hindu approach. The things
that are here with us, do not have to be overthrown at once. They have
to be accommodated and integrated, and that also counts for ideas,
Bharatiya or foreign. So, even socialism should be allowed to run its
course. This implies that now that it is waning, one should not
artificially keep it alive. Meanwhile, one should positively come
forward with an alternative.

On a worldwide scale, the time is ripe for an alternative. This is one
more of the tasks facing the Hindu intellectuals: to link up with the
global evolutions in thought and culture. There is a worldwide
ideological vacuum, and yet, it is not the end of history, there is
still an urgent need for guiding ideas. After the horribly divisive
ideologies that have tortured humanity during the twentieth century,
there is just no alternative to ideologies that one way or another come
down to *integral humanism*. So Hindu social philosophy has a lot to
offer, provided it comes out of the dusty manuscripts and indological
encyclopedias to get actualized and updated.

For the relevance of the Hindu outlook to modern problems, let us, in
tune with the very physical focus of the Hindutva movement at this time,
take a very physical example: vegetarianism. Typically, Hindu social
thought has always included an ecological dimension. Socialism and
liberalism do not have this dimension, they can at best annex it. But it
is an organic part of Hindu dharma. Ahimsa, non-violence, does not mean
an unnatural and masochistic refusal to defend yourself, it is not a
bizarre and repulsive item of moralism suppressing the self-defense
instinct (as Gandhians have presented it). Traditionally, it means
maintaining the harmony of the larger whole, caring not to disturb the
ecosystem. The need to take this value seriously, has suddenly become
very acute for all of humanity.

Therefore, Hindu dharma has since a few millennia thought very highly of
vegetarianism. Not that everyone practiced it, but it was universally
respected and honoured as an expression of both asceticism and
sensitivity for all life forms. Of course, the respect for all life
forms could not be absolute, it was graded (like most things in Pagan
culture). Thus, a cow would be more immune from killing than other large
mammals, than birds and fish, and killing insects could not always be
avoided. Life forms with less consciousness, like lower animals and
plants, were less immune from killing than higher animals, deemed to be
more conscious and thus more capable of suffering. So, this non-violence
towards animals was not a stern and God-given rule, it was well-founded
in a natural and realistic sensitivity for the suffering of fellow
creatures.

Today, countries that do not have this traditional value of
vegetarianism, are discovering it. Scientists have found that it is
healthier. Spiritual seekers cultivate the sensitivity that brings
fellow-feeling with the other life forms. But most acutely, ecologists
are finding that the world ecosystem can no longer sustain carnivorism.
For producing a given nutritional quantity of meat, you need seven times
the cultivating space that you would need to produce the same
nutritional value of that you would need to produce the same nutritional
value of vegetable food. So, the deforestation problem and the world
food problem can be solved quickly if meat consumption is cut down
drastically. Otherwise, these problems will become disasters, as the
number of human consumers keeps rising. So, the modernist elite in India
is wholly mistaken in considering vegetarianism as something rustic,
religious and horribly deshi. Environment minister Maneka Gandhi was a
better spokeswoman of the new world-wide ecological awareness, when she
declared in November 1990 that all Indians should take to vegetarianism
if they want to stop deforesting and desertifying their country.

So, the world is learning the hard way what Hindu philosophy has known
all along. We need to respect not just our fellow human beings, but all
fellow entities in this world. This goes to show how Hindu humanism is
genuinely *integral*: not only does it take into account man's integral
personality, but it also considers his integratedness in a larger social
and ecological whole.

This rather physical example of how the ancient Hindu value of
vegetarianism is actually very modern, may help Hindus to get over their
self-depreciation, and to go and discover how their social philosophy
too contains elements that are really very adequate for today's
problems. The world today is looking for integral humanism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 15.3 Pride in Hinduism

It may be remarked that the term *integral humanism* itself does not
mention its Hindu roots. Perhaps that is good. The term *Hindu* is
merely a geographical indication, while *integral humanism* briefly says
what it stands for. And it does no injustice to the essence of Hindu
social thought. After all *manavadharma* doesn't contain the word
*Hindu* either. On the other hand, should we not suspect that the
coining of this term shows the pressure on the Hindutva movement to
portray itself as *secular*?

After Nehru's crackdown on the RSS, following the murder of the Mahatma
(in which the RSS was not implicated, according to both the court and
the prosecutor), the RSS and its fronts, like the Bharatiya Jan Sangh,
later Bharatiya Janata Party, and the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad
(All India Student Council), have avoided the conspicuous use of the
term *Hindu*. They have complied with the taboo on everything *Hindu*.
They were totally on the defensive, trying to placate the arrogant
Leftists who dictated what was secular and what was not. Without
suggesting that the term *integral humanism* should be amended or
replaced, I do think it is time for Hindus to shake off their shyness
about being Hindu.

*"Say it with pride : we are Hindus"*, is what Swami Vivekananda taught
his fellow Hindus. Some anti-Hindu people insinuate that this slogan
implies a doctrine that Hindus are superior. In that case, *Black is
beautiful* would mean that white is not beautiful; it would therefore be
a racist slogan and quite reprehensible. In fact, every colour is
beautiful in its own way, and it is quite alright to express pride in
the long-despised black colour. And everyone is entitled to have and to
express pride in his identity. Expressing pride is not a matter of
superiority, but being denied the right to express pride, is very
certainly a proof of an imposed inferiority.

Who is in a position to heap scorn on Hindus for being Hindus? What are
these Babarwadis themselves, that they arrogate the right to look down
on Hindus? What is the record of the parties, systems and ideologies to
which they pledge allegiance? The record of the two main ideologies of
the *secularists*, Marxism and Islam, is well-known. Whenever they heap
scorn on Hinduism, they should be reminded of their own heritage.

For instance, Inder Kumar Gujral declared in declared in parliament in
late December 1990, that *"a colour is being seen these days which was
also seen at the time of the Mahatma's murder. I don't need to give the
name of the colour."* What about Gujral's own colour, red? It was very
much in evidence when Stalin killed millions of farmers, when he killed
political opponents, when he exterminated the elites of occupied Poland
opponents, when he exterminated the elites of occupied Poland and the
Baltic states, when Mao killed his millions, when Tibet was overrun,
when Pol Pot cleared Cambodia to make away for the new communist
humanity. Even when India was invaded in 1962, that colour was there.
who is this Gujral to be so derogatory about saffron?

In order to instill a proper and well-founded pride in Hindus, it is
(once more) most important to restore the truth about Hindu history,
especially about Hindu society's glorious achievements. In technology,
it cannot match China, which was the world leader until a mere three,
four centuries ago. But in abstract sciences like linguistics, logic
,mathematics, Hindu culture has been the chief pioneer. In psychology,
it is still unsurpassed, though this is not yet fully recognized in the
West, the part of the world that still arbitrates on what can count as
rational and scientific.

Much of India's backwardness has been created by the foreign occupies.
This is not just a convenient allegation: in other countries too, we see
the destructive impact of foreign occupation on the flourishing of arts
and sciences. Thus, in China mathematics was taken to new heights in the
11th-12th century. The works expounding these insights were preserved
until after the Mongol occupation. But when we read comments from the
post-Mongol period on these earlier works, we find that they had lost
the correct understanding of these advanced theorems and algorithms. The
flourishing of science needs a safe political as well as economical
cradle.

In India too, we see total stagnation in the sciences during the entire
Muslim period, and a mere passive adoption of Western science under the
British rule. Mani Shankar Aiyar, rejecting the proposition that India
was a battleground between two civilizations since the advent of the
Muslim hordes, states that Indian civilization has an *unbroken*
civilizational history thanks to its*"utterly unique capacity to
synthesize and move forward"*.[³¹²](notes.htm#note312) But the striking
fact about the Muslim period is that knowledge in India has not *moved
forward* at all.

The bhakti poets gave a new expression of old ideas, belonging to the
spiritual domain which deals with the unchanging and eternal. They were
part of Hinduism's answer to the challenge of this narrow-minded anti-
universalist culture of the new rulers. But this Bhakti poetry is not
proof of a really flourishing culture. As long as there are human
subjects and things happening, there will be literature : that is not a
sign of *moving forward* (in fact, times of disaster may be more
fruitful in literature, than times of prosperity). But in astronomy,
mathematics, logic, linguistics and philosophy, Hinds society hardly
managed to save its old knowledge from oblivion (often just *preserving*
it rather than keeping it *alive*). This stagnation and ossification of
the sciences in India is yet another proof that the *synthesis* of
Hinduism and Islam is a mere myth, for a synthesis would have been very
fruitful and India would have *moved forward* with enthusiasm. In
reality, Muslim rule stifled Hindu creativity and disturbed its social
and economical life, thus impoverishing it both culturally and
materially.

Of the British occupiers, it is known that they destroyed the existing
system of education, that they dismantled industries and disturbed
agriculture in order to integrate India into the colonial trade
system.[³¹³](notes.htm#note313) They also obliterated quite a chunk of
Ayurvedic medical knowledge, by discouraging and sometimes even
forbidding its practice and teaching. Earlier, the Muslims had destroyed
many universities, and if Hindu pandits are such an obscurantist lot, it
is largely because the academic framework that gave life to their
scholarship, has been destroyed.

Hindusthan was always a proverbially rich country. Now, mother Theresa
has made it something of a synonym with poverty. But this poverty cannot
be blamed on Hindu culture. After the Muslims had blindly plundered
large parts of the country and destroyed so much, the British made an
even more systematic and profound attack on India's natural prosperity.
They reorganized its economy to suit their own ends, integrating it in
their colonial trade system, again to the country's detriment. When the
British arrived, India was one of the most industrialized countries in
the world, and one of its top exporters. The British economical
policies, coupled with the world-wide impact of modern industry on the
pre-modern economies, destroyed much of India's prosperity and
economical; self-reliance.

Finally, this process of impoverishment was completed when Jawaharlal
Nehru imposed socialism on India. I am not an economist, but my
experiences with state-run enterprises like the State Bank of India and
Indian Airlines have made me quite aware of the damage done to this
country by socialism. The so-called *Hindu growth rate* is in fact the
*Nehru growth rate*. If you look at Hindus achievements abroad, it is
quite clear that Hinduism instills enough of a work ethic for attaining
professional and economical success. But this natural dynamism of Hindu
culture, which in the past made the country fabulously rich, has been
stifled by this misguided policy of a state-run economy.

Even that part of the English-educated elite which is no party to the
detrimental Nehruvian policies, but has on the contrary actively
contributed to the amount of prosperity that India still enjoys, has
also added to the Hindu inferiority complex. Both those who bring
Western modernity in business and technology and those who brought
Soviet modernity in the from of the Nehruvian establishment, regardless
of their merits and demerits, look down on the traditional culture of
this country. The strongest expression of their superiority over the
natives is of course the English language.

Another very conspicuous example is dress. Both communists and liberals
are extremely scornful about dhoti, kurta, pajama, pagari, and about
rural patriarch Devi Lal who wears those things even in parliament (not
to speak of Mahatma Gandhi). Colonial sahib Mani Shankar Aiyar calls
them *ethnic fancy dress*.[³¹⁴](notes.htm#note314) A friend and
compatriot of mine once traveled in a bus in Kerala, wearing a dhoti.
Someone asked him: *What are you wearing there?* My friend replied: *I
think you know well enough that this is a dhoti.* The man said: *"But a
dhoti is brahminical! This is the age of communism!"*

In fact, those people who think a three-piece suit is modern, while a
dhoti etc. is rustic, are the really superstitious savages: they think
they participate in modern culture, with its benefit of science, by
imitating the dress of the people who brought this scientific culture to
this backward land. This is a typically primitive and magical way of
reasoning. In reality, all this ethnic dress is far more *scientific*
and *rational*, in the sense of: adapted to reality. It is also far more
*modern*, in the sense of: liberating what is human from oppressive
forms imposed by convention. Compared with dresses, trousers and suits,
the native sari, dhoti and kurta-pajama are far more economical (need no
tailoring), hygienical (especially in this hot climate) and comfortable,
and generally also more elegant: all quite humanistic and rational
values. This makes Devi Lal the herald of scientific modernity in this
country.

At present, the Hindu inferiority complex is still so serious. that all
kind of funny attempts at compensation are in evidence. The best-known
example is probably the contention that the Taj Mahal was a Hindu
temple. Of course, architecturally it is not Hindu at all. But why claim
the Taj Mahal in the first place? It is really very simple architecture,
though that is made up for by the beautiful material used, which goes so
well with the light of the full moon. At any rate, Hindus had better
take pride in the temples which are really theirs (including the many
thousands destroyed by the Muslim conquerors).

Another pitiable example is the persistent claim that all the secrets of
modern science are contained in the Vedas and other classics. This does
injustice to the real contents of these scriptures. Unfortunately, the
*God in the new physics* wave of the late seventies has confirmed some
people in this pretense. In Frithjof Capra's masterpiece Tao of physics,
the chief argument for the basic consonance between modern physics and
*Eastern mysticism*, is the juxtaposition of a pageful of mathematical
equations and a pageful of Sanskrit shlokas: both of them are
abracadabra for those who know neither.

A third example of crank theories compensating for the Hindu inferiority
complex, is the belief that the whole world was colonized by the Hindus,
lakhs of year ago.

By contrast this other cherished belief of Hindu *chauvinists*, that the
Aryans were not outsiders who overran the Indus civilisation, is on
firmer ground. This is not the place to go into the details, but suffice
it to say that the linguistic arguments for putting the home of the
*Aryans* in Central Asia or Europe, have been found wanting, and that
the construction of a Dravidian interpretation of the Indus script is
not at all convincing. There is absolutely no archaeological proof for
the Aryan invasions theory. All the argumentations that have been given
for it are, on closer analysis, cases of petitio principii. And then
there is the internal evidence of the Vedas, which seems to exclude a
foreign homeland within human memory. Even the secularists and the other
enemies of Hindu society, who have been having so much propagandistic
fun with the Aryan invasions theory, will have to recognize its
untenability soon.[³¹⁵](notes.htm#note315) So, India can uninhibited
pride itself on a civilizational continuity since about 5000 years, or
more.

Another thing in which the Hindus can take pride, is their much-maligned
social system. When Iran was defeated by the Muslim armies and the state
collapsed, the entire society collapsed. It had no inner resistance and
got Islamized very quickly. By contrast, when in Hindusthan a state was
destroyed by the Muslim conquerors, society did not collapse. With its
weak state decentralized structure, Hindu society could live on in its
non-state, organically co-ordinated way. This may sound too idyllic for
modernist cynic, but the extra- ordinary historical fact of Hindu
society's survival is undeniably there.

If the misrepresentation of Hindu philosophy by illiterate and based
intellectuals and schoolbook-writers is stopped, another completely
misplaced source of inferiority feelings will disappear: the belief that
Hindu philosophy leads to passivity. This is a belief spread
systematically by the Christian missionaries. With it, they kind of pass
on Marx' criticism that *"religion is the opium of the people"*, which
had been levelled in the first place against Christianity. Salvation not
by effort but by the pseudo-historical event of Jesus' resurrection, is
the hocus-pocus doctrine central to Christianity. By contrast, Hindu
philosophy is a lot more methodical, realistic, and appealing to human
effort and self-determination. Anyone who cares to study this, can find
it out.

Sir Edmund Hillary declared, after a journey along the Ganga and
visiting many ashrams :*"I became a Hindu. I was very close to the Hindu
ethic. It was a great spiritual experience."* This was unbearable to the
Hindu- baiters present, so the press conference continued with a product
of modern Indian education: *"When it was pointed out to him that having
faith in the Hindu ethic essentially involved a belief in destiny "*
(predetermination), Sir Edmund remarked :*"No, not in that sense. I
believe a man can make his own destiny through his work and
effort"*.[³¹⁶](notes.htm#note316) No matter what faults you may be able
to find with Hindu doctrine, belief in predetermination and impotence in
the face of destiny (which is very much present in Islam) is not one of
them. As Hillary correctly pointed out to these illiterate press people,
a man makes his own destiny through his own effort. And that is not a
modern novelty, it is precisely the meaning of the age-old karma
doctrine: we make our destiny through our own actions.

Unknown makes unloved. It is the complete ignorance concerning the vast
river of Hindu Dharma, that makes many nominal Hindus indifferent or
hostile to Hinduism. That is why Nehruvian education actively promotes
this ignorance of and disdain for Hindu culture, and why Nehruvian
secularists want to intensify this ignorance by banning religion classes
from school and Hindu epics from TV.

Microcomputer pioneer Adam Osborne thinks India has the potential to be
the next Japan. Want he has in mind is technological achievement and a
vibrant economy, nothing hazy and rapturous. But the clue to this very
tangible kind of greatness is pride: *"There is no doubt in my mind that
India is one of the great financial success stories of the future. The
curse of India is that Indians lack pride in being Indian. The moment
they have that pride, India will be the next
Japan."*[³¹⁷](notes.htm#note317)

Pride in being Indian means, for 99%, pride in Hinduism (unless you are
a secularist distorter and consider the Islamic invaders' avowed
objective of destroying Hindu culture also as *culture* and as
*Indian*). So, this legitimate pride has to be nourished with broad and
in-depth knowledge of Hindu culture. The two enemies of this effort are
the secularist morbidity that glorifies the destroyers of Hindu culture,
denies the unity and integrity of Hindu culture, and discourages its
study altogether; and the mental laziness of some cranks who get
exuberant over wholly mistaken ideas about the Hindu past, without
caring to critically and thoroughly study it.[³¹⁸](notes.htm#note318)

So, this historical reassessment of the Hindu achievements is important
to give confidence and to re- establish the unity of Hindu civilization.
But it is only one component of the central task before the Hindu
intellectuals, and not even the most important one. Any amount of
negative self-image fostered by distorted history can be digested and
forgotten when there are achievement in the present. The battle over the
past, in which Hindus had until recently been pushed badly on the
defensive, should of course be won. But it is only a supporting act for
the intellectual battle over the present.

Hindu intellectuals should address the modern world and show the world
that there is nothing shameful in looking at world affairs from the
Hindu angle. At the socio-political level they must show that the Hindu
approach leads to a more humane and more satisfactory polity than the
approach from the Islamic and the Marxist angles. A more advanced and
more subtle task will be, to improve upon the reason-oriented and
democratic Western approach: this has recently been the best we have,
but it should not be taken as the ultimate in human civilization.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 15.4 From Ayodhya to Indraprastha

While thinkers create a new intellectual climate in post- Nehruvian
India, the task of political parties like the BJP, is the listen. And
then, it is their own business to frame policies that are realistically
in tune with this new thinking. Politics is an autonomous sphere, and
its personnel is free to take or not take its inspiration from a line of
thought which intellectuals have developed. But in fact it has no choice
but to be determined by the dominant ideological climate.

Conversely, the thought that gives form to the aspirations of Hindu
society, is not tied to any political party. Not so long ago, a BJP
leader said :*"We will not allow Congress to play the Hindu card"*. But
from a Hindu viewpoint, it is just as well if Congress or any other
party amends Article 30 or reintegrates Kashmir with India. Party
workers may identify strongly with the success of their organization,
but after all it is merely an instrument for realizing a programme
beneficial to Hindu society. Once a convincing thought current has been
created, all kinds of people and parties will tap into it, and that is
precisely the sign of its success. Parties cannot keep ideas to
themselves, but they may profit from being the most consistent in
advocating and applying them.

Till recently, most parties pledged their allegiance to some form of
socialist ideology was visible from the very fact that different parties
declared their intention of being instruments of socialism. Even the BJP
in 1984 opted for some hazy thing called Gandhian socialism. This was
yet another proof of how the Hindutva movement behaved like a mercenary
looking for an employer, i.e. an ideology, because it was ignorant or
ashamed of its own ideological roots. They had to borrow the socialists'
platform and slogans. The decline and fall of socialism is a good
occasion to drop all this second-hand nonsense and develop a modern
Hindu programme

In the short term, Hindu politicians would do well to concentrate on
non-controversial issues like the abolition of the discrimination
against the majority religion in state control over temples and, most of
all, educational institutes (Article 30). This demand is perfectly
unobjectionable. Anyone who objects to it, exposes himself as a
supporter of religion-based discrimination in secular affairs, i.e. as a
communalist. This issue, while of no concern to the minorities, is at
the same time a top priority for Hindu society.

By contrast, issue which affect the other communities but not Hindu
society itself, should be relegated to second rank. This debate about
the common Civil Code, or in effective terms, the abolition of the
separate Muslim Personal Law, is not immediately important for Hindu
tradition (which should however not be totally identified with its old
forms) to leave these matters to the community rather than to regulate
it centrally and uniformly.[³¹⁹](notes.htm#note319) Of course, it is not
consistent with the generally Western-style Constitution which India has
adopted in1950 (largely based on the colonial Government of India Act of
1935). But then, if even West-oriented secularists have not cared to
implement the Constitutional injunction to enact a common Civil Code,
Hindus should not feel compelled to hurry when it is more expedient to
settle other matters first.

When Westerners hear about this political Hinduism, this Hindu Rashtra
movement, they wonder what colourful ideas might be involved. But it is
not all that exotic. A political party that champions Hindu Rashtra and
comes to power, what is it going to do? Change the flag or the anthem?
Rename India's capital Indraprastha or move it to Ujjain, the historical
capital of Vikramaditya? Those are the kind of things which many
anti-colonial movements have done upon coming to power, but they are
*merely* symbolic. After that, the day-to-day business of government
starts.

A lot of the government decisions will be of the same kind as those
taken by non-Hindu governments in similar circumstances. It will have to
balance the budget, privatize inefficient state enterprises, encourage
education, ensure social justice, fight crime and corruption both at the
symptom and the *root cause* level, and all these other mundane things.
The Hindu Rashtra will simply be a modern state, a democratic federal
state, with political and religious pluralism, a free press, a free
market economy with social security checks, all these common-sense
things will be in common with most free countries. It may promote
Sanskrit, yoga, traditional music and dancing, all these colourful
things, but in politics it will not be all that exotic.

But then, concentrating on these normal common-sense policies, after the
first assertions of post-colonial restoration of the national Hindu
culture are completed, already constitutes a substantial change of
policy away from the Nehruvian pattern. In fact, in the short term its
most valuable contribution to the Indian polity will not be the
introduction of new concepts and policies, but the scrapping of the vast
amounts of nonsense that the present Nehruvian dispensation continues to
indulge in.

Take this *National Integration Council* and this *Minorities
Commission*. In all the growth-up countries of the world, subnational
communities look after themselves without weighing on the polity. But in
India, Hindus and their state are told that they should *instill
confidence* in the minorities. And they should foster the *emotional
integration* of the country by banning everything the might *hurt the
feelings* of the minorities, including the historical truth. As if
Hindus owe the minorities anything. They give them full religious
freedom, which is what they would get in most democratic countries, and
which is all they would get. For the rest, a secular state does not
recognize anything like *minority communities*, but treats all citizens
as equal individuals. Cutting out the Marxist and Minorityist nonsense
will already be an invaluable service to India's integrity, progress and
prosperity.

In a recent article, Swapan Dasgupta has off-hand made the point that
the BJP has the potential to play a leading role in Indian democratic
politics, following the model of the Christian Democrats, who are
centre-stage in the politics of stable European democracies like Italy,
Germany, Holland and Belgium. Of course, that is a choice the party the
party will have to make, as against perhaps more radical alternatives.
But at least, finally commentators are dropping these hysterical
outcries about *Hindu fascism*, and opening their eyes to the
possibility that a Hindu party can stand for something else than
Khomeini-type extremism.

A party which champions traditional values embedded in a broad religious
tradition, is not perforce a fundamentalist and *theocratic* party. The
Christian Democratic parties in Europe have played an important
stabilizing role as centrist and integrationist forces. They have
championed cultural and human values against the materialist accent in
the socialist and liberal party programmes. And they have championed the
harmony model against the class struggle model: a similar stand is very
much the need of the hour in Indian politics.[³²⁰](notes.htm#note320)

Swapan Dasgupta comments on Murli Manohar Joshi's election as party
president of the BJP: ***"It is one thing of offer, as mr. Advani has
consistently done, a powerful critique of the prevailing political
culture. But the problem lies in designing an alternative... How, for
example, does the concept of Hindu Rashtra...square with the notion of
'justice for all and appeasement of none? The campaign for the Ram
Mandir, while important in symbolic terms, is unlikely to be a
substitute for a comprehensive, alternative philosophy. Having tapped
the reservoirs of anti-status quo, the BJP' is unlikely to progress if
its critique stops at the secular-communal issue. Mr. Advani has struck
a powerful blow at the shibboleths of Nehruvian consensus; his successor
will be frittering away the advantages if a simultaneous assault is not
launched on the other article of the reviled faith -
socialism"***.[³²¹](notes.htm#note321)

It is correct that Hindu society faces more problems than just
minorityism. In fact, the secularists are right in considering the
minorityism problem a bit over-publicized and exaggerated: a few
amendments to the Constitution and dropping as few bad habits in
day-to-day politicking will do to end this minoritysm. Then, India will
be just a secular democracy like any other. A few decisions on symbolic
issues will do to make it a Hindu democracy (one shouldn't make the
socialist mistake of over-estimating the importance of the state for the
well-being of Hindu society). I agree that these things, few in number,
are easier said than done. But in the whole volume of political issues,
it is clear that a political party will have more on its mind than Hindu
Rashtra.

So, that is where the culture movement for real decolonization and real
self-determination of Hindu society parts company with the political
parties who champion Hindu causes and try to please the Hindu vote bank.
Politics is an autonomous sphere in society, and it is but natural for
advocates of Hindu culture to respect it as such. It is quite alright
that politicians have other things to do apart from the explicitly Hindu
issues.

That is why I do not follow those purists of the Hindutva movement who
protest that the BJP shouldn't waste time on such petty politicking as,
for instance, this demand for *statehood for Delhi*. Of course, Hindu
society couldn't care less whether Delhi is a Union Territory or a
State, and whether the BJP can have a chief minister there (which is
what this demand is all about). But then, that is politics, and those
politicians have a right to work on what is purely a power issue. No one
protests that the Birla family, the billionaires who go on building
temples, also spends time making money instead of exclusively serving
Hindu society by building temples. So, who cares if the BJP, or whatever
Hindu party to emerge in future, practices power politics and electoral
politics.

It is but normal and healthy to have other things to do apart from
affirming your identity. It was the Soviet Union that wasted tonnes of
paper and deplorably long stretches of time in appending eulogies of
Socialism to every book or speech on any and every topic. It is in the
Islamic republics that this strains are put on the economy by fantastic
demands for *Islamic economic*. For Hindu politicians, it is quite
alright to go beyond identify and to get down to non-ideological
business. It is only in its general spirit that economics and other
mundane matters can have a *Hindu* character. Apart from that, things
are just what they are.

As for strictly political issues, I might mention two. There have been
proposals to reform the Indian political system into a presidential
system, as recently by L.K.Advani. This is a matter which in one sense
or the other affects the efficiency of government, and since this is the
only state Hindus have (apart from Nepal), the government of this state
is a secular matter of importance for Hindu society. The same thing
counts for proposals to reform the electoral
procedure.[³²²](notes.htm#note322) Such reforms do not make the state
more Hindu, but they may be legitimate concerns of responsible
politicians.

If such strictly political work makes them neglect their duty to Hindu
culture and society, then another party will criticize them for this
neglect, and declare itself a better defender of Hindu values and
interests - provided the Hindu consciousness pervades the though climate
which all politicians imbibe, and which entices them to take up Hindu
issues. It is this thought climate that determines the programmes and
behavior of the political class. That is why political parties
championing Hindutva are really only a secondary phenomenon, a
materialization of the prevalent thinking.

In fact, it remains to be seen whether even the organizations being
attacked as *Hindu communalist*, are such staunch champions of the Hindu
cause in the first place. Some of their former prominents are not so
sure. Balraj Madhok, president of the Jan Sangh during its apex in
1966-67, has criticized his former party (now reconstituted as the BJP)
of opportunism, of having no ideological backbone. I cannot judge that,
but I would hardly expect many politicians to be all that principled.
And in fact, one should see the bright side of the fact that so many
politicians are such opportunists. If the BJP could be very wavering in
its Hindu convictions when the secularists were on the offensive, you
can be sure that Congress will be very wavering in its secularist
convictions once Hinduism (or Integral Humanism, or whichever name of
the anti-and post-colonial upsurge of the native culture will be
fashionable) becomes respected.

It is quite a mistake to think that these mass movements and political
parties are the leaders of the Hindu awakening. Their resolutions and
programmes are but the visible shapes brought about by the lines of
force of the prevalent thought configuration, like iron filings giving
expression to the weightless and invisible magnetic field. The so-called
leaders will easily fall in line and gladly make themselves instruments
of a Hindu future, once their attachment to outdated doctrines is
removed by the thought currents of Sanatana Dharma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
