+++
title = "18 Limits of the Hindu Rashtra"

+++
# Appendix 1. Girilal Jain on Hindu Rashtra

Girilal Jain is one of the India's leading journalists. He was editor of
the Times of India until 1989. After that, he did not really retire, but
continues to function as one of India's most respected columnists. In
these, he has taken an increasingly bold and outspoken stand in favor of
the recognition of India as a Hindu Rashtra, as the political embodiment
of Hindu civilization. Unlike the many who don't go beyond a petty
criticism of the injustices done to Hindus, Mr. Jain draws attention to
the configuration of the large historical forces at work.

I have included here two of his columns published in Sunday Mail (which
have been honored with page full of reaction by Shankar Aiyar and P.
Sainath), and an interview given to J. D. Singh and published in The
Daily.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Limits of the Hindu Rashtra

The Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri dispute has brought to the fore the critical
issue of the nature of the Indian state as nothing else has since
partition and independence in 1947.

The secularist-versus-Hindu-Rashtra controversy is, of course, not new.
In fact, it has been with us since the twenties when some of our
forebears began to search for a definition of nationalism which could
transcend at once the Hindu-Muslim divide and the aggregationist
approach whereby India was regarded as a Hindu-Muslim-Sikh-Christian
land. But it has acquired an intensity it has not had since partition.

This intensity is the result of a variety of factors which have
cumulatively provoked intense anxiety among million of Hindus regarding
their future and simultaneously given a new sense of strength and
confidence to the proponents of Hindu Rashtra. The first part of this
story beings, in my view, with the mass conversion of Harijans to Islam
in Meenakshipuram in Tamil Nadu in 1981. and travels via the rise of
Pakistan-backed armed secessionist movements in Punjab and Jammu and
Kashmir, and the second part with the spectacular success of the
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in the last polls to the Lok Sabha and
State Vidhan Sabha. These details, however, need not detain us in a
discussion on basic issues.

The basic issues, I need hardly add, are extremely complex; and judging
by what has been written and spoken in recent months, they, I am afraid,
are once again being simplified and sloganized. This is a pity in vies
of the gravity of the situation we face and the nature of the stake we
have in the outcome. I, therefore, wish to draw attention to what appear
to me to be lacunae in the current and previous debates, and that too in
a general fashion; for that alone is possible in this space.

In much of what I have read and heart on the subject, an awareness of
the civilizational aspect of the problem has either been absent or
warped, though its very mention should suffice to convince us that this
is a matter if the greatest importance. India, to put the matter
brusquely, has been a battleground between two civilizations (Hindu and
Islamic) for well over a thousand years, and three (Hindu, Muslim and
Western) for over two hundred years. None of them has ever won a
decisive enough and durable enough victory to oblige the other two to
assimilate themselves fully into it. So to the battle continues. This
stalemate lies at the root of the crisis of identity the intelligentsia
is incidentally not a monolithic entity. Though its constituents are not
too clearly differentiated, they should broadly be divided into at least
two groups.

The more resilient and upwardly mobile section of the intelligentsia
must, by definition, seek to come to terms with the ruling power and its
mores, and the less successful part of it to look for its roots and seek
comfort in its culture past. This was so during the Muslim period; this
was the case during the British Raj; and this rule has not ceased to
operate since independence.

Thus in the medieval period of our history grew up a class of Hindus in
and around centres of Muslim power who took to the Persian-Arabic
culture and ways of the rules; similarly under the more securely founded
and far better organized and managed Raj there arose a vast number of
Hindus who took to the English language, Western ideas, ideals, dress
and eating habits; many of these men came from the earlier Islamized
groups, such as the Nehrus, for example; they, their progeny and other
recruits to their class have continued to dominate independent India.

They are the self-proclaimed secularists who have sought, and continue
to seek, to remark India in the Western image. The image has, of course,
been an eclectic one; if they have stuck to the institutional framework
inherited from the British, they have been more than willing to take up
not only the Soviet model of economic development, but also the Soviet
theories on a variety of issues such as the nationalities problem and
the nature of imperialism and neo-colonialism.

Behind them has stood, and continues to stand, the awesome intellectual
might of the West, which may or may not be anti- India, depending on the
exigencies of its interest, but which has to be antipathetic to Hinduism
in view of its non-Semitic character.

Some secularists may be genuinely pro-Muslim, as was Nehru, because they
find high Islamic culture and the ornate Urdu language attractive. But,
by and large, that is not the motivating force in their lives. They are
driven, above all, by the fear of what they call regression into their
own past which have come and continue to come understandably from the
Left, understandably because no other group of Indians can possibly be
so alienated from the country's culture past as the followers of Lenin,
Stalin and Mao who have spared little effort to turn their own countries
into culture wastelands.

As a group, the secularists, especially the Leftists, have not summoned
the courage to insist that in order to ensure the survival of the
secular India state, Muslims should accept one common civil code, and
that Article 370 of the Constitution, which concedes special rights to
Jammu and Kashmir mainly because it is a Muslim-majority state, should
be scrapped. They have contented themselves with vague statements on the
need for the majorities to join the mainstream, never drawing attention
to the twin fact that, of necessity, Hindus constitute the mainstream
and that this mainstream is capable of respecting the identities and
rights of the minorities, precisely because it is inclined to take note
of the international aspect of Indian Islam.

Personally I have never been inclined to favour one common civil code. I
regard such a demand as being Semitic in its inspection and spirit. A
Hindu, in my view, can never wish to impose a code on a reluctant, in
this case defiant, community. Even so I find it extraordinary that those
who call themselves modernizers and secularists-the two terms are
interchangeable-should shirk the logic of their philosophy of life.

A number of Indians have tried to define secularism as sarva dharma
samabhava (equal respect for all religions). I cannot say whether they
have been naive or clever in doing so. But the fact remains that
secularism cannot admit of such an interpretation. In fact, orthodox
Muslims are quite justified in regarding it as irreligious. Moreover,
dharma cannot be defined as religion which is a Semitic concept and
applies only to Judaism, Christianity and Islam. Hinduism is not a
religion in that sense; nor are Jainism and Buddhism, or for that
matter, Taoism and Confucianism.

The state in independent India, has, it is true, sought, broadly
speaking, to be neutral in the matter of religion. But this is a surface
view of the reality. The Indian state has been far from neutral inn
civilizational terms. It has been an agency, and a powerful agency, for
the spread of Western values and mores. It has willfully sought to
replicate Western institutions, the Soviet Union too being essentially
part of Western civilization. It could not be otherwise in view of the
orientation and aspirations of the dominant elite of which Nehru remains
the guiding spirit.

Muslim have found such a state acceptable principally on three counts.
First, it has agreed to leave them alone in respect of their personal
law (the Shariat) so much so that when the Supreme Court allowed a small
alimony to a Muslim window on the ground that she was indigent and
therefore viable to become a vagrant, parliament enacted a law to
overrule such interventions in the future. Secondly, it has allowed them
to expand their traditional Quran-Hadith-based educational system in
madrasahs attached to mosques. Above all, it has helped them avoid the
necessity to come to terms with Hindu civilization in a predominantly
Hindu India. This last count is the crux of the matter.

I do not believe for a moment that a genuine Hindu-Muslim synthesis took
place in India during the Moghul period, or that the British policy of
divide-and-rule was solely, or even mainly, responsible for the
Hindu-Muslim conflict under the Raj. Two caveats, however, need to be
entered on these observations. First, after the beginning of the
collapse of the Moghal empire with Aurangzeb's death in 1707, new power
Hindu-Muslim co- existence and co-operation on terms less onerous for
Hindus. Second, the very consolidation of British rule on an all-India
basis led to a search by both Hindus and Muslims for self- definitions
on the same all-India basis. This search led to a sharpening of the
conflict between which the British exploited to their advantage.

Be that as it may, however, there is a basic point which has generally
failed to attract the attention it deserves. Which is that a triangular
contest is inherently not conducive to a stable alliance. So all
equations (Hindu-Muslim, Hindu-British and Muslim-British) had to be
unstable under the Raj; they were unstable. Each co-operated and clashed
with the other two and each was also divided within itself. For example,
just as Sir Sayyid Ahmed propagated the cause of co-operation with the
British among fellow Muslims, the pan-Islamic sentiment began to spread
among them on the Turkish question, inclining them finally to accept
Gandhiji's leadership of the Khilafat movement in 1921. Gandhiji saw
this triangular contest in civilizational terms. He juxtaposed all
traditional civilizations against the modern scientific-technological
civilization, which he called Satanic. Nehru saw the contest in economic
terms. He juxtaposed the capitalist-imperialist and exploitative West
against the exploited anti-imperialist East in which he included the
Soviet Union.

Gandhiji sought Hindu-Muslim amity on the platform of essential unity of
the two *religion* and Nehru on that of a common fight against
*feudalism*, exploitation and poverty. Both approaches failed to produce
the desired result; they had to fail. The two leaders tried to wish away
the unresolved and stalemated civilizational conflict and they could not
possibly succeed. The nobility of their purpose, the intensity of their
conviction and the Herculean nature of their effort could not prevail
against the logic of history. The alternative to Partition would have
been infinitely worse.

For the first time in a thousand years, Hindus got in 1947 an
opportunity to resolve the civilizational issue in the only manner such
issues can be resolved. History clearly of one civilization alone
produces the necessary condition for the assimilation of another. The
predominant culture too changes, as any student of the Arab conquests of
Christian Syria and Egypt in the seventh century. would know. But that
is how civilizations grow.

Hindus missed the opportunity, not so much because Nehru happened to be
at the helm of affairs, as because they did not possess an elite capable
of rising to the occasion. Indeed, Nehru himself was not an aberration.
He was representative of the dominate elite which must not be equated
with the Congress organizational leaders. The sweep and success of the
campaign against Sardar Patel in 1947-48 should clinch the argument.

Hindus were just not in a position to assert the primacy of their
civilization and they are still in no position to do so. The case for
Hindu Rashtra rests on the failure of the Nehru model and its pull on
the rise of a vast unprivileged intelligentsia, mobilization of vast
masses as part of the democratic process and the modernization
programme.

While a proper discussion of this question must wait, I would wish to
add in conclusion that V.P. Singh and Mulayam Singh have rendered a
yeoman's service to the cause of Hindu Rashtra, the former by splitting
the *secularist* forces in the political realm, and the latter by
showing Hindus how contemptuous and brutal the Indian state can be in
its treatment of them.

*\[Sunday Mail, 2/12/1990\]*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## The Harbinger of a New Order

A spectre haunts dominant sections of Indian's political and
intellectual elites-the spectre of a growing Hindu self-awareness and
self-assertion. Till recently these elites had used the bogey of Hindu
*communalism* and revivalism as a convenient device to keep themselves
in power and to *legitimize* their slavish imitation of the West.
Unfortunately for them, the ghost has now materialized.

Million of Hindus have stood up. It will not be easy to trick them back
into acquiescing in an order which has been characterized not much by
its *appeasement of Muslims* as by its alienness, rootlessness and
contempt for the land's unique culture past. Secularism, a euphemism for
irreligion and repudiation of the Hindu ethos, and socialism, an
euphemism for denigration and humiliation of the business community to
the benefit of ever expanding rapacious bureaucracy and politocracy,
have been major planks of this order. Both have lost much of their old
glitter and, therefore, capacity to dazzle and mislead. By the same
token, re-Hinduization of the country's political domain has begun. On a
surface view, it may be a sheer *accident* that the battle between
aroused Hindus and the imitation Indian state, neutral to the
restoration of the country's ancient civilization on its own
oft-repeated admission, has been joined on the question of the Ram
Janam-bhoomi temple in Rama's city of Ayodhya. But the historic
significance of this *accident* should be evident to anyone familiar
with Rama's place in our historic consciousness.

Rama has been exemplar par excellence for the Hindu public domain. There
have been other incarnations of Vishnu in the Hindu view and the tenth
(the Kalki avatar) is yet to arrive. But there has been no other similar
exemplar for Hindu polity. In historic terms, therefore, the proposed
temple can be the first step towards that goal. The proper English
translation of Hindu Rashtra would be Hindu polity and not Hindu nation.

The concept of nation itself is, in fact, alien to the Hindu temperament
and genius. It is essentially Semitic in character, even if it arose in
Western Europe in the eighteenth century when it had successfully shaken
off the Church's stranglehold. For, like Christianity and Islam, it too
emphasizes the exclusion of those who do not belong to the charmed
circle (territorial, or linguistic, or ethnic) as much as it emphasizes
the inclusion of those who fall within the circle. Indeed, the former,
like the heretics and pagans in Christianity and Islam, are cast into
outer darkness.

Two other points may be made in this connection, though only
parenthetically. First, the nation could become the new icon and wars
between nations replace religious (sectarian) wars in Western Europe
precisely because it was a secularized version of Christian and
sectarian exclusivism. Second, the Western European imperialist
expansion into pagan lands was not unrelated to the spirit of heresy
hunting from the very beginning of the Christian enterprise.

Spaniards and the Portuguese made no bones about it. They went about the
task of destroying pagan temples and converting the peoples they
conquered with a ruthlessness perhaps without a parallel in human
history. Latin America bears witness to the earnestness and thoroughness
of the Spanish-Portuguese Christian *soul-rescue* mission.

The British and the French took a different route to the same goal of
decimation of other cultures. They sought not so much blessed with the
light, compassion and love of God's own son Christ, as to introduce
these *victims of primitive animism superstition, idolatory and female
irrationalism* to the world- ordering masculine rationality of the West.
They too did as thorough a job of under-mining pagan civilization as
their Spanish and Portuguese predecessors. The continued adherence to
the concept of nationalism and secularism of our elites are evidence of
the success of the British in our case.

Obviously, I am calling into question the conceptual capital of the
dominant elites. Equally obviously, I cannot deal with the issues I am
raising even in the telegraphic language. But, fortunately, an American
anthropologist, Ronal Inden, has written a book entitled Imagining India
(Basil Blackwell) exposing the distortions our heritage has suffered in
interpretations by Western orientalists, whether materialists (British
and French) or idealists (Germans). He has not discussed how Western-
education Indians have swallowed lock, stock and barrel these distorted
interpretations of our past. But that should become obvious once we
become aware of the misrepresentations. The book available in Delhi.

To return to the issue under discussion, Hindus are not a community;
they cannot become a community. This fact has less to do with the caste
system even in this present degenerate from than with the essential
spirit of Hinduism which is inclusivist and not exclusivist by
definition. Such a spirit must seek to abolish and not build boundaries.
Manava-dharma must come before swa-dharma in the hierarchy of our
values. That is why I have said again and again that Hindus cannot
sustain an anti-Muslim feeling except temporarily and that too under
provocation. The provocation may not come directly from Muslims. But
that is a different proposition not under discussion in this piece.

Hindus have been compelled to recognize boundaries, as towards the end
of tenth century when Eastern Afghanistan fell to Muslim Turks after a
valiant struggle by shaivite princes lasting over three centuries and
their access to Central Asia was effectively blocked as a prelude to the
invasion of Bharat Varsha itself by Afghans converted to Islam (for
details of the struggle see Andre Wink's Al Hind, Oxford University
press). And they are obliged to recognize frontiers now even within the
sub-continent which has been the heartland of their civilization. But
that limitation cannot make them into a nation.

Hindus are not a nation in being or becoming. They cannot be, not
because of the illiterate view that they are divided on the basis of
caste and language but of the deep and profound truth that they have
been and are meant to be a civilization. A civilization must, by
definition, seek to be universal. Of the great civilizations, China
alone has been an exception to this rule. That has been so because
Chinese civilization alone has been based on, and has derived sustenance
from, the ethnic unity of its populace.

It is this approach that I had in my mind when I wrote the article
entitled *"Rama and not temples is the issue"* in his journal on
November 4, though I took have been obliged since to speak of *Hindu*
nation in order to bring out the absurdity of the Indian concept of
secular nationalism which its proponents treat as being culturally
neutral. As such I find it painful that even well-meaning Hindus should
make a distinction between Hindu culture-civilization and Hindu
religion, little realizing that Hinduism is not a religion, and say that
Rama was both a cultural hero and a religious figure as if he can be so
split. No, he epitomizes our civilization in its totality.

The construction of the proposed temples in the city of his birth, as we
know it from Ramayana which, much more than the Maharashtra, has shaped
the Hindu world view at least in this millennium of deep trouble and
continuous struggle against foreign inroads, cannot symbolize the return
of Rama as such. But it can mark the beginning of the process which must
in the nature of things be prolonged and painful.

The Hindu fight is not at all with Muslim; the fight is between Hindus
anxious to renew themselves in the spirit of their civilization, and the
state, Indian in name and not in spirit and the political and
intellectual class trapped in the debris the British managed to bury us
under before they left. The proponents of the Western ideology are using
Muslims as auxiliaries and it is a pity Muslim *leaders* are allowing
themselves to be so used. Developments in this regard have, however, not
been without a positive aspect since 1986 when the padlock on the gate
to the structure known as the Babri mosque were opened and Rama Lala
(child Rama) which was already installed at the site sanctified by
tradition as the place of Rama's birth. On the contrary, it can argued
that in the absence of opposition by the state and Muslim *leaders* the
necessary task of mobilizing Hindus would have got neglected, with
adverse consequences in the long term. Proponents of a Hindu order have
reason to be particularly grateful to the U.P. chief Minister, Mulayam
Singh, who on October 30 and November 2 gave Ram bhaktas an opportunity
to prove that they could withstand a mass massacre. That is how
instruments for fulfillment of historic destiny are forged. In the past
up to the sixteenth century, great temples have been built in our
country by rulers to mark the rise of a new dynasty and/or to mark a
triumph which they have regarded as vindication of their claim to the
Chakravarti status. In the present case, the proposal to build the Rama
temple has also to help produce an *army* which can in the first
instance achieve the victory the construction can proclaim.

The raising of such as *army* in our democracy, however flawed, involves
not a body of disciplined cadres, which is available in the shape of the
RSS, a political organization, which too is available in the Bharatiya
Janata Party, but also an aroused citizenry. That had so far been
missing. The Vishwa Hindu Parishad and its allies have fulfilled this
need in manner which is truly spectacular.

So long as this task of mobilizing support continues, delay in the
actual construction of the proposed temples need not be a cause for
concern. That can well await the arrival of a Hindu government in New
Delhi. Indeed, it would be in order to build the temple then. It can
appropriately herald the dawn of a new order.

I am in no position to say whether the mobilization programme has been
flawed because the organizers have not taken adequate precautions to
ensure that it is not allowed to acquire anti- Muslim overtones, or
whether that was unavoidable on account of V.P. Singh's duplicity and
Mulayam Singh's desperate search foe power on the strength of the Muslim
card. Indeed, I must confess that the top BJP leaders, especially L.K.
Advani, could not have been more careful; they spelt it out day after
day that they were not guided by anti-Muslim bias. Even so, no effort
should be spared in future to avoid the risk of Hindu-Muslim clashes.

The BJP-VHP-RSS leaders have rendered the country another greater
service. They have brought Hindu interests, if not the Hindu ethos, into
the public domain where they legitimately belong. But it would appear
that they have not fully grasped the implications of their action. Their
talk of pseudo-secularism gives me that feeling. The fight is not
against what they call pseudo- secularism; it is against secularism in
its proper definition whereby man as animal usurps the place of man as
spirit. The concept of man as an economic being is a complement to the
secular man.

In the existing West-dominated political-intellectual milieu, it is
understandable that BJP leaders act defensively. But it is time they
recognize that defensiveness can cripple them, as it did in the past
when they sought respectability in claimed of adherence to Gandhian
socialism, whatever it might mean, and this time in a context favourable
to them. The Nehru order is as much in the throes of death as its
progenitor, the Marxist-Leninist- stalinist order. A new order is
waiting to be conceived and born. It needs a mother as well as a
mid-wife.

*\[Sunday Mail, 9/12/1990\]*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## This is Hindu India

Giri, would you define the India of your dreams?

First, let me tell you I am not a dreamer. I am not a utopian. I am an
analyst. I analyze the correlation of forces and make certain
assessments on that basis. You would never have seen a statement by me
which is not backed by. analysis of forces in play.

I do not have a vision of Hindu India. I certainly do not have a
blueprint for Hind India. What I see is the disintegration of the
existing order, then I try to analyze the reasons responsible for it and
indicate a possible solution, or, to put it differently, an alternative
model of development which may hopefully turn out to be more viable and
healthier.

What are these forces ?

It is for instance, sheer escapism on our part to believe that the
Hindu-Muslim problem is of a recent origin, or that it is solely the
product of the British policy of divide and rule. This is a
thousand-year-old civilizational problem which has not been resolved. In
the seventh century Islam arose in Arabia and expanded rapidly in the
West, reaching up to the Mediterranean and beyond within a hundred years
and the north conquering Persia and then, Central Asia. It moved into
India with far greater difficulty. The resistance was formidable and
continuous.

Most people who comment on these matters have no idea that Shaivite
kings, backed by Buddhists, resisted the Islamic onslaught in eastern
Afghanistan, which was then part of India for close to four hundred
years, It was only in the last part of the tenth century that the
Ghaznavid kingdom was established there.

Similarly, most people have no idea of the resistance Muslims met on the
Makran coast which was also an integral part of India. But this is all
by way of information. The central point is that Muslim rule could never
be fully consolidated in India. Muslim rulers remained for most part
like military garrisons.

I am not taking a moralistic position either on the fact of the Muslim
attacks or on the fact of Hindu resistance. I am stating these facts as
a student of history.

Incidentally, while the Muslim occupation of Sind took place in the
eighth century with Mohammed bin Qasim, up to the 11th century there was
very little conversion in Sind. The resistance was very tough and
Muslims had to come to terms with local centres. But all this is also
incidental to my argument.

Conversion, however, took place in India on a mass scale from the time
of the Sultanate till the end of the 17th century under Aurangzeb ; the
Muslim population multiplied for a variety of reasons. The people
captured in war were, for example, given the option of being killed or
converted. You will appreciate that most of them agreed to get
converted. Similarly, like all invaders in that period, Muslims took
women as prisoners and distributed them among soldiers. So they produced
children who helped swell the Muslim population. But in spite of all
that, the Muslim population did not exceed 25 per cent of the population
on the subcontinent at any time.

My difference with most contemporary writers on the subject arises from
their perception that a Hindu-Muslim synthesis took place and a new
civilization, or a new culture, which could be called Into-Muslim,
arose. In my opinion, nothing of that kind happened on a significant
scale.

To begin with, it needs to be emphasized that Muslims themselves were
broadly divided into two categories - the foreigners and their
descendants who constituted the ruling elite, and those who were
converted or born of Indian parents. The social status of these people
remained more or less what it was at the time of conversion.

This is in spite of the fact Islam believes in equality?

The Islamic claim to equality is not false. All Muslims pray together in
a mosque. There is no gradation. But Islam could not possibly overcome
social stratification and ethnic distinctions.

Not only in India but also abroad?

The Arabs, for example, continue to regard themselves as superior to
Muslims elsewhere even today by virtue of being the people of Mohammed.
To return to the issue of Hindu-Muslim synthesis, however, only a small
group of Hindus took to Persian culture and language in and around the
Muslim courts. Only this small crust at the top took to what we may, for
the sake of brevity, call the Muslim way of life, though they also
continued to practice the old rituals at home and avoid social contacts,
like eating together with Muslims. The most prominent groups among them
were the Kayasthas of UP and Bihar and the Kashmiri pandits who had
migrated to north India.

At the other end of the spectrum, ordinary converted Muslims remained
close to the Hindus in their way of life. The best illustration of this
fact is that even as late as the last part of the 19th century in
Bengal, many Muslims kept Hindu names and at the time of the 1871 census
no one knew, or suspected, that Muslims constituted a majority in
Bengal.

Every single Islamic concept in Bengal had to be explained to Muslims
there in terms of Hindu concepts and practices, so much so, that the
prophet himself was represented as an incarnation of Vishnu. There is
substantial literature on the subject which shows that Muslims were
indistinguishable from Hindus for all practical purposes. Finally, a
kind of situation was reached where at the top you had Islamized groups
among Hindus and just below that, you had more or less Hinduized groups
among Muslims and you can say that a kind of coexistence prevailed. With
the decline of the Mughal empire the country broke up into different
kingdoms whose rulers were neither capable of, or interested in,
imposing their way of life on people of the other faith.

My other point of departure with most of my fellow commentators is that
they assume unity of all religions as given. There is, of course, a
transcendental unity of all faiths. But that transcendental unity is,
for practical purposes, less significant than the differences in
religious forms. The difference of form is extremely important. Along
with it, comes the difference of culture. Now there is a world of
difference between what Western scholars call natural religions, that is
religions which have grown over hundreds of years in a natural way, and
prophetic religions. There is a would of difference between the Semitic
spirit and the Hindu-Buddhist-Jain spirit, that is the Indian spirit.

The Semitic spirit is informed by an earnestness and a single-
mindedness which are wholly absent in the Indian spirit. The Semitic
spirit is intolerant and insistent on the pursuit of a particular
course, whereas the Indian spirits is a broadminded and tolerant one. To
say therefore that Ram and Rahim are the same is, in my opinion, a form
of escapism or make-believe.

There is no concept, for example, in Hinduism of kafir. You cannot be a
kafir in Hinduism. You do not cease to be a Hindu whatever you do,
unless you choose to get converted to another religion. You can be a
Buddhist and a Hindu at the same time, not only in a social sense but
also in religious terms. I do not know what would have happened if the
British had not come. Probably, adjustments at the local or regional
level could have taken place and a new kind of reality might have
emerged.

You talk of adjustments, not assimilation ?

Assimilation is possible only id one civilization prevails over the
other. Assimilation is not neutral. For example, Syria was a major
Christian centre before the rise of prophet Mohammed. When the Arabs
conquered Syria, Christianity was, however, on the decline. As one
writer has put it, there was a lot of cultural property lying around
waiting for somebody to take it over and give it a new shape and life.
Islam provided the form in which the old content t was absorbed and
reshaped. That is assimilation.

Assimilation in India is treated as if it is a neutral concept, which it
is not. Assimilation is critically dependent on the predominance of the
form over the other. As a result of assimilation, the dominant culture
also changes its shape and its character. But broadly speaking, it
retains more of its old form, content and spirit than the other which is
absorbed. In India such a situation has not arisen.

Can one speculate that if the British had not come the adjustment Would
have been smoother ?

Although Muslim power weakened and disintegrated after the death of
Aurangzeb in 1707, nothing like a composite Hindu power emerged. The two
dominant groups, Sikhs in the north and Marathas in the west, did not
show the capacity to prevail on an all-India scale. The failure of the
Marathas was more significant than that of the Sighs. Sikhs were a small
community but Marathas possessed the necessary numbers. They ranged all
over the country at one stage. But they could not establish a kind of
predominance which could have held out promised of Hindu triumph.

As the British power got consolidated, local adjustments also began to
be subordinated to the urge for larger unity. Hindus began to define
themselves in pan-Indian terms and Muslims in pan-Islamic terms. By this
logic, I would regard partition not only inevitable but desirable. Many
would share this view.

In the wake of partition, the India that emerged could not, in a sense,
but be Hindu India because, for all effective purpose, the Muslim
component of state power moved to Pakistan. The army was partitioned
along religious and communal lines. The police was partitioned along the
same lines. The bureaucracy was partitioned and much of the top crust of
the Muslim elite migrated to Pakistan from various parts of India. This
reality however, we refused to recognize.

What would this recognition have implied ?

Recognition would have meant, first of all, an assurance to Hindus that
they had at long last come into their own. The Indian elite has spent
the last 43 years in trying to convince Hindus that they have not come
into their own. That has not been the intention but that has been the
result. This recognition should have been made like in the case of Arab
nationalism. No Arab nationalist will, for instance, refuse to recognize
the fact that this nationalism is underscored by its commitment to
Islam. Even Christian Arabs recognize this to be the case. If we had
owned the India that emerged as a result of partition as a Hindu India,
then a new process of adjustment could have taken place which, in my
opinion, would have been far healthier.

Was failure of leadership responsible for it in some measure? The
dominant Hindu intelligentsia is the product of the Macaulay school of
education. It has got alienated from its own roots. It has to an extent
lost its sense of identity. It is anxious to join the Western world even
if as a very junior partner. It thinks mainly in Western terms. Its
conceptual equipment and intellectual baggage is wholly Western in its
origin. Such an intelligentsia could not and cannot possibly recognize
the reality.

Was it not possible for the leadership to give a different kind of
orientation ?

If any Congress leader other than Nehru had been the first prime
minister of India, a movement in that direction Might have taken place.
If, for instance, Sardar Patel, Rajendra Prasad or C. Rajagopalachari
were at the helm, the orientation would surely have been more
sympathetic to the aspirations of ordinary Hindus. Nehru was quite alien
to the world of Hinduism. In reality, he had a contempt for popular
Hinduism'. His autobiography and his Discovery of India can leave no
score for doubt on that score. But the very fact that Nehru was popular
and he remained prime minister, even after the debacle in 1962 at the
hands of china, would show there was widespread sentiment in favour of
his policy.

I would not be able to say whether it was more the result of his talk of
socialism than of his talk of secularism. As far as I know, Nehru never
defined secularism n its proper European and historical context.

The Muslim community as a whole was very glad that India had not
declared itself a Hindu republic and had set out to become a *secular*
republic. This was possibly the result of two undercurrents of thought.
First, judging by their own attitude to other religions, they could well
have believed that a self- confessed Hindu India would be intolerant of
their faith. Secondly, even those who remained here had good reasons to
feel that as a result of this policy of secularism, combined with the
pursuit of democracy, they would have a better chance of getting a share
in power than they would have in Hindu India. Again a misconception.

But while they welcomed the commitment of the state to secularism, they
were not prepared to take to secularism themselves. For example, at no
stage have Muslims shown the slightest inclination to accept one common
civil code. There has also been a tremendous expansion in the
traditional Quranbased education in madrasas attached to mosques, since
independence. There commitment to the shariat has remained unshaken.

I must emphasize at this point, that I do not criticize Muslims on these
counts. I regard it as the right of Muslims to stick to the shariat. As
such, I am not opposed to their opposition to one common civil code. I
do not believe in imposing such a code. I do not believe in imposing
such a code on a reluctant minority.

Has uniformity no merit?

Uniformity has no place in the Hindu view of life. Also, Hindus do not
believe in abstract laws and abstract principles. Both these are the
products of Europeans.

Would not lack of it encourage separatism?

By itself it would not encourage separatism. What encourages separatism
is our refusal to recognise that Muslims are different. They have, of
course, their rights as citizens which they exercise. They have every
opportunity to raise in life. But that can be possible only when they
conform to the general atmosphere and ethos. After all, you cannot
become a professor in a university unless you acquire the same kind of
knowledge as your Hindu counterparts. You cannot be a top bureaucrat, or
a general, unless you grow up in the same discipline and speak the same
language, at least in the public domain. The confusion has arisen
because their distinctness is not recognized.

Again, in my view, nation-building is not a hopeless enterprise in
India. May I point out in his connection that a vast majority of Muslims
have for 200 years or more, refused to Shah Wali Ullah in the early part
of the 18th century till today, that is for nearly 300 years, and
especially since the rise of Al-Wahab in Saudi Arabia and the spread of
his influence in India in the 19th century, there has been a persistent
campaign to rid Indian Islam of saint worship and so-called Hindu
accretions and influences. But, by and large, ordinary Muslims have
stuck to saint worship as a visit to any important durgah would show. So
there has been a potentiality for the rise of an Indian Islam, provided
power equations were clearly understood.

By *Indian Islam* do you mean a modified version of Islam? No. Most
Hindus have not tried to understand what is Islam. As in Christianity
for 600 years, there were major dissent movements in Islam for 300
years, particularly the powerful sufi movement, emanating from Iran with
its Zoroastraian background, and Central Asia with its
Shamanistic-Buddhist background. It is interesting that the powerful
sufi movement arose not in the heartland of Islam but on the periphery
of the world of Islam. When the juridical approach finally triumphed in
the 10th century, something like a Muslim creed emerged. Islam was
frozen in its present shape in the 11th-12th century.

Let me make another point which is not too well remembered in this
country. This is that all idolatrous practices against which Mohammed
fought in the seventh century were prevalent at the time of rise of
Al-Wahab in Saudi Arabia in the 19th century. The sayings and activities
of the prophet; polytheism could not be eliminated even in Arabia, the
birthplace of Islam. Such is the power of this phenomenon. To say that
an Indian Islam would have differed from the pristine from is Islam will
thus be only partially valid. There is just no pristine Islam, whatever
Muslim might say and believe. However, an Islam broader in its vision
and more tolerant in its spirit could have arisen if the power equations
were made explicit.

But this did not happen even in the Central Asian republics in the
Soviet Union.

The Central Asian republics example is not valid in our case because the
Russians tried to exterminate Islam. Extermination never succeeds.
Incidentally, it should be noted that the revival of Islam has taken
place in Central Asia not through orthodox ulemas but through the Sufi
brotherhoods. Thus, in a sense, the pre-Islamic tradition is asserting
itself in Central Asia. Incidentally, the Shia search for spiritual life
can also be traced back to Zoroastrianism.

Two other developments tool place which worked against assimilation. I
am not against Urdu. But Urdu makes a departure from what was called
Hindvi with the imposition on that growing language of Persian and
Arabia words and concepts. Urdu in its grammar and in respect of the
roots of most of its vocabulary, is not different from Hindi. When the
Persianization and Arabization of Hindi began, the Sanskritization of
Hindi also began.

At the time of partition or soon after partition, Nehru divided the
problem of Muslims in two parts: one of containing Pakistan and the
other of accommodating Muslims and restoring their confidence in the
economic-political set-up of India. The containment of Pakistan required
that on the world stage we aligned ourselves with the more powerful of
the two blocs, the Western bloc. In the very act very act of not doing
so, he made sure that Pakistan would not be effectively contained. The
Kashmir crisis is thus primarily his *gift* to the country.

He also failed to understand that we could not allow continued
proselytization and conversion except at the grave risk of hurting the
Hindus psyche. The result is there for anyone to see. I for one regard
Meenakshipuram as a very critical and dangerous development. After the
mass conversion of Harijans to Islam came the trouble in Punjab. It was
followed by the rise of revivalism and fundamentalism in Kashmir, though
it fully exploded in our face only in 1989-90. All in all, the
impression began to grow among Hindu that they were besieged in their
own country.

Is the Ram temple issue a reaction to it?

The VHP is closely linked with the RSS. It would be dishonest to deny
that link. But the popular appeal it has made has very much to do with
the prevalence of the siege psychology among Hindus. The idea that the
Allahabad High Court can settle the issue I regard as irresponsible.
Courts cannot settle such questions. There are *historians* who raise
such absurd question as whether Ram was ever born, whether he was a
historical figure, whether Ayodhya was his city. All this is irrelevant
and worse.

Two facts are important in this regard. First, for several centuries
there has been a struggle over that site. Hindus have been one in
regarding that site as holy. The chabootra adjoining the mosque where
prayers and worship have been going on ever since, was allowed to be
constructed by Akbar. From the 16the century this has been a live issue.
Those who raise the question of whether a temple existed on not, are not
aware of the dangerous implications of what they are saying. For there
is no dearth of mosques in India which stand at temple sites.

Second, Muslims believe in fighting idolatry. It has been an article of
faith for them to destroy idols. They have lived according to their
perception of the faith . By modern criteria, it may have been wrong,
but by the criteria of the day, it was not wrong. Nor can all these
wrongs be set right. They are important symbols which cannot be
disregarded. Ram is by far the most important symbol of Hindu identity.
For anyone to raise this kind of issue in respect of what millions of
Hindus regard as Janmabhoomi of Ram is to ask for trouble. The issue
would have been settled long ago if politicians had not intervened in
the manner they have.

It is extraordinary that a man like Mulayam Singh who otherwise has
shown scant respect for court judgments should swear by the court in
this case. It is also extraordinary that V.P.Singh should speak one
language in private and another in public. I have the same feeling about
Rajiv Gandhi. These people have played politics of a dangerous variety.

What solution have you to offer?

The least Hindus need is a symbolic victory. The Babri mosque does not
exist. A structure exists which is called a mosque. Equally important,
it can never be a mosque again. Muslim shall not pray there ever again.
So it is defunct. The issue is not whether the mosque should stay or
not. The issue is whether Hindus are allowed to build the temple. But I
do not really believe that Muslim activists are going to compromise on
this question. So I think this conflict will continue.

How do you see the communal issue in its larger perspective?

I don't take such a pessimistic view of this problem as many others do.
I do not believe that we are in anything like the 1946-47 situation.
Communal riots have taken place and more riots may take place. But I see
the situation differently. I see it in terms of a redefinition of Indian
politics of which this controversy has become a major instrument.

My assessment falls into two parts. First, the existing order is in a
pretty bad shape. It is not only that one-tenth of members of Parliament
have formed the government. It is not only that horse trading has taken
place, in new Delhi, Ahmedabad, Patna and Lucknow. There has been a
general decline in the quality of our democracy.

Indeed, our slogans no longer keep pace with reality. For the past 20
years, money earned through smuggling, bootlegging and muscle power have
been significant factors influencing the course of elections. And yet
all the time we have talked of the nexus between politics and big
business. I am not suggesting that big business does not have any
influence on politics in a subterranean manner. I am suggesting a new
element has entered the situation, which is called criminalization of
politics. In U.P. and Bihar a large number of MLAs have criminal
records. The crimes include charges of murder. Mafia dons have become
extremely influential. I for one, am not surprised at this development.
But that is another story.

As of the other pillars of our system - secularism and socialism - the
communal situation is precarious and nothing more need be said about it.
And socialism, as is well known, has produced a parallel black money
economy of unprecedented proportions. I do not see any signs of
improvement in that situation. One reason for all these developments is
the denigration by the power elites of traditional mores. Everyone knows
that religion has been the most important restraining influence on our
appetites. Our appetites have now been unleashed, and we have set for
ourselves the American model where consumerism is the ideology.

In view of the decay of the present political order, the struggle for
the rise of a new order is unavoidable. In my opinion, the BJP
represents the wave of the future precisely because it emphasizes the
link between religion and politics. That is why I attach a great deal of
importance to the activities of the BJP.

Whatever else the RSS may have done, nobody can suggest that its members
have ever engaged in anti-social activities. Nobody can deny that they
are a very disciplined group. If the BJP gains access to power it would
have to defer in a big way to the RSS cadres who are highly motivated,
patriotic and disciplined. So we can get a new kind of policy.

But the BJP stands isolated today and is confined to the Hindi
heartland.

No, the BJP is no longer confined to the Hindi belt. The RSS has a
presence throughout the country. In western India, the BJP itself is
quite strong. There is widespread speculation that if an election is
held tomorrow, the BJP would sweep in Gujarat and do reasonably well in
Maharashtra. The main check on the BJP in Maharashtra is the personality
of Sharad Pawar. In Tamil Nadu. Hindu organizations are beginning to do
well. In Karnataka, the BJP is gaining in influence. In north India, its
presence is quite strong. The next place where it will consolidate
itself will be U.P., epicenter of the Mandir-Masjid storm.

That the BJP is isolated among the established political organizations
and the Westernized intellectual elite is not only logical in view of
what I have said but also desirable. It is logical because all other
parties, including the Congress, represent the status quo; the BJP alone
stands for a new order which is rooted in the country's cultural past.
And it is a desirable one, that it helps avoid an erosion, as in the
past, of the BJP's identity, commitment and programme.

*\[The Daily, 23/12/1990, with J.D.Singh\]*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
