+++
title = "05 1 Jihãd in the Koran"

+++
**1**  
**Jihãd in the Koran**

The Koran does not discuss a single Islamic tenet systematically and in
conformity with the arrangement of its chapters. The combined body of
Revelations from Allah which constitute the Holy Book of Islam appeared
to the Prophet without any logical sequence during the 23 years of his
prophetic career (609 to 632 AD), and this fact accounts for its
haphazard arrangement. The Koran has 114 chapters and some six thousand
verses. The verses of *jihãd*, like those explaining any other doctrine,
remain spread over a great many chapters. This is the reason why, to an
ordinary reader, the knowledge of any and every Islamic doctrine appears
difficult, the doctrine of *jihãd* being no exception.

A second and more important reason for the difficulty is that the
Koranic verses do not deliver their full meaning without a knowledge of
their relevance in the Prophet’s career. The Koran is not the only
source book of Islam, the so-called Hadis^([1](#1)) collections share
that role equally. In Arabic the plural of *hadîs* is *ahãdîs*; these
describe what the Prophet did or what he said. As a Muslim would put it,
these narrate the Prophet’s Sunnah (practice of the Prophet). In one
sense, the importance of the Hadis literature in the life of a Muslim is
even greater than that of the Koran. A Koranic text might admit of
different meanings. Certainly different commentators could suggest
different meanings of the same Koranic verse. But the relevant *hadîs*,
in explaining its meaning as exemplified in the Prophet’s practice,
renders the meaning unique for all time to come.^([2](#2))

Besides the Hadis, another source book for the Sunnah are the so-called
*siyar* (plural of *sîrah*) or the biographies of the Prophet. These do
not belong to the body of Islam’s canonical literature but in so far as
the events described in them are considered genuine by the ulema or the
collectors of the Hadis, these bring out the meaning of Koranic verses
even more clearly than the Hadis. Thus the genuine biographies of the
Prophet are important source books for Sunnah.

After these preliminary remarks the reader must understand that the
literal meaning of *jihãd* is ‘effort’ or ‘striving’ - a meaning, to all
intents and purposes, unrelated to the sanguinary activities with which
the word has become inextricably woven. The technical expression used in
the Koran is *jihãd fi Sabilillah*, ‘effort in the way of Allah’. But
even this expression does not explicitly mention any sanguinary
conflict, and if we concentrate on meanings of words alone, we are
likely to be led astray. When closely examined, the eighth *sûrah*
(chapter) of the Koran, the *Sûrah Anfãl*, and the ninth *sûrah*
entitled *Taubah* are the truly jihadic *sûrahs*. But *jihãd* is
enjoined in many other chapters. Perhaps the most significant verse in
this connection is Koran 8/39 which, in meaning, is almost identical
with Koran 2/193.

These declare: “Fight them until persecution is no more and religion is
all for Allah.”

In other words, Allah in 8/39 and 2/193 enjoins perpetual war for the
destruction of the persecuting Koreish of Mecca, and, by the same token,
for the abolition of all non-Islamic religions the world over.^([3](#3))
This according to the Koran is the best ‘striving in the way of Allah’.
This is *Jihãd fi Sabilillah* in its most *comprehensive meaning*.

\(2\) Is this war allegorical?  Since Mahatma Gandhi’s allegorical
explanation of the Kurukshetra war, it has been the fashion in India to
consider all types of religious wars as wars against the baser passions
of the human mind. The contagion has not spared even Muslim scholars who
are sometimes heard giving a nonviolent interpretation of *jihãd*. But
such explanation is clearly contrary to Koranic verses. In the 74th
verse of *Sûrah Nisã*, Allah says very clearly:

“Let those fight in the way of Allah who sell the life of this world for
the other. Who so fighteth in the way of Allah, be he slain or
victorious, on him we shall bestow a vast reward.”

This verse clearly shows that there is nothing allegorical or
metaphysical in the nature of war that is *jihãd*; it is armed war and
nothing else. The idea has been further explained in another verse which
says:

“Hast thou not seen those unto whom it was said: Withhold your hands and
establish worship and pay the poor-due?  But when fighting was
prescribed for them, behold! a party of them fear mankind even as they
fear Allah or with greater fear, and say: Our Lord! why hast Thou
ordained fighting for us? If only Thou wouldst give us respite for a
while. I Say: The comfort of this world is scant; the Hereafter will be
better for him that  
wardeth off evil” (K 4/77).

This verse describes the benefits of *jihãd* to be enjoyed in the
hereafter. Also it clearly shows that, instead of “withholding one’s
hand”, *jihãd* requires the waging of unremitting armed conflict.
Obviously, this verse descended for the instruction of those Muslims who
had been pleading against bloodshed and wanting “respite” from the duty
of engaging in murderous confrontations. Historically too this verse is
rather important. Before the Migration (to Medina) the number of Muslims
(in Mecca) was not large, but even among that small number there were
war-mongers whom Allah had to restrain as the issue of war in Mecca was
dim. This comes out clearly in the first half of the verse. On the other
hand, if the traditional date of the *sûrah* to which the whole verse
belongs be accepted, the second half of the verse shows that after the
reverse at the Battle of Uhud (625 AD), the Muslims of Medina wanted to
settle down to a peaceful existence. This second half was intended to
rouse them to renewed warlike effort, and to revive their drooping
spirits. Not only that. The verse seems to imply that over and above the
war-mongers there existed a body of Muslims who were essentially
peace-living, and it required all the eloquence of Allah and his Prophet
to rouse them and goad them into unflinching bloodshed. The lure of a
felicitous hereafter was held up before them, and it was made clear that
the abrogation of Meccan pacifism was final and irrevocable.

\(3\) The extent of violence and bloodshed permitted in *jihãd* is also
clearly stated in the Koran. The 5th verse of *Sûrah Taubah* makes no
bones about the matter. Allah says in so many words:

“When the sacred months have passed, slay the idolaters wherever ye find
them, and take them, besiege them and prepare for them each ambush. But
if they repent and establish worship and pay the poor-due, then leave
their way free.”

The meaning of this verse is clear enough. “Profess Islam or else die” -
such is the upshot of this verse expressed in the most transparent
language possible.^([4](#4)) But clearer even than this is the
declaration embodied in the 67th verse of *Sûrah Anfãl*, which says: “It
is not for any Prophet to have captives until he hath made slaughter in
the land.  Ye desire the lure of this world but Allah desireth (for you)
the hereafter.”

The historical background of this particular verse is important. Every
student of Islamic history knows that the first landmark in the
world-conquering mission of Islam was the Battle of Badr (624 AD). For
the Koreishite idolaters of Mecca who fell into Muslim hands in that
war, a proposal was mooted that all those captives be let off in lieu of
adequate ransom. The idea was to earn some money by sparing the lives of
the captured Koreish. Historians attribute this proposal to have
originated from Abu Bakr. Another suggestion came from Umar who would
have all the idolaters slaughtered. The Prophet accepted Abu Bakr’s
suggestion and, after killing a handful, let off the rest of the
prisoners in lieu of some ransom money. Evidently this was not to the
liking of Allah who would have a “slaughter in the land” rather than
that his devotees should opt for “the lure of this world” - an
expression which evidently stands for the ransom money accepted by the
Prophet. As Mohammed Pickthall puts it, “The Prophet took the verses as
a reproof, and they are generally understood to mean that no quarter
ought to have been given in that first battle.” The sanguinary nature of
*jihãd* comes out in this episode with the uttermost clarity.

(4) A variant of this ransom money was the famous *jizyah* or poll-tax
or capitation-tax as it has been variously rendered.^([5](#5)) The
Revelation enjoining the institution of this tax also occurs in the
Koran. *Sûrah Taubah* declares with thunderous clarity:

“Fight against such of those who have been given the Scripture as
believe not in Allah nor the last day, and forbid not that which Allah
hath forbidden by His Messenger and follow not the religion of truth,
until they pay the tribute (*jizya*) readily,^([6](#6)) being brought
low” (K 9/29).

This verse is of the greatest historical significance, and to explain it
we must first of all know the meaning of the expression “those who have
been given the Scripture”. The Arabic original of the expression,
*Ahl-ul-Kitãb*, and the Indian variant *Kitãbî* as also the English
phrase ‘People of the Book’, are also important.

In orthodox Islam the term *Kitãbî* stands for Jews and Christians. This
is because the Koran recognises the Jewish Scripture *Taurãt* (=Old
Testament) and the Christian Gospels *Injîl* (=Evangel=New Testament) as
Revelations equally authentic with the Koran but superseded, as this
very verse indicates, only by the latter. The non-*Kitãbîs* or
non-Scriptuaries of the world are, in the Koran, designated as *mushrik*
(=idolaters). With this explanation, the verse in question simply states
that the lives of Scriptuaries may be spared in *jihãd*, provided they
pay the poll-tax “in humility and with their own hands”. The verse is
silent regarding idolaters; it does not specify if *their* lives too can
be spared in lieu of *jizyah*. But as mentioned earlier, Islamic tenets
do not derive from the Koran alone. There occur *ahãdîs* - not
recognised by all the schools of Islamic jurisprudence - which are
supposed to mention the letting off by the Prophet of certain idolatrous
(non-Arab) tribes in lieu of the poll-tax. The ulema, even to this day,
are not unanimous whether Hindus deserve such immunity, even though the
Sultans and Padishahs of Delhi had granted it by recognising their Hindu
subjects as *kharãjguzãr* (=payer of the poll-tax) and *zimmî* (=held in
tutelage). Even the fanatical Aurangzeb did not controvert this usage.

\(5\) Not only the poll-tax or ransom money. Another fruit of *jihãd* is
‘plunder’ or ‘spoils of *ghanîmah’* as the Koran puts it. The 69th verse
of *Sûrah Anfãl* declares:

“Eat ye the spoils of war. They are lawful and pure.”^([7](#7))

This injunction regarding “spoils of war” will be taken up in detail in
a subsequent chapter. For the present it will suffice to mention that
this injunction is part of the group of injunctions laid down in the
Koran on the subject of *jihãd*.

To sum up, the following are the rules and instructions regarding
*jihãd* as laid down in the Koran:

\(a\) The *ultimate* object of *jihãd* is to Islamize the whole of
humanity. Since the Prophet’s sojourn in Medina, this duty has been
permanently enjoined on Muslims over the length and breadth of the
world.

(b) The *immediate* objects of *jihãd* are four in number: (1) spread of
Islam by war; (2) the destruction of infidels; (3) *jizyah*; and (4)
plunder.^([8](#8))

\(c\) For *Scriptuaries* the imposition of *jizyah* is the rule, just as
for *idolaters* the rule is mass-slaughter. But there are many
exceptions to this general rule. Mass-slaughter of Jews in *jihãd* is
eminently permissible, as the subsequent chapters will show. On the
other hand, even idolaters can be let off on payment of the poll-tax.
The Koran has not published any rigorous rule regarding these matters.

\(d\) *Jihãd* is by no means a war for self-defence. Historically the
verse “kill the idolaters wherever you find them” (K 9/5) forms an item
in the ‘immunity’ granted to the Prophet in 631 AD regarding his
obligations to the idolaters of Arabia. But as in every verse of the
Koran, the implication of such immunity in respect of a particular set
of infidels embraced in due course idolaters of any and every country of
the world. Such an injunction is necessarily informed with the spirit of
extreme aggressiveness. For those who plead that the call of *jihãd* is
an injunction for self-defence, the so-called immunity verses of the 9th
*sûrah* are the best refutation; but there are many other verses which
confute the plea.

In conclusion it is only necessary to add that according to the Koran,
the duty of *jihãd* for any and every Muslim of the world preponderates
over all other Islamic duties. This is brought out most clearly in
verses 9/19-22, but these are by no means the only verses with a similar
import.

In these verses Allah makes an estimate of the relative excellence of a
Muslim who engages in *jihãd* as contrasted with another who is engaged
in pacific Islamic duties:

“Count ye the slaking of a pilgrim’s thirst and tendence of the
Inviolable Place of Worship (i.e. the Ka’ba) as (equal to the worth of
him) who believeth in Allah and the Last Day, and striveth in the way of
Allah (i.e. engages in *jihãd*)? They are not equal in the sight of
Allah… Those who believe and have left their homes and striven with
their wealth and their lives in the way of Allah are of much greater
worth in Allah’s sight” (K 9/19-22).

The meaning of these verses is clear enough. The “greater worth” of the
*mujãhid* “in the sight of Allah” necessarily renders him fit to obtain
a greater reward here as well as hereafter. The reward here is an
exclusive share in the spoils of war which is denied to the sedentary
Muslim.^([9](#9)) The reward hereafter is everlasting residence in the
highest heaven which the Hadis literature designates as *Jannãt-ul
firdaus*. It is to that literature that we must turn now to see how
Allah’s injunctions are confirmed and, in fact, added to in the
Prophet’s Sunnah.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Literally *hadîs* means a report. In Islam’s technical
vocabulary it stands for any report of the Prophet’s actions or sayings
as embodied in canonical collections also called the Hadis in a
collective sense.

[²](#2a) Even *ahãdîs* at times are found to be conflicting. We need not
go into this.

[³](#3a) Cf. N. J. Dawood’s rendering of the same verse, “Make war on
them until idolatry is no more and Allah’s religion reigns supreme”,
brings out the meaning more explicitly.

[⁴](#4a) For the historical context of this verse see Chapter 10.

[⁵](#5a) Literally it means ‘retribution tax’ - the retribution for
obstinacy in refusing to renounce *kufr* (infidelity).

[⁶](#6a) For ‘readily’ most versions have ‘with their own hands’.
Actually in the law books the prescription is that *jizyah* has to be
paid in person.

[⁷](#7a) This rendering is by Abdul Hamid Siddiqi, the translator of
*Sahih Muslim*. Pickthall renders ‘the spoils of war’ as ‘what you have
won’. This seems to be wrong.font face="Times New Roman,Times"&gt;

[⁸](#8a) ‘Plunder’ in *jihãd* is actually twofold in nature. Plunder of
property as well as enslavement of the female and child population of
the vanquished infidels are both recognized as *ghanîmah*.

[⁹](#9a) Vide also Koran 4/95 where sedentary Muslims are specifically
mentioned and shrugged off.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
