+++
title = "09 5 Islamic Expansion through Jihãd:xa0 The Evidence of the Sunnah"

+++
**5**  
**Islamic Expansion through *Jihãd*: **  
**The Evidence of the Sunnah**

In the foregoing chapters I have attempted to give a brief but complete
outline of the Islamic theory of *jihãd*, that is, the injunctions of
Allah and his Prophet regarding the subject. However, no part of Islamic
theory is supposed to be complete without a description of the Prophet’s
own actions in terms to those injunctions. In fact, these actions in
their totality are the Sunnah properly so called, the mere injunctions
even from the Prophet’s mouth being only a part of it. To a devout
Muslim, the Prophet’s actions and sayings rather than revelations from
Allah supply the model of excellence which he is expected to emulate
throughout his life-span. The Prophet is the best ruler, the best
parent, the best husband, and, by the same token, the best *mujãhid*. To
round off the theory of *jihãd*, a discussion of his own jihãds is,
therefore, essential.

Adding up the evidence of the Koran and the Hadis, a complete *jihãd* is
seen to have no less than five distinct objectives: (1) Forcible
spreading of Islam. (2) Destruction of the kafir population against
which the *jihãd* is mounted. (3) Imposition of *jizyah* on the defeated
infidels. (4) The wresting of war booty in the form of material
property. (5) The enslavement of the female and child population of the
vanquished kafir enemy. The last two items, indeed, do not count as two,
but are aspects of the self-same *ghanîmah*. It is for clarity that they
are mentioned separately. In this chapter I will concentrate on the
first objective of *jihãd*, namely, the spread of Islam through *jihãd*
as illustrated in the Prophet’s own career.

This spreading of Islam through *jihãd* again has two sides: to force
the vanquished infidels into professing Islam, and to destroy their
places as well as symbols of worship. The Koranic injunctions, in so far
as they refer to forcible spread of Islam, have already been quoted. The
reader should particularly refer to verses 9/5, 8/39, 2/193. The
relevant Sunnah is best described in *The Life of Mahomet* by Sir
William Muir by comparing and collating the early biographical data from
Ibn Ishãq, Ibn Hishãm, Al-Wãqidî, Ibn Sa’d and At-Tabarî.^([1](#1)) The
Prophet’s Sunnah regarding the spread of Islam by means of *jihãd* is
described in these works in great detail.

According to Muir, the Prophet never made a concerted effort for the
spread of Islam in Arabia before the conquest of Mecca (January, 630
AD). He was content to keep together the band of his followers in Medina
and with their help wage incessant war against the Koreish of Mecca and
other Arab tribes, so as to add to his resources and build a
well-equipped military machine. The moment he felt strong enough, he
swooped down on Mecca and gained what was for all practical purposes a
bloodless victory. The Meccans professed Islam, intimidated as they were
by the display of his strength and also because of the unwritten
agreement he had reached earlier with the Meccan leader, Abu Sufyan.
Muir has given a graphic description of this agreement.

According to him, the Prophet, with an army of 10,000, was proceeding
towards Mecca in extreme secrecy when a small reconnoitring party of the
Koreish, headed by Abu Sufyan, fell in with Al-Abbas, the Prophet’s
uncle, issuing forth from the latter’s encampment. Al-Abbas wanted ‘to
save Mecca from destruction’. He persuaded Abu Sufyan to accompany him
to the Prophet and ‘seek quarter from him’. This was in the evening
prior to the surrender of Mecca. Next morning, Al-Abbas took Abu Sufyan
to the Prophet. What took place is best described in Muir’s language:

*“‘Out upon thee Abu Sufyan*!’ exclaimed Mohammad as the Koreishite
chief drew near; *‘hast thou not discovered that there is no God save
the Lord alone*?’ ‘Noble and generous Sire!  Had there been any God
beside, verily he had been of some avail to me.’ *‘And dost thou not
acknowledge that I am the Prophet of the Lord*?’ questioned Mohammad.
‘Noble Sire!  As to this thing there is yet in my heart some hesitancy.’
‘Woe is thee!’ exclaimed Al-Abbas; ‘it is no time for hesitancy, this.
Believe and testify forthwith the creed of Islam, or else thy neck shall
be in danger!’”

This description by Muir makes it clear that Abu Sufyan professed Islam
under duress - to ‘save his neck from danger’. Most of the Meccans
followed him in the same course and obviously under the same
predicament. Muir has praised the Prophet’s extreme generosity in
letting off the Koreish so easily, and abstaining from bloodshed and
plunder. But he has not concealed the fact that the conversion of the
Koreish was effected by terror, by an apprehension relating to the
‘safety of their necks’.

It must be admitted that the generosity of the Prophet extended even
beyond sparing the life and property of the Koreish. He did not compel
each and every Meccan to profess Islam at once, nor threw out anyone who
would persist in ‘infidelity’ for some time yet. They were even allowed
to worship at the Ka‘bah, the so-called Inviolable Place of Worship. He
got the idols in the Ka‘bah destroyed on the very first day of his entry
into Mecca, but retained much of the pre-Islamic ritual. This
facilitated for some more time the continuance of pre-Islamic worship by
the as yet unconverted Koreishites, without encountering opposition from
the Prophet’s followers.

That opposition came about a year later (631 AD) on the occasion of the
first independent pilgrimage to the Ka‘bah by the Prophet's followers
from Medina. At first the Prophet had sent Abu Bakr as the leader of
this pilgrimage. But after the latter had already proceeded some
distance, the Prophet despatched Ali (his cousin as well as son-in-law)
with a set of newly received Revelations from Allah. They were the
so-called ‘Immunity Verses’. By means of these, Allah gave to himself
and his Prophet immunity from the responsibility for tolerating those
Meccans and other Arabs who had been persisting in infidelity even after
the conquest of Mecca. The *Sûrah Taubah* of the Koran contains these
‘Immunity Verses’, the *sûrah* itself bearing the alternative title,
*Barã’ah* (immunity). Allah declared:

“Freedom from obligation from Allah and His Messenger towards those of
the idolaters with whom ye made treaty.

“Travel \[O idolaters\] freely in the land for four months, and know
that ye cannot escape Allah and Allah will confound the disbelievers.

“And a proclamation from Allah and His Messenger to all men on the day
of the Greater Pilgrimage that Allah is free from obligation to
idolaters and (so is) His Messenger” (K 9/1-3).

It is on this occasion that the liberty to kill the idolaters (“kill
them whenever you find them”, K 9/5) was proclaimed and the doors of the
Ka‘bah were closed for all time to come to non-Muslims. As the
“proclamation from Allah” clearly states, the unbelievers (of Arabia and
not of Mecca alone) were given only four months’ time to forswear their
ancestral religion and profess Islam. Clearly this was a direct outcome
of the conquest of Mecca although delayed after the day of victory for
about a year. This, therefore, must be reckoned the supreme example of
how *jihãd* is utilised for the forcible spread of Islam. Every practice
of the Prophet is canonical Sunnah to the believer, and as binding as
the verses of the Koran. It is for this reason that with Muslims,
*jihãd* became the supreme instrument for propagating Islam and its
spread by peaceful means always remained secondary. The ordinance which
was originally intended for Arab idolaters, came to be recognised in due
course as including idolaters anywhere and everywhere.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) Ibn Ishãq (85 A.H - 151 A.H); Ibn Hishãm (d. 218 A.H);
AI-Wãqidî (130 A.H-207 A.H); Ibn Sa’d (d. 230 A.H); At-Tabarî (d. 310
A.H).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
