+++
title = "10 6 Destruction of Idols and Idol-Temples inxa0 Jihãd: The Evidence of the Sunnah"

+++
**6**  
**Destruction of Idols and Idol-Temples in **  
***Jihãd*: The Evidence of the Sunnah**

A natural and in fact inevitable consequence of spreading Islam by
*jihãd* is the destruction of non-believers’ places of worship and their
idols. It is somewhat remarkable that this duty has not been enjoined in
any Koranic verse as a part of *jihãd*. The destruction of idols is
often mentioned in the Koran, but nowhere in connection with *jihãd*.
Such an ordinance derives from the Sunnah and the Sunnah alone. In the
Koran there are descriptions of such destruction in heaven at the hands
of angels (*firishtas*) and on earth at the hands of Prophet Ibrãhîm
(Abraham), who is proclaimed the first Mussalman in the world. But these
descriptions are not connected with any *jihãd*.

\(1\) The *sûrah* for the destruction of idols and images is *Sûrah
Sãffãt*, the 37th chapter of the Koran. This *sûrah* tells us that on
the Day of Judgement Allah would assemble idols and idol-worshippers
through his *firishtas* and throw them into the everlasting fire of
hell. As the Koran puts it:

“(And it is said unto the angels) assemble those who did wrong, together
with their wives and what (idols) they used to worship instead of Allah,
and lead them to the path of hell… Then lo! this day they (both) are
sharers in the doom. Thus deal We with the guilty” (K 37/22, 23, 33,
39).

\(2\) So much for the destruction of idols by Allah himself through his
heavenly hosts. As regards Prophet Ibrãhîm’s hand in the matter, the
Koran describes his iconoclasm in several passages, notably in the same
*sûrah* 37 as also in *sûrah* 21 (*Ambiyã*). In the former this is how
Ibrãhîm proceeded in regard to the deities of his kinsmen:

“Ibrahim said unto his father and his folk: What is it that ye worship?
Is it a falsehood - gods beside Allah - that ye desire?… And he glanced
a glance at the stars; then said: Lo! I feel sick. And they turned their
backs and went away from him. Then turned he to their gods and said:
Will ye not eat? What aileth ye that ye speak not? Then he attacked them
striking with his right hand. And his people came towards him hastening.
He said: Worship ye that ye yourselves carve?” (K 37/85ff).

Such are the Koranic accounts of the destruction of idols. It appears
that what Ibrãhîm objected to was his folk’s addiction to ‘false gods’
who could not ‘eat or speak’. To us this does not constitute so serious
an offence as to rouse one to iconoclastic fury. However, the Koran does
not mention if, beyond striking his folk’s idols behind their back,
Ibrãhîm waged any full-fledged *jihãd* against his idolatrous kinsmen.
That was left to the Prophet of Islam who in his *jihãd* against his
kinsmen destroyed all the idols in and around the Ka‘bah and signalled
the event as a permanent legacy to future *mujãhids*.

According to the account given by all biographers of the Prophet, on
reaching Mecca, he mounted his camel Al-Kaswa and proceeded towards the
Ka‘bah. On reaching there he saluted the famous Black Stone with his
staff and made seven circuits round the sacred building. “Then pointing
with his staff to the idols one by one, he commanded them to be hewn
down.” The huge idol of Hubal stood in front of the temple. As the
Prophet’s followers attacked it with pickaxes the image fell down with a
crash. The Prophet celebrated its fall by shouting a verse from the
Koran: “Truth hath come and falsehood gone, for falsehood verily
vanisheth away,” (K 17/81).

This was not all. The destruction of Hubal was followed by the
destruction of all the pictures decorating the walls of the temple. An
announcer was asked to go down the streets of Mecca shouting a
proclamation: “Whoever believeth in Allah, let him not leave in his
house any image whatever that he doth not break in pieces.” The fury of
idol-breaking was unleashed in the city.

In the next two weeks the Prophet despatched his armed squads to all
places in the neighbourhood with the express command to destroy the
images as also their shrines. Khãlid destroyed the fane of Al-Uzzã at
Nakhla. Amr smashed the image of Suwã‘ worshipped by the tribe of
Hudhail. Al-Manãt was destroyed at Kodeid. This particular work of
destruction was entrusted to a tribe of Medina who had been specially
attached to this deity. This was the Prophet’s way of testing their zeal
for Islam.

Muir’s description of the destruction of the image of Al-Lãt, worshipped
by the Thakif tribe of Taif, is particularly touching. Following close
upon the conquest of Mecca the Prophet had besieged the city of Taif,
but the siege had to be raised because of the heroic resistance of the
Thakafites. But when every surrounding tribe started professing Islam
and organising raid upon raid against them, the Thakafites decided to
offer submission. Their attachment to their Goddess Al-Lãt, however, was
too strong to be renounced so easily. Already they had killed one of
their own chiefs, Urwa, who, having professed Islam on his own, would
have all his fellow-citizens follow in his footsteps. But harassed and
exhausted by Islamic attacks from all sides they at last sent out a
deputation of six chiefs who pleaded with the Prophet for retaining the
temple of Al-Lãt for another three years even after professing Islam. As
was to be expected, the Prophet rejected the plea. Thereafter they
prayed for a respite of two years, one year, six months, successively
with tearful supplication. The Prophet was stubborn in his refusal,
declaring that Al-Lãt could not coexist with Allah for a single day. The
only concession the Thakafites could get was that they were not required
to destroy the image of Al-Lãt with their own hands. Al-Mughira, a
kinsman to Urwa, and Abu Sufyan, the Koreishite leader, volunteered to
perform that task. “Al-Mughira, wielding a pickaxe and surrounded by a
guard of his relatives, and amid the cries and wailing of the women,
with his own hand, hewed \[the image\] to the ground.”

A Christian with iconoclastic tendencies himself, Muir has wasted few
words of sympathy for the people whose Gods and shrines were so
ruthlessly destroyed. But even he seems to have been somewhat affected
by the devotion of the Thakafites to their deity. As he puts it,
“Al-Taif was the last stronghold that held out against the authority of
Mohammad. It is remarkable as the only place where the fate of an idol
excited the sympathy of the people. Everywhere else the images seem to
have been destroyed by the people themselves without a pang.” We can
ignore the last sentence as proceeding from the pen of a would-be
iconoclast, but the heartless manner of trampling upon the devotion of
the Thakafites as illustrated in the above incident is an eloquent
commentary on the virtue of breaking other people’s idols.

But whatever be one’s opinion about this vandalism, the Islamic
significance of these events can hardly be exaggerated. Iconoclasm
became part and parcel of *jihãd* not by any specific injunction of the
Koran but by the very activities following upon the conquest of Mecca.
These constituted the Prophet’s Sunnah and was an addition to the
teachings of the Koran, so much so that in a great many *jihãds* waged
by the latter-day zealots of Islam, the very words which the Prophet had
uttered at the time of destroying the image of Hubal at Ka‘bah became a
part of the ritual of iconoclasm unleashed at the end of a successful
*jihãd*. “Truth hat come and falsehood gone; for verily falsehood
vanisheth away.”  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
