+++
title = "12 8 Plunder (Ghanîmah) in Jihãd:xa0 The Evidence of the Sunnah"

+++
**8**  
**Plunder (*Ghanîmah*) in *Jihãd*: **  
**The Evidence of the Sunnah**

Did the Prophet appropriate plunder (*ghanîmah*) for his own use? The
relevant Revelations and *ahãdîs* have already been discussed in detail,
and the part of *Khums*, the holy one-fifth of the plunder in the
Islamic scheme of things, analysed threadbare. But here again the
Prophet’s own practice (*Sunnah*) has to be mentioned if only to round
off the discussion. A proper analysis of this single topic would require
a whole book; here I shall content myself with a bare outline.

\(1\) According to the biographers, the Prophet received his one-fifth
starting from the raid of Nakhla (late 623 AD) in which one Koreishite
was killed and two of them made captives, the booty obtained being
meagre. But as the earliest of the Prophet’s biographers, Ibn Ishãq,
reflected, “This was the first booty which the Muslims obtained, the
first captives they seized, and the first life they took.” The amount of
ransom money charged was 40 ounces of silver for each of the two
captured Koreishites.

(2) In comparison, the loot from the Battle of Badr (624 AD) was
considerable. Besides a vast amount of garments and articles of leather,
the number of camels captured was 114 and that of horses 10, the captive
Koreishites totalling 70.^([1](#1)) According to Margoliouth’s
calculation, the ransom money charged was 100,000 *dirhems*. The Prophet
received a clear one-fifth of these. Over and above, he took the camel
of Abu Jahl,^([2](#2)) his most inveterate Koreishite enemy happily
“sent to hell” on the battlefield, as also the famous sword Zulfiqãr.
These constituted his special share as the chief of his team.

\(3\) The largest amount of plunder earned during the Prophet’s ten
years’ residence at Medina was obtained at the cost of the Jews. A short
account of these earnings should elucidate the relevant Sunnah for
plunder with more vividness than any other event could.

As is well known, the Prophet's conquering career started with his
migration to Medina in September 622 AD. In the history of Islam the
event is known as the Migration (*hijrah*) with a capital M. The
Prophet’s previous career of 12 or 13 years’ preaching at Mecca had
enlisted very few converts. In Medina, indeed he was received with the
honour due to a monarch, but this was not accompanied by any accession
of wealth or property. The first gainful exploit of Muslims was the
victory of Badr. But the plunder obtained therefrom, though opulent, was
not considerable enough to feed the growing Muslim population
indefinitely. It seems to be this consideration above any other which
actuated the Prophet for extirpating the thriving Jewish settlements
around Medina and attaching their property to the nascent Islamic state.
It has been argued that the Jews themselves had behaved treacherously
with him. But if “all earth belongs to Allah and His Prophet” such a
rationalisation is hardly necessary. In any event, after the victory of
Badr the Jewish tribes of Medina started being a prey to the Prophet’s
repeated assaults. Banu Kainuka was the first tribe to be thrown out.
This event occurred close on the heels of Badr. After the reverse at
Uhud (625 AD), it was the turn of the Banu Nazir to be banished. Banu
Kuraizah, as mentioned earlier, were exterminated after the Battle of
Ahzãb (627 AD). All these were Jewish tribes of Medina.

The very next year saw the raid upon Khaibar (628 AD), that is, on the
Jews who resided far from Medina. They were retained in their
settlements on condition of tilling their own lands and paying half
their produce to the Islamic state. This seems to be the first
imposition of *jizyah* in the history of Islam. The extirpation or
subjugation of Jews in all these cases was followed by extortion of a
vast amount of *ghanîmah* (plunder).

\(a\) Property worth thousands of *dirhems*, if not more, accrued from
the expulsion of Banu Nazir (625 AD). This tribe had rich and extensive
agricultural lands, all of which was appropriated by the Prophet. This
was because the Nazirites were conquered without engaging in regular
warfare, so that their property was counted as *Fai* (gift) in Islam’s
technical vocabulary.^([3](#3)) As Abdul Hamid Siddiqi’s commentary on a
*hadîs* elaborates:

“The properties abandoned by Banu Nazir were the ones which Allah
bestowed upon his Apostle for which no expedition was taken either with
cavalry or camel. Those properties were particularly meant for the Holy
Prophet. He would meet the annual expenditure of his family from the
income thereof and would spend what remained for purchasing horses and
weapons for preparation of *Jihãd”* (*Sahih Muslim*, No. 4347).

\(b\) The plunder accruing from the extermination of the entire male
population of Banu Kuraizah is best described in Muir’s language. As he
puts it:

“The booty was divided into four classes - lands, chattels, cattle and
slaves; and Mohammad took a fifth of each. There were (besides the
children who counted with their mothers) a thousand captives; from his
share of these, Mohammad made certain presents to his friends of slave
girls and female servants. The rest of the women and children he sent to
be sold among the Bedawi tribes of Nejd, in exchange for horses and arms
in the service of the State; for he kept steadily in view the advantage
of raising a body of efficient cavalry. The remaining property was
divided among the 3,000 soldiers of Medîna, to the highest bidders among
whom the women also were sold.

“The whole booty at the prize valuation would thus be 40,000 dînãrs.
Mohammad sold a number of State slaves to ‘Othmãn and ‘Abd-ar-Rahmãn,
who made a good speculation therefrom. They divided them into old and
young. ‘Othmãn took the old, and found as he expected much money on
their persons. Large sums were obtained from the Jews of Kheibar and
other places for the ransom of such of the women and children as they
were interested in.”^([4](#4))

This single example brings out the Prophet’s practice regarding
*ghanîmah* (plunder) with a vividness which a hundred pages of
theoretical discussion would hardly equal.

\(c\) But even this booty, vast as it was, was small compared to what
the Prophet wrested from the Jews of Khaibar. After their defeat, “When
the Moslems came to apportion their spoils they found that the conquest
of Khaibar surpassed every other benefit that God had conferred on their
Prophet. The leader’s one-fifth enabled him to enrich his wives and
concubines, his daughters and their off-spring, his friends and
acquaintance, down to the servants. Eighteen hundred lots were portioned
out for the fourteen hundred fighters; the two hundred horsemen got,
according to custom, treble lots… Moreover there was no fear of this
wealth melting away as the former booty had melted; for the Jews
remained to till the land which became the property of the
robbers.”^([5](#5))

Did the Prophet appropriate female slaves in conformity with the Koranic
injunction^([6](#6)) on concubinage? Biographers mention Raihãna, the
Jewess of Banu Kuraizah, chosen by the Prophet as his concubine after
she had refused to espouse Islam, that being the condition for legal
marriage. But Raihãna’s story does not figure prominently in the
canonical *ahãdîs*, which, while mentioning nine wives (apart from the
long-deceased Khadija) and two concubines, dilate only on Maria, the
handsome Coptic slave girl presented to the Prophet by the Christian
governor of Egypt. It is not clear why Maria, who had apparently turned
Muslim, was not given the benefit of legal marriage. That she was a
slave could be no objection, for the Prophet could well have manumitted
her. In fact, canonical *ahãdîs* refer to the similar case of Safiyya
with much fanfare. As Muslim writers make much of this case and cite it
as an example of the Prophet’s noble heart, I will describe it in some
detail.

Safiyya’s father Huyayya belonged to Banu Nazir. After the expulsion of
his tribe from Medina, he had taken refuge at Khaibar, and, because of
his warlike activities, had been assassinated by killers sent by the
Prophet with an express order. Her husband Kinãna was cruelly tortured
and murdered in cold blood after the conquest of Khaibar, again by the
Prophet’s express order. In the distribution of spoils, Safiyya actually
fell to the lot of Dihya, a handsome Muslim, in whose shape Gabriel is
said to have often visited the Prophet. The full story is told by Imam
Muslim on the authority of Anas, the Prophet’s personal attendant. As
Anas relates:

“We took the territory of Khaibar by force. There came Dihya and he
said: Messenger of Allah, bestow upon me a girl out of the prisoners. He
said: Go and get any girl. He made a choice of Safiyya. There came a
person to Allah’s Apostle and said: Safiyya is worthy of you only… When
Allah’s Apostle saw her he said \[to Dihya\]: Take any other woman from
among the prisoners… He then granted her emancipation and then married
her… On the way Umm Sulaim embellished and then sent her to the Holy
Prophet at night. Allah’s Apostle appeared as a bridegroom in the
morning” (*Sahih Muslim*, No. 3325).

This narrative tells its own story in the simplest language possible.
But to illustrate how devout Muslims view such examples of Sunnah, one
more word is necessary. Imam Muslim himself has entered this *hadîs* in
his collection, not as an example of *ghanîmah* (plunder) earned by the
Prophet from his *ghazwah* (expedition) but as an instance of the high
morality involved in emancipating a slave woman before marrying her!
Needless to say, Safiyya had not been a slave woman prior to her being
treated as lawful plunder. The learned Pakistani translator of *Sahih
Muslim* is not satisfied even with this elucidation. Not to be outdone
by the venerable Imam of aforetime, he has added his own encomium on the
Prophet’s noble character on the strength of this very *hadîs*. He
speaks of a Revelation (without actually citing it) that “her marriage
with the Holy Prophet was a dire necessity in the larger interest of the
Islamic State”!!  Nor does he stop even at that. He adds in so many
words that “It is easy to talk of noble things and high ideals, but it
is difficult to put them into practice.”!!! Obviously, he enters the
event in the register of the Prophet’s noblest deeds. Comment is
superfluous.^([7](#7))  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) These are Sir William Muir’s figures. Margoliouth says that the
camels numbered 150.

[²](#2a) His real name was Abu Hakm (father of wisdom). But as he was
resolutely opposed to Islam, the Prophet named him Abu Jahl (father of
folly).

[³](#3a) *Fai* is Koranic rather than Prophetic. “And that which Allah
gave as spoil to his Messenger from them, ye urged not any horse or
camel for the sake thereof. But Allah giveth lordship to His Messenger
over whom He will” (K 59/6).

[⁴](#4a) *The Life of Mahomet*, p. 320 and n.

[⁵](#5a) D.S. Margoliouth, *Mohammed and the Rise of Islam*, pp. 361-62.

[⁶](#6a) K 4/24; also see above.

[⁷](#7a) Margoliouth says that the Arabic word ‘Safiyya’ means ‘titbit’
i.e. an article specially selected by the conqueror out of the booty. He
denies that Safiyya had been her real name. Comment again is
superfluous.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
