+++
title = "18 Appendix II Jizyah and the Zimmî"

+++
**Appendix II**

**Jizyah and the Zimmî**

The imposition of *jizyah* on a vanquished infidel population being one
of the five fundamentals of *jihãd*, besides forcible conversions, mass
slaughter and the two kinds of *ghanîmah* (=plunder), a short discussion
of this tax on religion is essential for a full understanding of the
doctrine of *jihãd*. Needless to say, every single aspect of *jihãd* is
aimed at the ultimate Islamic objective of conquering the whole world
for Islam, but *jizyah* has a very special role to play in attaining
that objective. It is the only activity connected with *jihãd* which may
be called ‘bloodless’. As such this topic merits the closest attention.

It is astonishing that most Muslim historians of our times are out to
dismiss *jizyah* as a nominal tax on non-combatant non-Muslims imposed
more as a benevolent gesture than as a punishment for infidelity. The
reasoning behind this propaganda seems to run somewhat on the following
lines: in an Islamic state it is the Muslim population alone which is
burdened with compulsory military duty; the infidels are relieved from
that arduous task by making nominal payment of a trumpery sum; ergo,
*jizyah* is the ultimate expression of the Islamic state’s ultimate
benevolence towards its infidel subjects.

The only flaw in this shining piece of reasoning is its utter failure to
answer a simple but inescapable question: why should the Islamic state
be so hard upon its own people while it showers so much benevolence on
the accursed infidels? Muslim historians have never attempted to answer
this straightforward question.^([1](#1))

In truth, *jizyah* has nothing to do with military duty or exemption
from it. On the contrary, it is one of the worst devices thought out by
Allah in one of his blacker moods for crushing the unbelievers without
actually slaughtering them. As the Koran puts it: “Fight against such of
those who have been given the Scripture as believe not in Allah nor the
Last Day, and forbid not that which Allah hath forbidden by His
Messenger, and follow not the religion of truth, until they pay the
tribute readily, being brought low” (9/29).

This verse has already been explained in Chapter One, where it was
mentioned that *jizyah*, according to the letter of the Koran, is
intended only for Jews and Christians - the so-called People of the
Scripture (or the Book). The extension of the tribute to idolaters
outside Arabia was a development of later times and is nowhere expressly
mentioned in the Koran. But here I must point out that the above verse,
if it means anything, certainly does not mean any concern with military
duty from which the People of the Scripture were to be exempted. It
simply pronounces a dire punishment upon Jews and Christians for not
embracing Islam the moment they are called upon to do so. As everybody
knows, Jews and Christians do believe in a single God even though they
do not call him Allah. Also, they emphatically believe in the Last Day.
The verse in question, however, seems to allege that not all of them
cherish these beliefs and are to be punished for that very reason. This
would seem to imply that the concern here is with atheists born of
Jewish and Christian parentage rather than with believing Jews and
believing Christians. But when in the same breath the verse finds fault
with these putative atheists for failing to forbid what Allah “forbids
by His Messenger” and goes on to couple them with those who “follow not
the religion of truth”, the intention becomes clear enough. The verse
actually refers to all monotheists who have not embraced Islam and would
not do so willingly. For such people Allah himself pronounces *jizyah*
as a punishment, which is a punishment for infidelity and nothing else.
This is the plain meaning of the verse.

But this is not all. The verse indeed mentions non-Muslim monotheists
specifically, but by its very wording leaves room for including any and
every non-Muslim “who does not follow the religion of truth”. Indeed
such an extension is implied by the concluding words of the verse
itself. These concluding words emphatically specify the tax as a mark of
degradation for the payer, who - as the verse goes on to say in so many
words are to be “brought low” in paying it. Other renderings of the
verse include an addition which says that the tax is to be paid “with
one‘s own hands” - implying that *jizyah* can never be sent through a
messenger or an intermediary, however exalted the social position of the
infidel may be. In other words, the Koran makes little concession to the
position of *Kitãbîs* (People of the Book, i.e. Jews and Christians) in
the Islamic scheme of things. It pronounces degradation on all
non-Muslims to the uttermost limit.  
 

**The Addition in the Sunnah**

Nevertheless the Koran, in explaining *jizyah* as a mark of degradation
for non-Muslims, does not exhaust the subject. For one thing, it nowhere
mentions the rate of the taxation. Rather, surprisingly, the Hadis
literature also does not discuss it with the fullness which it bestows
on other topics. *Sahih Muslim*, for example, has only a single *hadîs*
concerned with this all-important subject. Beyond mentioning that “if
they refuse to accept Islam, demand from them the *Jizya”* (No. 4294),
it seems to avoid the topic altogether. To fill in the gap, we have to
examine the biographical *ahãdîs* for further information on *jizyah*.

But even these *ahãdîs* do not mention any uniform rate of taxation. As
mentioned in the course of this book, the Jews of Khaibar were the first
people to be treated as *kharãjguzãrs*, that is to say, the payers of
the poll-tax. But the tax imposed on these people consisted in leaving
them as tenants in their own lands - the rate of taxation, according to
Sir William Muir, being half the produce of these lands. This rate was
not applied to the Christian governor of Aila whom the Prophet
vanquished during the course of the Tabuk campaign (630 AD). The
Christian subjects of this monarch were called upon to pay a gold piece
(*dînãr*) per head per annum. According to D.S. Margoliouth, the Jews of
Aila had to pay a higher rate - one-quarter of their produce.
Margoliouth contrasts this rate with the rate of *zakãt* (=alms or
poor-due) imposed on Muslims and says that “twenty-five percent of the
produce means ten times the amount imposed on the Muslims as alms”. On
this reckoning, the Jews of Khaibar had to pay a poll-tax twenty times
the amount of the corresponding *zakãt* money.  
 

***Jizyah* in the Shariat**

The non-uniform rate of taxation imposed by the Prophet on the various
non-Muslim tribes of Arabia (and beyond) was a source of endless
controversy among the jurists of the ensuing ages; the Caliphs, starting
with Umar, did not follow the divergent practices of the Prophet but
sought to bring in a measure of uniformity in their own practice. The
school of jurisprudence according to Imam Hanîfah, enjoined their
practice as canonical. Umar divided the infidel population of his empire
into three classes – ‘the rich’, ‘the middling’, and 'the labouring
poor’. On the first class he imposed a tax of 48 *dirhems* per head per
annum, on the middling that of 24, and on the labouring poor 12
*dirhems*. As the *Hidãyah* puts it, “The common rate is fixed by the
Imam imposing upon every avowedly rich person a tax of forty-eight
*dirms* per annum or four *dirms* per month; and upon every person in
middling circumstances, twenty-four *dirms* per annum or two *dirms* per
month; and upon the labouring poor twelve *dirms* per annum or one
*dirm* per month.”^([2](#2))

It is not clear whether this fixed rate of taxation was intended for all
time to come or whether a percentage on the total income was
contemplated by the jurists of the school of Hanîfah in their
calculation of the rate. Certainly, the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb imposed
the same rate upon the Hindus of India in the seventh decade of the
seventeenth century. But even with the possible rise of the price index
since the first imposition of this rate, the poorest section of the
non-Muslim population had to bear the brunt of this ‘benevolent’
imposition. Jadunath Sarkar in his *History of Aurangzeb* discusses this
question at some length and says: “In violation of the modern canons of
taxation, the *jaziya* hit the poorest portion of the population
hardest. It could never be less than Rs. 31/3 on a man, which was the
money for nine maunds of wheat flour at the average market price at the
end of the 16th century. The State, therefore, at the lowest incidence
of the tax, annually took away from the poor man the full value of one
year’s food as the price of religious indulgence.” Such was the
‘benevolent’ nature of *jizyah* in Aurangzeb’s time.  
 

***Jizyah* as Retribution Money**

Incidentally, the *Hidãyah* brings out the true character of *jizyah*
with transcendent clarity. “The capitation tax,” it declares, “is a
species of punishment, inflicted upon infidels on *account of their
infidelity, whence it is termed Jizyat, which is derived from Jizya,
meaning retribution.”* Again, *“Capitation tax is a sort of punishment
inflicted upon infidels for their obstinacy in infidelity.”*[³](#3) The
author continues this reasoning to its logical end and gives his own
gloss on the all-important Koranic verse (9/29). He says in so many
words: “Whence it is that it cannot be accepted of the infidel if he
send it by the hands of a messenger, but must be exacted in a mortifying
and humiliating manner, by the collector sitting and receiving it from
him in a standing posture; (according to one tradition), the collector
is to seize him by the throat, and shake him saying ‘Pay your tax,
Zimmee’.”^([4](#4)) The *Hidãyah* thus makes short work of the modern
Muslim apologist’s attempt to hold up *jizyah* as the expression of the
Islamic state’s ultimate benevolence to infidels.

Indeed, the *Hidãyah* makes no bones about the long-term objective of
*jizyah*, which is nothing short of forcing the helpless *kharãjguzãr*
into the fold of Islam. “If a person becomes a Musulman, who is indebted
for any arrear of capitation tax, such arrear is remitted. The Prophet
has declared that ‘capitation tax’ is not incumbent upon Musulman.
(Hence this) temporal punishment for infidelity is remitted in
consequence of the faith.” Shaikh Burhanuddin Ali has explained the real
intention of *jizyah* with luminous perspicuity.

It is not that the military intention is wholly absent from the minds of
the authors of the Shariat. The retribution money extorted from
non-Muslims can be put to many an Islamic use, one of which is doubtless
the mounting of newer and fresher *jihãds* for bringing over newer and
fresher countries under the umbrella of Islam. The *Hidãyah* recognises
this “aid to the troops” of Islam as a lawful use of *jizyah*, and
rationalises the division of the *kharãjguzãrs* (=payers of *jizyah*)
into the three classes mentioned above by arguing that “capitation tax
is due in lieu of assistance (in *jihãd*) with person and property; but
as property is different with respect to being more or less, so in the
same manner is its substitute (i.e. *jizya*) different.”^([5](#5)) This
is the only species of exemption from military duty recognised by the
Shariat - it is for the replenishment of war-treasury, not for sparing
non-Muslims from arduous military duty.  
 

**The Meaning of *Zimmî***

In Islam, the *kharãjguzãrs* (=payers of *jizyah*) are termed *zimmîs*.
The literal meaning of this Arabic expression is “people under tutelage”
- in other words, people whom the Islamic state holds as hostages to
earn an adequate amount of retribution money by exploiting them till the
end of their days except when the paying of the tribute is terminated by
voluntary conversion. The term itself is an insulting one, but the
various disabilities imposed on *zimmîs* by the Shariat leave one
wondering whether the plain meaning of the term was not a hundred times
preferable to the provisions of the Shariat. Before we discuss some of
these provisions, a preliminary word is necessary.

The notion of *zimmî* is not Koranic, and even the Hadis mentions it
only in passing. Like so many oppressive measures against non-Muslims,
this notion in its fullness is credited to Umar who, on the strength of
these very measures, has come to occupy a place among Islamic heroes
which is second only to that of the Prophet. It was Umar who defined the
*zimmî’s* place in an Islamic state in a document which has been quoted
in full in Volume VI of *The History and Culture of the Indian People*
edited by R.C. Majumdar. I shall not discuss this document here, but set
forth only some of its provisions in the language of the
*Hidãyah*.^([6](#6))

\(1\) In the first place, the distinction between a Muslim and a *zimmî*
is one of the basic tenets of the Islamic state. This distinction has to
be maintained at all levels not excluding such matters as ‘dress or
equipage’. According to the *Hidãyah*, “It is not allowable for Zimmees
to ride upon horses, or to use armour, or to use the same saddle and
wear the same garments or headdresses as Musulmans. (Also) the Zimmees
must be directed to wear (a woolen rope called) Kisteej^([7](#7))
openly, on the outside of their clothes. They must be directed, if they
ride any animal, to provide themselves a saddle like (that) of an ass.
(This is because) the Musulmans are to be held in honour, contrary to
Zimmees who are not to be held in honour.  And if there were no outward
signs to distinguish Musulmans from Zimmees, these might be treated with
the same respect, which is not allowed. (This is why) the insignia
incumbent upon them to wear is woollen rope,… and not a silken belt.”

\(2\) The *Hidãyah* mentions many other modes of discrimination. “It is
requisite that the wives of Zimmees be kept separate from the wives of
Musulmans, both in the public roads and also in the baths. And it is
also requisite that a mark be set upon their dwellings, in order that
beggars who come to their doors may not pray for them. The learned have
also remarked that it is fit that Zimmees be not permitted to ride at
all except in cases of absolute necessity. (And if he rides) he must
alight wherever he sees any Musulmans assembled.”

\(3\) Can the *zimmî* be allowed to observe his religious practices?
Says the *Hidãyah*: “The construction of churches or synagogues in the
Musulman territory is unlawful; but if places of worship originally
belonging to Jews and Christians be destroyed or fall into decay they
are at liberty to repair them… If however… they build them in (a new)
situation, the Imam must prevent them.”

It is not necessary to enumerate all the other disabilities incumbent
upon a *zimmî* in an Islamic state. These few restrictions are an
adequate indication of his status in any country under the umbrella of
Islam. It has often been said that *zimmîs* are second class citizens.
The forgoing account shows that they are actually non-citizens in a
state of degradation worse than that of the beasts of burden.  
 

**The Modern Glorification of the Status of *Zimmîs***

It is interesting but hardly surprising to find that Muslim scholars who
have held up *jizyah* as the expression of Islam’s ultimate benevolence
to non-Muslims, have also hailed the status of *zimmî* in the Islamic
state as one of much consequence and considerable dignity. One such
scholar has even described the curse of zimmihood incumbent on a
non-Muslim in an Islamic state as a process of “raising the unbeliever
to the dignity of zimmee”. Such monstrous idealisation of such a
monstrous doctrine inevitably raises the question: does it not indicate
Islam’s utter loss of self-confidence in preaching the truth about
itself to a world which would reject its pretensions the moment that
truth comes to be examined in the court of objective and disinterested
scholarship?

This is a question the reader must answer for himself. I would only
remark that as early as 1916 Jadunath Sarkar had taken note of this
newfangled idealisation of *jizyah* and *zimmî* in his monumental work
on Aurangzeb, and demolished it with prodigious wealth of historical
facts and masterly presentation from which those facts originated. But
even he failed to kill the false propaganda regarding the meanings of
*jizyah* and *zimmî*, which in our times has become all the more
impudent and universal. This would seem to indicate that the proverbial
nine lives of the cat are as nothing compared to the life-span of
Islam’s propaganda gimmick. Such persistent falsification of well-known
facts about Islam can be combated only by an equal persistence with the
truth regarding those facts. *Jizyah* and zimmihood are two of the
monotonous gifts of Islamic statecraft to the annals of human history,
and they have to be shown up again and again for what they truly
represent, till an unmindful world takes note and makes adequate
preparation for preventing any repetition of mischievous
misrepresentation.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) “The theory of some modern writers that the *jiziya* was only
commutation money paid for exemption from military service is not borne
out by history, for it was as late as 10th May, 1855 that ‘the *jiziya*
as a tax on the free exercise of religion was replaced by a tax for
exemption from military service’ even in European Turkey (Jadunath
Sarkar, *History of Aurangzeb*, Chapter 34).

[²](#2a) *The Hedaya*, Book IX, Chapter 8. The author adds: “(This)
doctrine is adopted from Omar, Othman and Ali.”

[³](#3a) Ibid. Emphasis added.

[⁴](#4a) Ibid.

[⁵](#5a) Ibid.

[⁶](#6a) See also *Jizyah* by Harsha Narain.

[⁷](#7a) A woollen band.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
