+++
title = "08 CHAPTER 8 Catholic Ashrams Adopting and Adapting Hindu Dharma"

+++
CHAPTER 8  
Catholic Ashrams  
Adopting and Adapting Hindu Dharma

The Shantivanam Ashram looks like a rishi's home transported from Vedic
times to the banks of the sacred Cauvery River at a forested place near
Trichy in South India. A pilgrim's first impressions are strong, and
very Hindu; the elaborately colourful Hindu shrine; the bearded,
saffron-robed "swami" seated cross - legged on a straw mat; devotees
practising yogic meditations, even chanting Hindu scriptures.

But these impressions gradually prove false. First, the eye detects that
the courtyard shrine is for Saint Paul and that "puja" is actually, a
daily Mass, complete with incense, arati lamps, flower offerings and
prasadam. Finally, one meets the "swami", learning he is Father Bede
"Dayananda" Griffiths, a Christian "sannyasin" of impeccable British
background.

This is a Christian ashram, one of more than 50 in India, which are
variously described as "experiments in cross-cultural communication,"
"contemplative hermitages that revolve around both Christian and Hindu
ideals," or (less charitably) "institutions to brainwash and convert
India's unwary masses." Are these places to be endorsed by Hindus as
worthy attempts to share each other's spirituality? Or are they a
spiritual oxymoron, a contradiction of terms, because the Christians are
interested in sharing - dialogue is the term they use - only as a means
to conversions?

This special *Hinduism Today* report will focus on the issue of Catholic
adoption and adaptation of those things that Hindus regard as their
sacred heritage and spirituality, a policy the Catholics have named
"inculturation." It is a complex issue involving doctrine, cultural
camouflage, allegedly deceptive conversion tactics and more. Many
Catholics will be perplexed by the issues raised in this report. They
don't see what could be wrong with their selectively embracing those
parts of Hindu spiritual discipline and culture which they find
inspiring. And many Hindus, raised on decades of uncritical acceptance
of any form of religious expression, may simply not care one way or the
other.

Hindu leaders are more and more aware that the Indianization of
Christianity is a serious matter. They remember the fate of the American
Indian religion and the native spiritual traditions of Africa and South
America. More recently they recall that the Hawaiian people who numbered
nearly 500,000 a century ago, are now less than 50,000 - their culture
gone, their language spoken by a mere 500 people and their gods
worshipped by a dying handful of *Kahuna* priests. All this was the
effective and intentional bequest of a few dedicated Christian
missionaries - good people who thought their work necessary and divinely
ordained. The purpose which drove these early missionaries to eliminate
non-Christian faiths and cultures has not changed. It has become more
subtle, more articulately argued. It is certainly more of a problem to
Africans, but India's Hindus would do well to remain alert and informed.
That is why it is essential to examine and understand such places as
Father Bede's Shantivanam.

**Shantivanam**

Father Bede Griffiths is widely respected among Christians and Hindus
alike. In the West the Catholics hold him in awe, a present-day saint
whose lifetime association with the great religious traditions of
ancient India is considered a courageous pioneering.

Shantivanam's brochure describes its objectives: "The aim of the ashram
remains to establish a way of contemplative life, based alike on the
traditions of Christian monasticism and of Hindu sannyasa. Hinduism has
a tradition of sannyasa - 'renunciation' of the world in order to seek
God, or in Hindu terms, 'liberation' - which goes back many centuries
before the birth of Christ and has continued to the present day. Our aim
at Shantivanam is to unite ourselves with this tradition as Christian
sannyasis. Our life is based on the Rule of Saint Benedict, the
patriarch of Western monasticism \[the Ashram is an official monastery
of the Camaldolese Monks, founded in the 13th century in Italy\], and on
the teaching of the monastic Fathers of the Church, but we also study
Hindu doctrine (Vedanta) and make use of Hindu methods of prayer and
meditation (Yoga). The ashram seeks to be a place of meeting for Hindus
and Christians and people of all religions or none, who are genuinely
seeking God."

The residents of the ashram are generally Europeans, some of whom are
initiated into "sannyas" by Father Griffiths and then return to their
own countries. Others are novices of the order, sent for exposure to
this way of life. All participate fully in the Indian life style of the
place.

A November, 1984 article in *The Hindu* newspaper, published in Madras,
describes some of the ashramites: "A psychologist by profession, a young
lady from W. Germany, Maria, said she visited the ashram annually.
Before her experiencing this atmosphere here, she thought that the Bible
has no message for her and now after studying the Vedanta here she could
now say that her attitude towards the Bible and Christ had undergone
total transformation. She felt that there was nothing wrong with the
Christian religion. Mr. Desmond, a young lad from Bombay and a drug
addict said that after coming to the ashram he was a transformed man and
when he returned to Bombay after Christmas he would be a reformed man."
The article goes on to say: "Father Griffiths has so far initiated 20 to
30 persons belonging to different nations as sannyasis and sannyasinis
and all of them were spreading the message of this peaceful coexistence
of the Trinity and non-duality in their own countries."

The limits of Father Griffiths' experiment in inculturation are apparent
in his theological stance on certain central Hindu beliefs:
reincarnation, moksha and cycles of time. He has not adopted any Hindu
beliefs which would be considered heretical by the Catholic Church. In a
1984 interview by Renee Weber published in *Revision* magazine, Father
Griffiths said, "I consider reincarnation one of the most difficult
doctrines to reconcile with Christian faith. According to popular belief
the individual soul passes from body to body in a series of rebirths. I
consider this entirely unacceptable from a Christian point of view." In
regard to transcendent experience, the merging of the soul in God, the
Moksha of Hindu theology, Renee Weber asked, "Was there this
extraordinary openness and capacity for self-transcendence precisely in
Jesus? Or can it happen again?" Father Griffiths replied, "In the
Christian understanding, we would say no. He was open to the total
reality of God. The rest of us have varying degrees of openness to the
divine." Another area of difficulty is time. Hinduism conceives of time
as vast cycles of creation and dissolution. Father Griffiths' concept is
that time is strictly linear, starting at one point in the past and
ending at one point in the future, never repeating itself.

Though not covered in that particular interview, Father Griffiths would
also have had to affirm his concept of God conformed with the five
anathemas against pantheism stated by Vatican I and left unaltered by
Vatican II. An anathema is a forbidden belief, a belief which
contradicts the Catholic teaching. These forbidden five are: "1) Nothing
exists except matter. 2) God and all things possess one and the same
substance and essence. 3) Finite things, both corporeal and spiritual,
or at least spiritual, emanated from the divine substance. 4) Ale divine
essence becomes all things by a manifestation or evolution of itself. 5)
God is universal or indefinite being, which by determining itself makes
up the universe, which is diversified into genera, species and
individuals." The Catholics Church forbids its priests to believe or
preach any of these concepts, several of which are, of course, standard
parts of most Hindu theologies. This shows that on the most central
issue of theology - God - there is a vast chasm between Catholic and
Hindu belief.

Father Griffiths is an anomaly - a Hindu on the outside, a Catholic on
the inside. And he's not the only one.

**Jeevandhara Ashram**

Jeevandhara Ashram, another Catholic ashram which is near Rishikesh in
northern India, was founded by Ishapriya (Sister Patricia Kinsey) and
Vandana of the Society of the Sacred Heart. Considered the nun's
equivalent of the Jesuits, this order has 7,000 members world-wide and
deeply involved in education. Ishapriya was born in Britain, spent her
novitiacy in London and then a year in Rome. She was sent on mission to
India where she was deeply impressed by the spiritual values of the
country. She stayed on, first at the Divine Life Society in Rishikesh,
studying and eventually, she says, taking sannyas diksha from Swami
Chidananda. Vandana was born in Bombay, ran away from home at 16 or 17,
converted to Christianity and then entered the order, eventually
becoming the provencale (head) in India. she and Ishapriya took sannyas
together and founded the ashram. Like Shantivanam, the majority of the
people at the ashram are western Christians, usually Sacred Heart nuns.
They are also involved in missionary efforts to convert Hindus in the
local area. The ashram moved twenty miles north of Rishikesh due to
objections by local Hindus.

A correspondent for *Hinduism Today* met briefly with Ishapriya in
Carmel, California. She was conducting a six week retreat program in
Ashtanga Yoga at the Angelica Convent. The white-haired nun, about 50,
was dressed in a saffron sari and wore a large cross around her neck.
*Hinduism Today* inquired if there is any Christianity in her teachings.
She replied, "Of course, there is Christianity in my teachings, I am a
Catholic." We asked if she also teaches Catholicism in her ashram in
India. She said the Hindus who attend are aware that she is a Christian.
"There is no problem with that. They know that it is a Catholic ashram."
Sensing that he was asking about her motives she stated. "We are only
trying to make the Christians more aware. You are completely on the
wrong track. We are only trying to pray." When asked why she took
sannyas, she replied, "Sannyas is just where the spirit leads," and
quickly excused herself.

A Catholic nun's receiving sannyas from a Hindu swami seemed
questionable, so *Hinduism Today* contacted Sadhaka Kartikeyan of the
Divine Life Society at Rishikesh who was visiting San Francisco. He
stated, "Our swamis would never initiate a Christian into Sannyas.
Perhaps they were just given a mantram." Other Hindu leaders, including
the head of Kasi Mutt in Tirupanandal, confirmed that it would not be
possible for a non-Hindu to take sannyas. After all, sannyas is Hindu
monkhood.

The general attitude of the Order of the Sacred Heart toward Ishapriya
is one of deep reverence and respect. But outside the order, a Sister
explained, the mother Church remains uneasy with her Yoga teachings and
Eastern look and leanings.

**Hindu Reaction**

The general Hindu reaction to these ashrams is one of tolerant, even
loving acceptance and respect. *Sarvadharma samabhâva*, equal respect
for all religions, has long been a fundamental principle of Hindu
culture.[1](#1) Allowing another person to hold beliefs different from
one's own without attempting to change them, is dear to the Hindu's
heart, and he does, in actual practice, accept an enormous range of
beliefs within his own religion.[2](#2)

**Hindu History and Catholic Theology**

Yet, among those at the vanguard of Hindu renaissance there is
suspicion, resistance and even outright hostility as shown by comments
collected for *Hinduism Today* in India on the subject of Christian
ashrams. Here is a sampling: G.M. Jagtiani of Bombay wrote: "A
mischievous attempt is being made by some Christian missionaries to wear
the saffron robe, put tilak on their forehead, recite the Gita, and
convert the Hindus to Christianity." S. Shanmukham of the Hindu Munnani,
Kanyakumari, states: "Once I met an orange-robed sannyasin. I took her
to be a Hindu sannyasin. When asked, she said 'I have put on this dress
so that I can come in contact with Hindus very easily and tell them
about Christianity'." R. Chidambasaksiamma, Kanyakumari, said, "It seems
to be a sinister plan to make people accept Christ as God, the only God.
They adopt all the philosophies and practices of Hindus but would accept
only Jesus as God. It is only a development of their original plan of
Indianisation of Christianity."

At the root of these criticisms is a deep distrust of the Christians in
India. Imposed by force from the outside, Christianity is still
considered an unwelcome intrusion from the West. Even Mahatma Gandhi
stated that from the time Christianity was established in Rome in the
third century, "it became an imperialist faith as it remains to this
day." This unfortunate legacy has never been forgotten by the Hindus.
Though the military backing is no longer present, enormous sums of money
are sent into India for the use of the missionaries. A well-monied and
successful missionary is regarded as a threat to the national stability.

The official government document, *Madhya Pradesh Report on Christian
Missionary Activities* (1956) stated, "Evangelization in India appears
to be a part of the uniform world policy to revive Christendom for
re-establishing Western supremacy and is not prompted by spiritual
motives. The objective is apparently to create Christian minority
pockets with a view to disrupt the solidarity of the non-Christian
societies. The ulterior motive is fraught with danger to the security of
the State."

Christians are only three per cent of India's population, yet they
control 25% of all schools and 40% of all social service organizations.
Their Western affiliations give them political entree and cultural clout
beyond their numbers. Christians are widely viewed as not necessarily
strongly loyal to the nation, the Catholics in particular being thought
to be under the direct rule of the Vatican. The Madhya Pradesh report
also says, "Because conversion muddles the convert's sense of unity and
solidarity with his society, there is a danger of his loyalty to his
country and state being undermined."

New Delhi's Sita Ram Goel wrote a book on the Catholic threat in India
full of intellectual fire. *Papacy, Its Doctrine and History*[3](#3) was
published in response to the Pope's 1986 visit to India. This small
volume is a scathing account of the history of Christians in India. Some
excerpts: "Hindus at large were showing great aversion to Christianity
accompanied as it was by wanton violence, loud-mouthed outpourings of
the friars against everything which the Hindus cherished, killing of
Brahmins and cows wherever the newcomers had no fear of reprisals, the
extremely unhygienic habits of the Portuguese including their 'holy
men', and the drunken revelries in which they all indulged very
frequently. The only people who associated with the *paranghis* were
prostitutes, pimps and similar characters living on the fringes of Hindu
society," Goel explains the indifference which Hindus showed to the
Christian missionaries: "To an average Hindu, saintliness signified a
calm self-possession and contemplative silence. The paroxysms of these
strangers could only amuse him, whenever they did not leave him dead
cold." Finally Goel mentions the problem which continues to face the
Christians: "Christianity had failed to register as a religion with the
masses as well as the classes of Hindu society. They continued to look
at this imported creed as an imposition with the help of British
bayonets."

It is against this background that any activities of the Christians are
viewed. The early missionaries were not at all above acquiring converts
by force, money or deception. And it's reported that unscrupulous
tactics still abound. The present Catholic ashrams have inherited a
history of intrigue and subterfuge. Here is a description from the
*Madhya Pradesh Report*: "Robert De Nobili (A Catholic Jesuit priest)
appeared in Madura in 1607 clad in the saffron robes of a Sadhu with
sandal paste on his forehead and the sacred thread on his body. He gave
out that he was a Brahmin from Rome. He showed documentary evidence to
prove that he belonged to a clan that had migrated from ancient India.
He declared that he was bringing a message which had been taught in
India by Indian ascetics of yore and that he was only restoring to
Hindus one of their lost sacred books, namely the 5th Veda, called
Yeshurveda (Jesus Veda). It passed for a genuine work until the
Protestant Missionaries exposed the fraud about the year 1840. This
Brahmin Sannyasi of the 'Roman Gotra', Father De Nobili, worked for 40
years and died at the ripe age of 89 in 1656. It is said that he had
converted about a lakh of persons but they all melted away after his
death."[4](#4)

Critics also point to more recent examples of hidden motives in
establishing ashrams and adopting the appearance of sannyasins. Noted
Indian writer Ram Swarup in his pamphlet *"Liberal" Christianity*[5](#5)
quoted the intentions of one of the founders of Shantivanam, Father J.
Monchanin: "Fr. J. Monchanin himself defines his mission in these terms:
'I have come to India for no other purpose than to awaken in a few souls
the desire (the passion) to raise up a Christian India. It will take
centuries, sacrificed lives and we shall perhaps die before seeing any
realizations. A Christian India, completely Indian and completely
Christian will be something so wonderful the sacrifice of our lives is
not too much to ask."

It is precisely this goal, which can only be described as the spiritual
genocide of Hindu dharma, which motivates leaders like Swarup and
movements like VHP and RSS to protect India's religious traditions
against overt conversion efforts.

**The Catholic Response**

Catholic leaders *Hinduism Today* spoke with consider all of these
complaints to be problems of the past. Father John Keane, Ecumenical and
Interreligious Affairs officer of the Archdiocese of San Francisco said,
"The main thrust of Pope John Paul II is 'irrevocable commitment' to the
unity of the Churches \[the various Christian sects\] and to fostering
dialogue and cooperation amongst the religions of the world. The Church
began to realise that within non-Christian religions there is truth,
there is goodness and there is beauty and it is about time we began to
recognize it. Whatever policies were directed toward non-Christian
religions before, the Church has said \[through the Second Vatican
Council\] are not according to what the Church through Jesus Christ has
been trying to say," In other words, the Church has seen the errors of
its ways.

When asked about militant or devious conversion tactics, he said, "Well,
you know they're called 'Rice Christians.' The Church is getting nowhere
through that. That type of missionary zeal is no longer really
appreciated. We don't make friends with anyone by doing those kind of
things. What \[I have explained\] is the official attitude of the Roman
Catholic Church towards the Hindu tradition. If anyone in India feels
that the Hindu tradition is pagan and has to be rubbed out, ignored or
fought against violently, they haven't understood what the Vatican
Council is trying to say."

**Vatican II**

The widespread support for these Catholic ashrams by the official Church
is one part of the vast fall-out from the Second Vatican Council
(Vatican H) held from 1962 to 1965. Vatican II was an attempt to
confront the challenge to Catholicism in the 20th century, yet it
apparently precipitated, through its decision, an even greater crisis
than it intended to solve. Many new interpretations of doctrine were set
forth - one on non-Christians was a major one. As a result of numerous
fundamental changes, the Catholic Church faces a crises within itself.
In America alone the Catholic Church is losing members at the rate of
*one thousand per day*. In 1984 in the United States, 1,100 new priests
were ordained compared with 14,000 in 1964. The conclusion from these
figures is drawn by such persons as Bishop Jon Diegal of the American
Catholic Church of the Malabar Rite: for its very survival, the Catholic
Church must make an impact in Asia and Africa before it dwindles in the
West.

One result of Vatican II was a new attitude toward Hinduism and other
religions, released by Paul VI in 1964: "\[The Church\] regards with
sincere reverence those ways of conduct and of life, those precepts and
teachings which, though differing in many aspects from the ones she
holds and sets forth, nonetheless often reflect a ray of that Truth
which enlightens all men. The Church, therefore, exhorts her sons, that
through dialogue and collaboration with the followers of other
religions, carried out with prudence and love and in witness to the
Christian faith and life, they recognize, preserve and promote the good
things, spiritual and moral, as well as the socio-cultural values found
among these men."

In regard to Hinduism, he stated: "In Hinduism men explore the divine
mystery and express it both in the limitless riches of myth and the
accurately defined insights of philosophy. They seek release from the
trials of the present life by ascetical practices, profound meditation
and recourse to God in confidence and love."

Vatican II's new Code of Canon Law offers this definition of *dialogue*:
"By the witness of their lives and their message, let the missionaries
enter into a sincere dialogue with those who do not yet believe in
Christ. Accommodating their approach to the mentality and culture of
their audience, they will open up the way for them to reach the point
where they are ready to accept the Good News \[the Gospel of Christ\]."

*Inculturation* has become a very central aspect of the relation of the
Church to Asia and Africa and is the basis for the present existence of
Catholic ashrams. A thorough exposition of the idea was made by the
Third General Conference of Latin American Bishops in January of 1978.
Here are statements from their report:

"The Church must make the attempt to translate the Gospel message into
the anthropological language and symbols of the culture into which it is
inserted. This is what is meant by inculturation of the Gospel. Yet the
Church ought also to regard culture with a critical eye, denouncing sin
and amending, purifying and exorcizing its counter-values and
overthrowing its idolatrous values. The Church leads people on to
abandon false ideas of God, unnatural behavior and the illegitimate
manipulation of person by person. The Church inspires local cultures to
accept through faith the lordship of Christ, without whose grace and
truth, they would be unable to reach their full stature." Translation:
"Let them keep those cultural forms we approve, but make them
Catholics."

In a lengthy interview with *Hinduism Today*, Father Frank Podgorski,
Director of Asian Area Studies at Seton Hall University, New Jersey
\[USA\], spoke on the subject of the new approach of the Catholic
Church. He is a noted scholar in Asian studies and the author of the
popular book, *Hinduism: A Beautiful Mosaic*. He said, "I don't deny
that there have been difficulties in the past, and that there are
difficulties in the reality of the present. But as part of the official
Church thrust today, there is a call for reverence, respect, a call for
making the Hindu a better Hindu, allowing the Hindu to be a better
Hindu. In Africa, in recent days, after the India trip, Pope John Paul
II called for a truly African Church to emerge. An African Church in
which the African spirit would enter in and enrich the Church and make
it more Catholic and by that he talks about basic customs entering into
the tradition of the Church. Now we're talking really about adapting the
natural habits in such a way so that the teaching of Christ, so that
Christ may more fully communicate with the spirit of Africa and that
means adapting natural prayer forms and things of that nature. So just
as yoga may be adapted, so may various other ways."

**Hindu/Catholic Dialogue: The Future**

Father Podgorski's statement that "we're not talking about changing the
Church theologically" is crucial and fraught with ramifications for the
Hindu. As long as the Catholic Church continues to claim a divine
monopoly on salvation, its tolerance for other faiths will be incomplete
and its adaptation to other religions only superficial adjustments for
the purpose of expansion.

Vatican II made the Church's ultimate stance crystal clear: "\[The
Council\] relies on sacred Scripture and Tradition in teaching that this
pilgrim Church is necessary for salvation. Christ alone is the mediator
of salvation and the way of salvation. He presents himself to us in his
body, which is the Church. When he insisted expressly on the necessity
for faith and baptism, he asserted at the same time the necessity for
the Church which men would enter by the gateway of baptism. This means
that it would be impossible for men to be saved if they refused to enter
or to remain in the Catholic Church, unless they were unaware that her
foundation by God through Jesus Christ made it a necessity."

It is difficult for the Hindu to reconcile this statement with the
declaration, on Non-Christian religions made by the same council.
Clearly while striving for true tolerance, the Church is still anchored
by its fundamental "one path, one church" dogma. On the one hand the
Church admits that there is truth and beauty in other religions. On the
other it declares the Catholic Church essential for salvation.

**Practical Applications of Dialogue and Inculturation**

Hindus who have heard these semantic posturings and seen Hindu children
slowly drawn away from their faith criticise this approach as clever
maneuvering. Ram swarup in his *"Liberal" Christianity* pamphlet notes:
"Their procedure is not to denounce Hinduism forthright: it is to take
different categories of Hindu thinking and after exhausting all the
positive points that Hinduism provides as solutions, proceed to show
that Christianity gives fuller and ultimate solution to those and all
other problems." He has quoted here from the book entitled *Indian
Interiority and Christian Theology* which is a summary of a meeting by
Christian theologians of India at Almora. Swarup recounts their
evaluation of Bhakti: "Hindu Bhakti too has more demerits than merits.
Its chief defects are that (1) 'the notion of love itself is not
perfect;' (2) 'there is no integration between knowledge and love,'- one
has to choose between them; and (3) it lacks a 'perfect concept of
alterity \[that God and His creation are separate\] and there is no
proper concept of sin.' Nevertheless, the Bhakti of a Hindu could still
be a preparation for the final confrontation with the personal God who
manifests Himself in the Christian Revelation.''' Swarup, who considers
his religion the most enlightened known to man, is offended by the
Almora conclusions.

A comparison might best illustrate Hindu concerns. Let us imagine that
one day a Muslim missionary arrives in a poor section of America such as
a part of the Catholic Hispanic (Mexican Origin) section of San
Francisco. Well supplied with zeal and petrodollars from his own
country, he learns Spanish, builds a Muslim cathedral along the lines of
a Catholic building, outfitting it with pews, organs, choirs and so
forth. Preaching from a Christian Bible appropriately edited according
to the Koran, he puts on the clerical collar and black robes of a
Catholic Priest and holds Sunday services which look just like Mass,
except that prayers are to Allah and Mohammed instead of Jesus. In
ministering to the local people, he tells them that his Islamic faith is
just a slight variation of Christianity, one which puts the crowning
touches on it. Their father's religion, Catholicism was, he says, flawed
but it is a good preparation for Islam. He gives loans to those in need,
which need not be repaid if one joins his Church. He opens an orphanage
and raises the children as Muslims though their parents are Christians.
When accused of deceiving the people, he says he is only adapting his
religion to the local context and expressing his Muslim charity and
divine call to evangelize.

In this situation, would not the local Catholic leaders be offended?
Would they not point out that this preacher was making an unfair and
undue impact because of his foreign funding? They would ask why he did
not simply come forward as he was, a Muslim, and not pretend that his
religion was only an "improved" version of Christianity. They would
challenge his right to wear the vestments their community honored, to
sing the hymns their mystics composed, usurp symbols held to be holy, to
draw their people away from Christ, thereby dividing the families and
pitting wife against husband, father against son and neighbor against
neighbor.

This is the situation the Hindu finds himself in, though it has
developed over several hundred years. Christian missionaries have
adopted Hindu ways of life, Hindu religious symbols, architecture,
worship forms and declared themselves as Swamis. A Catholic priest who
calls himself "swami" instantly attains the status and authority of a
holy man in Hindu society, which he can use to make converts. By using
Sanskrit terminology in his sermons he implies a close relationship of
Hindu theology to Catholic theology, a relationship which does not
really exist. Such missionaries speak authoritatively on Hindu
scriptures and argue that their \[Christian\] teachings are consonant
with everything Hindu, but add a finishing touch, a "fullness," to the
traditional faith.

Hindus are seriously questioning whether yoga, puja, and sannyas, which
are so deeply rooted in particular Hindu theological concepts, can
ethically be adopted by Christianity. Christians don't believe in the
practice of Yoga as the means to God-Realization - as taught by Hindus.
Puja is based upon an understanding of Gods and Devas which Catholics do
not share. And finally sannyas is Hindu monasticism, rooted in Hindu
beliefs, leading not to heaven and Jesus but to moksha - the Hindu's
realization of Absolute Truth.

**The Future**

As the 21st century nears, Catholics are more interested than ever in
India and in Hinduism, as indicated by the Pope's January visit to the
subcontinent and by a growing number of faculty and departments in US
Catholic universities dedicated to Asian Studies. As they have drawn
closer to Hinduism, their history and motives in India and elsewhere
have come under scrutiny.

Hindu spiritual leaders and intellectuals are open to the dialogue
Catholics seek, but not if cooperation and brotherliness opens Hindu
families to unethical conversion strategies. Obviously, the Catholic
Church will legitimately adopt certain outer forms from Indian culture
to serve existing members, but these have ethical limits. Among those
actions of the Church which Hindus consider exceed these limits are the
priests' and nuns' adoption of Hindu vestments and religious titles like
"swami" and participation in non-Catholic sacraments such as sannyas.
The misleading use of Hindu scripture and yoga teachings must also be
examined, as should Catholic use of social and educational services
which should not subtly erode Hindu faith or take advantage of Indian
poverty to convert. Ethical guidelines must be crafted that allow
Catholics to attend wholly to their members' spiritual needs, but do not
impinge unscrupulously on Hindus.

Hindus continue to be wary of Christian expansionism and criticism of
Hindu culture and theology. An energetic Hindu renaissance has turned
wariness into open challenge to Christian conversions, with results yet
to be seen. Still, Hindu respect all the great faiths, honor their
spirituality. The difference today is that they demand that the Sanatana
Dharma be equally respected and honored in the Vedic spirit of "Truth is
one, paths are many."

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This is not true. The slogan, *sarva-dharma-samabhâva*, was
coined by Mahatma Gandhi in recent times, and extended to Christianity
and Islam. The medieval and modern Hindu acharyas have never accepted
the prophetic creeds as *dharmas*.

[2](#2a) This is true if the beliefs do not lead to aggression. Hindus
who extend tolerance towards doctrines of intolerance are not aware of
their tradition vis-a-vis âsurika belief systems. They have become
victims of the motivated propaganda, now internalised by many Hindus,
that Hindus can and should tolerate, even respect, every doctrine
howsoever devilish.

[3](#3a) Published by Voice of India in January, 1986

[4](#4a) The Niyogi Report seems to have swallowed the missionary
propaganda about the extent of De Nobili's sucess. He had converted only
120 Hindus.

[5](#5a) Published in 1982 in *Manthan*, a quarterly from New Delhi, and
included in *Hinduism vis-a-vis Christianity and Islam* published by
Voice of India, 1982. Reprinted in 1984, this book has been enlarged in
a new edition brought out in 1993.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
