+++
title = "15 CHAPTER 12         The First Dialogue"

+++
CHAPTER 12  
The First Dialogue

*Hinduism Today* invited some interesting letters from its readers,
Hindus as well as Christians. They are reproduced as below:

  
HINDUISM TODAY, APRIL-MAY 1987

Catholic Ashrams

The article on the above subject in your November-December issue exposes
a fraud which Catholic missionaries have been practising upon unwary
Hindus for a long time. An average Hindu does not know that the
missionary clad in ochre robes is no sadhu, but a scheming impostor. So
long as the Catholics stick to their exclusive theology, they will
remain aliens in the land of Sanatana Dharma, no matter what disguises
they don and what strategies of conversion they design... They are
turning \[Jesus\] into a co-conspirator in their bid to subvert Hindu
society and culture.

**Vijaylakshmi Jain  
Kamala Nagar, Delhi**

 

The Preaching Balance

With reference to your long article and supporting editorial
(Nov./Dec.,1986) on the "Catholic Ashrams," you conclude: "Let Catholics
tend their own flock as they wish. All the Hindu asks is to be left
alone to follow his dharma." This seems to me either anachronistic,
ill-informed or disingenuous. If all the Hindu asks is to be left alone,
why have these shores been saturated with gurus and swamis propagating,
not just following, their dharma, especially these last decades? And as
you know, their constituency has been largely the indigenous
Judeo-Christian, not the transplanted Indian, a matter rather gleefully
celebrated elsewhere in this issue. Moreover, when I look at a charlatan
like Rajneesh or a mercenary like Maharishi (whatever their standing in
India, even if deplored), opposite a now rather benighted Bede
Griffiths, I cannot help but think that you are getting the better of
the exchange.

Dr. Christopher Nugent  
University of Kentucky, Lexington

 

Catholic Ashrams

In our ashram we work on the basis of dialogue. It is a Christian
ashram, just as other ashrams are Hindu, but we leave people...to follow
any path to which they are drawn. I think that we are moving into a new
age where people are learning to live with different religions in mutual
respect. On the sociological level the problem of conversion remains,
but on the level of prayer and meditation we transcend that level. I
look on sannyasa as a state transcending creed and caste and all
dharmas. One of the two founders of our ashram, Abhishiktananda, works
very convincingly on this subject in his book *The Further Shore*. He
was a personal friend of Swami Chidananda of Rishikesh. I hope that you
are satisfied with this point of view. I feel that it is initiating a
new understanding of Hindu-Christian relations.

Father Bede Griffiths  
Tiruchi, S. India

 

Re: a "Catholic Sannyasini"

I am writing in response to your concerns which you have brought to the
attention of the Holy Father \[the pope\]. We are presently checking
with the proper Superiors concerning the activities of Sister Patricia
Kinsey, RSCJ, \[alias Ishapriya\]. It is our sincere hope that we will
be able to clarify the situation through these contacts and insure that
nothing is being done to hinder honest, open and mutually tolerant
relationships between Hindus and Catholics

V. Fagiolo Seer  
Rome, Italy

 

The J.R. Ewing Syndrome  

Your editorial "The J.R. Ewing Syndrome" brings to light the methods
which today's Christian missionaries are employing to take advantage of
India's poverty, illiteracy and simple culture. The question is why do
the Christian missionaries find it so easy to dupe the Hindu masses. As
you stated, the Hindu's respect for all religions is one cause. Other
causes could be our lack of social service spirit, lack of organized
religious bodies aiming at the spiritual uplift along with the social
uplift of the masses.

Anjna Gupta  
Saratoga, Illinois

 

HINDUISM TODAY, OCTOBER 1987

Hinduising Christianity

Your editorial in the January 1987 issue portrays the state of the
majority of Christian sects. In this era of enlightenment when frontiers
of knowledge are rapidly expanding, one cannot but pity their
obscurantist attitude. The "J.R. Ewing Syndrome" very appropriately
describes their deluded state. Since the establishment of the Church,
due to vested interests, they have been brainwashed into the belief of
"One Way- One Saviour." Hinduising Christianity in India seems to be
their last ditch battle. We Hindus have suffered due to our indifferent
attitude. We must give up complacency and organize ourselves to foil
these "pseudo Christian Hindus" in their attempts to increase the number
of converts. In this you are rendering yeoman service to the Hindu
cause. Your paper is peerless among its kind.

Dr. S.G. Balani  
Bombay, India

 

A Jesuit Writes

I am a Jesuit Catholic priest and professor of Hinduism (at Boston
College). A colleague recently pointed out to me your article
(Nov./Dec., 1986) on "Catholic Ashrams". On the whole I was quite
impressed with the article and the questions it raises. While I have
visited some of the Christian ashrams mentioned and appreciate the
efforts being made, I too have wondered about the extent to which
Catholicism is being "dressed up" as Hindu without a sufficiently deep
intellectual basis and real openness to new images and ideas not
traditionally Catholic, and about how all this appears to Hindus. Your
article raises these issues quite forcefully and well. I am curious what
kinds of responses you have received, whether you think there is a valid
level on which discussion might be pursued, etc. I ask this simply
because it seems it would be a shame to let such a well-presented
argument pass by without being taken seriously by all concerned. Thank
you for the provocative piece.

Francis X. Clooney, S.J.  
Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
