+++
title = "01 PREFACE"

+++
**PREFACE**

A court order in 1986 threw open for Hindu worship the gates of the
temple-turned-mosque at the Rãmajanmabhûmi at Ayodhya. Hindus were
overjoyed, and started looking forward to the coming up of a grand Rãma
Mandir at the sacred site. But they were counting without the stalwarts
of Secularism in the Nehruvian establishment. It was not long before a
hysterical cry was heard – “Secularism in danger!”

The Marxist-Muslim combine launched a two-pronged campaign. On the one
hand, they proclaimed that Muslims had destroyed no Hindu temples except
those few which were stinking with hoarded wealth or had become centres
of local rebellions, and that Islam as a religion was never involved in
iconoclasm. On the other hand, they accused the Hindus of destroying any
number of Buddhist, Jain and Animist shrines in the pre-Islamic days.

As a student of India’s history, ancient as well as medieval, I could
see quite clearly that they were playing the Goebbelsian game of the Big
Lie. But they could not be countered because they had come to dominate
the academia and control the mass media during the heyday of the Nehru
dynasty. Most of the prestigious press was owned by Hindu moneybags. But
they had placed their papers in the hands of the most brazen-faced
Hindu-baiters.

The most unkindest cut of all, however, came from the Vishva Hindu
Parishad and the Bharatiya Janata Party. They were doing nothing towards
debunking Secularist lies about Hinduism vis-a-vis Buddhism and Jainism.
But they were trumpeting from the house-tops that Islam did not permit
the destruction of other people’s places of worship, and that *namãz*
offered in a mosque built on the site of a temple was not acceptable to
Allãh! They were laying the blame for the destruction of the Rãm Mandir
not on Islam as an ideology of terror but on Bãbur as a foreign invader!

The only ray of light in this encircling gloom was Arun Shourie, the
veteran journalist and the chief editor of the *Indian express* at that
time. On February 5, 1989, he frontpaged an article, *Hideaway
Communalism*, showing that while the Urdu version of a book by Maulana
Hakim Sayid Abdul Hai of the Nadwatul-Ulama at Lucknow had admitted that
seven famous mosques had been built on the sites of Hindu temples, the
English translation published by the Maulana’s son, Abul Hasan Ali Nadwi
(Ali Mian) had eschewed the “controversial evidence”. He also published
in the *Indian Express* three articles written by me on the subject of
Islamic iconoclasm. This was a very courageous defiance of the ban
imposed by Islam and administered by Secularism, namely, that crimes
committed by Islam cannot even be whispered in private, not to speak of
being proclaimed in public.

Finally, VOICE OF INDIA published in April, 1991 Volume I of a projected
series - *Hindu Temples: What Happened to Them*. It was a collection of
relevant articles by Arun Shourie, Harsh Narain, Jay Dubashi, Ram
Swarup, and myself. An important part of the volume was a list of 2000
Muslim monuments built on the sites and/or with the materials of Hindu
temples. This list became famous all over the country as soon as it came
out.

Meanwhile, the evidence I had collected regarding Islamic iconoclasm
could already cover several, and much bigger volumes. VOICE OF INDIA
published in May, 1991 Volume II of the series. It was devoted
exclusively to Islamic evidence, historical as well theological. It was
received very well, particularly by the world of scholarship. Only the
prestigious newspapers and periodicals in this country ignored it
completely; they did not even acknowledge it in their “Books Received”
column. But an extensive review written by the Belgian scholar, Koenraad
Elst, was published by VOICE OF INDIA in 1992 under the title
*Negationism in India: Concealing the Record of Islam*.

This second edition of Volume II is a thoroughly revised and somewhat
enlarged version of the first edition. Its main merit is that the
lengthy chapters in the earlier edition have been divided into smaller
ones, and placed under several well-defined sections. A new Appendix on
the meaning of the word “Hindu” has been added. And the Appendix which
carries the Questionnaire For the Marxist Professors, has been
considerably expanded by inclusion of correspondence between myself and
Professor Romila Thapar, the doyen of Marxist historians.

I take this opportunity to point out that the subject of this volume is
not so much the destruction of Hindu temples as the character of Islam -
an imperialist ideology of terrorism and genocide masquerading as a
religion, in fact, as the only true religion. It is high time for Hindus
to see Islam not with its own eyes but from the viewpoint of the great
spiritual vision which is their inheritance.  
 

New Delhi 

<div align="right">

SITA RAM GOEL

</div>

25 March 1993   
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
