+++
title = "CV-life"
+++

Source: [TW](https://twitter.com/GuruAnaerobic/status/1673016289638400004)

Never Had A CV

What's a CV? It's the acronym for Curriculum Vitae, which means, 'I need a job, in Latin. When I left school I was pretty clueless. I hadn't been taught there were ways to live other than being a full-time employee. I'd been brainwashed into conformity. I put on my only suit and went to an employment agency who told me I needed a CV to help me get a job. I had no idea what a CV was, and I didn't know Latin because I went to a modern school where it was regarded as an unnecessary, dead language. [Note: All the top private schools teach Latin, so they must know something that shit schools don't. If you're a normal street kid in a gang, and you teach yourself Latin, it will confuse the hell out of the people you meet they won't be able to bracket you. This one thing can help alter your life, not necessarily because you can read Latin shit, but that any preconceived notions that people have about you will change].

As I was just out of school my CV only contained my school history, exam results, hobbies and interests eleven years of schooling reduced to this. The employment agency also gave me a twenty minute maths and english test which was so easy I completed it in seven seconds. So, now I was registered with the agency. It worked because I got an interview at a bank within a week. Unfortunately, the interview went well and they employed me.

For about a year I was happy, I had money in my pocket, and I worked in the centre of an exciting City. But it didn't last. A sense of unease started to creep in, the novelty was wearing off I began to feel trapped. I remember looking at the older employees at the bank; they looked unhealthy and half-dead, devoid of vitality. This wasn't what I wanted. I quit.

I hadn't yet figured out that it wasn't the bank which was the problem, but employment itself. After the bank, the jobs I had were sales related. Sales jobs don't give a shit about your exams, qualifications, or that you do macramé in your spare time- all they care about is that you can sell. They filter out the hopeless applicants in the interview (or during the phone call for the interview); the people who pass normally have a period, say, of two weeks where they are thrown into the deep end, sink or swim. If they can't sell, they're out. I remember having an interview on the 33rd floor of a building in Canary Wharf (the centre of finance and fraud, in London) no CV was asked for. I passed, of course. On the first day I noticed the mix of salespeople, it was completely diverse. The employer didn't care who we were, what age, what colour, what 'gender' or how we dressed. It was still a bullshit job though, because most jobs are bullshit - but a CV didn't mean anything to them. Note: They regarded degrees the same way. A degree doesn't mean diddly-squat when it comes to selling. They ran an evolutionary system, survive or die. The most effective system there is.

I promised myself to never again have a CV. Further, I realised that the jobs which required a CV were precisely the type of job I didn't want. Any jobs that needed a CV, I filtered out. A CV is like, "I've been a good boy, been employed, done all sorts of amazing work-related things, and was a key member of the sales force (as if). I like travel, reading and socialising with friends. Once I cycled from London to Paris and raised £2k for my local hospice": Translated: "Please hire me, please hire me, I'm desperate. I hate my job, the pay is shit and I' m going nowhere."

Ok, so I lied - I did have a CV but only for a year or two until I came to my senses. The CV experts tell you how a CV should be presented, and that it shouldn't show long periods of unemployment well, that's people like me fucked; I spent half my life gainfully unemployed - a CV would be pure fiction. The thing is, most employed people lie on their CV; this is called 'tailoring it to the job you're applying for'.

What do you want? You can have a 'CV Life' or a 'Non-CV Life'. The majority choose the former because they don't know any better. When you're employed in the type of shit job which requires a CV, you are surrounded by other people like you. You socialise with them. Then you marry one of them. Then you have kids. Then you brainwash your kids into the same world. A self-perpetuating loop of zombiefication. A living hell of slavery where slaves give birth to, and raise, other slaves. There are definitely people around who are happy with slavery, it makes them feel secure; they are born with the slavery gene. There are others whose environment creates it in the way a long-term prisoner becomes institutionalised. So, it' s possible the slavery mindset is one part nature, one part nurture. If you have a predisposition for enslavement', and you are surrounded by that mindset as you grow-up, you become willing fodder for the slave nation. We have to ask ourselves, is the zombie happy being a zombie? They may well be. They go to zombie pubs, watch zombie sports, form zombie institutions and talk zombie-talk.

If you are happy living in Zombie-World, be my guest. Work all your life, retire, then die. All of it will be summarised in your CV which your relatives can keep on their mantelpiece, next to the urn of your ashes.