+++
title = "18 XI"

+++
**XI**

*Statement made by Lt. B. W. O’Connor of 2 Marhattas.*

I recovered two married ladies from a Muslim house in Chak No. 32,
District Sargodha.  Actually they had been taken away from the Lalian
Camp by the police guard of the camp at 2 p.m. on the 31st October,
1947.  On my arrival, I received reports about this abduction from their
husbands and went in search of them. I searched the above chak and
recovered them at about 10-30 a.m. on the 1st November, 1947.  I have
now brought them to the D. A.-V. College Camp.  Their statements should
also be taken separately if it is so desired.

<div align="right">

Sd/- B. W. O’Connor, Lt.  
1-11-1947.

</div>

**XII**

*Statement of Sh. Santosh Kumari, wife of Puran Nath Sethi (20) Care of
Garrison Engineer, Ranchi.*

My father  Ch.  Manohar Lal Anand, Overseer, was employed in Dandot
factory at Dandot.  A refugee train left Pind Dadan Khan on September
23, 1947.  My parents and younger sister, aged 9. and two brothers, aged
4 and 13, and my daughter of one year, were with me in the train.  This
train reached Kamoke Railway Station at 6 p.m. the same day and was
stopped there by the Muslim Military escort with the train.  They said
that there was danger ahead.  They further said that the train would
stop at Kamoke Railway Station for the night.  We spent the entire night
in the train.  The Muslim escort was on the platform.  Next morning at 8
a.m. Kamoke police came there and searched the train for weapons. 
During the night an attack was apprehended but it did not materialise,
as they knew that refugees had a lot of arms and would be able to defend
themselves.  During the search the police took possession of all the
weapons which were with the refugees.  The military officer incharge of
the train at first did not agree to the search and he told the police
that a search would be conducted at Lahore station.  Shah Didar Hussain,
Sub-Inspector of Police, Kamoke, however, insisted that he must carry
out the search then and there.  When the search was made a lot of
ornaments and cash were taken away and at this even the Military escort
consented to the search.  After this police, led by the said
Sub-Inspector wanted to attack the train, but once again the Military
officer told him that he would prevent the attack on the train.  The
Sub-Inspector aimed his pistol at the Military officer and made him
agree to the attack on the train.  At about 12 p.m. a concerted attack
was made on the train by the police and military and the armed mob.  The
attack continued till 5 p.m. The attackers had with them knives, spears
and other lethal weapons.  Military and police fired at those refugees
who got down from the train and tried to escape.  No man was spared. 
Women and children were snatched away and taken to the neighbouring
villages round Kamoke.  A Muslim resident of Gakhar caught hold of me
and dragged me out of the train and threw me on the railway platform. 
At this I became unconscious and when I regained my consciousness, I
found myself in the house of this Muslim’s relative.  When I was dragged
from the train my baby girl was with my mother.  When I was thrown on
the platform I saw my father still alive.  Only 2-3 male refugees were
on the platform and the remaining had been finished.  The women of the
household in the house of the Muslim asked me to remove my bloodstained
clothes, which I did.  They gave me instead old and worn out clothes
which I put on.  The women left me and I went upstairs.  They also tried
to dissuade me from crying.  After they had gone I dozed off and was
awakened by a girl who came to snatch away the “dopatta” which had been
given to me and was slightly better than the other clothes.  After the
girl had taken away the dopatta I heard noise outside the house.  The
Muslims entered the house and shouted to the women to take me upstairs
and from there take me to the other side of the village from where the
man would take me in the tonga to Gakhar. I told him that I would jump
off the roof, as I was under the impression that Hindu military was
there and was trying to rescue me.  The neighbours told the Muslims that
all the houses would be searched and as the authorities knew that I was
in that house they would be able to recover me. I then myself came down
and found the Muslim Leaguers blocking the door.  They told me that in
case I accompanied them to the camp of girls from the train I should be
able to meet my kith and kin. I accompanied them to a flour mill where I
was put in that room along with them.  This was in the town of Kamoke.
They told us that they had in their possession other children who would
be delivered to us next morning, but they contradicted each other as the
other denied this fact.  Members of Muslim League told us that we would
all be killed.  They also said that we should be married to Muslims and
made to live with them.  They opened the door of that room and a crowd
of Changars, Sweepers, and other “Kamins” of various castes came in and
took away most of the girls.  Only 5 to 7 were left in one corner.  The,
Sayed who owned the mill told us that he took strong exception to the
behaviour of Muslims and that he would protect us.  He told us to move
into the adjoining room which was a bit dark.  Then one policeman came
there and said that all the girls must be returned and that they (the
police) would dispose them of as they wished.  Excepting 3 or 4 the rest
of the girls were brought to the mill.  The members of the Muslim League
then started distributing the girls by handing one to each. I was sent
to the house of one Mohd.  Shafi, ex-Sub-Divisional Officer, Bhawalpur
State and a brother of Police Head Constable Ghulam Dastgir.  We were
confined in that mill for 4 or 5 days and the distribution of girls took
place after that.  The Muslims in this period used to threaten us but
did not molest us.  When I reached the house of Mohd.  Shafi I found his
womenfolk there.  Mohd.  Shafi behaved nicely enough. I was married to
him before I left the mill.  At the time of “Nikah” I told Mohd.  Shafi
I had my “uncleared” other relations alive in Pakistan and also my
husband and others in India and that I would wait for six months.  If
during this period I was riot rescued I should then continue to live
there.  Mohd.  Shafi agreed to this arrangement. I told Mohd.  Shafi my
father was also in service in Bhawalpui.  State.  Mohd.  Shafi paid due
consideration to this fact.  Another Hindu girl, Parkash of Dandot, was
brought there and she lived with me.  About two months ago the police
came to the house and enquired about me.  They said I should be sent to
the police station to meet the Superintendent of Police.  My younger
brother Kanwal Nain was in the house of one Maulvi Lal Dirt.  When he
came to the mill one day he told me about my brother and he left my
brother with me.  Since then my brother lived with me until our rescue. 
The police asked me whether I wanted to go back to India. I told them
unless my brother, mother and my daughter were rescued I should remain
there. I was also interrogated by the Superintendent of Police,
Gujranwala at Gujranwala.  After that they brought me to Lahore.  At
Gujranwala where I went for my statement I was kept in the house of one
Sheikh among his womenfolk and they treated me nicely.  From Gujranwala
I was brought to Lahore and was produced before the Inspector-General,
Qurban Ali Khan.  He told me that enquiry had been made from Delhi about
me by somebody and if I wanted to go back, he promised he would make
arrangements for my going to India. I told him that I would go to India
and he should make arrangements for rescuing my mother, brother, sister
and my child.  He then rang up Mr. Bakshi, Secretary to the Deputy High
Commissioner, who brought me from the Inspector-General of Police. I
came over to the Deputy High Commissioner’s residence about 6 days
back.  During the days that I was in the possession of the Muslims they
did not misbehave.  Other girls who met me complained about bad
treatment and non-provision of food and various other discomforts.

A Hindu doctor who has been converted to Islam is residing at Kamoke. 
Two refugees girls named Ram and Raj of Pind Dadan Khan were married to
his two sons.

Parkash, the girl who came to the house in which I was confined was left
there when I was called to the Police Station, as she was taking her
bath. I could not inform that I was going to the Police Station where I
made no mention about her.  I, however, mentioned this fact to the
Inspector-General of Police, Lahore.

(24-11-1947)

Note:- *Other statements on the Kamoke massacre appear earlier in the
Appendix.*

**XIII**

*Statement of Raj Rani, daughter of L. Ganga Ram Kapur of Village
Ratniwala Garla, Thana Shahdara, District Sheikhupura, dated
21-10-1947.*

On the 18th August, 1947, I came to the village Babakwal with my father
and other relations, for fear of life.  On the 24th/25th August night
about 20,000 Muslims attacked Babakwal with the help of the Muslim
Military.  They killed about 3,000 Hindu and Sikh residents of the town
and abducted 200 Hindu and Sikh ladies. I was one of them.  Myself,
Lilawanti, daughter of Labha Shah and Parkash, daughter of Dayal Chand
along with nine others were taken by Fateh, and he kept us in his
house.  He kept us there for 12 days.  After that he sold us off to
different persons.  He sold me to Ghulam Mohd. of village Karaul. 
Ghulam Mohd. kept me for 1½ months. I was put to great insult and
hardship.  Being tired of life I sent a message to Bawa Singh of
Rattanpura.  Bawa Singh who had become a Muslim, paid Rs. 140 to Ghulam
Mohd. and brought me to his house.  About 8-9 days ago he brought me to
his house with the aid of Military (Hindu) Bawa Singh brought me to Sir
Ganga Ram Hospital day before yesterday, i.e., 19-10-1947 I was brought
to D. A.-V. College Camp.  As I was confined to bed I was spared badfeli
(rape).  The other girls were badly raped in my presence.  The treatment
is most horrible to remember.

(THUMB IMPRESSION OF RAJ RANI)

**XIV**

*Copy of paragraph 1 of a report dated 6-10-1947 submitted by S.
Harbhajan Singh, Magistrate 1st Class, Gurdaspur to the Deputy
Commissioner, Gurdaspur.*

*Rape.*

“On 4-10-47, a small caravan of about fifteen non-Muslims tried to cross
the bridge Ravi from Pakistan to this side.  They were entrapped by the
Muslim Military picket on the other side of the bridge.  That caravan
included four women.  The male members of the caravan were murdered
during the night.  Our Military picket on this side of the bridge heard
shrieks and cries of the victims.  The Gurkha Jamadar in charge of the
picket saw the women with Military (Muslim).  They kept those women in
their tents during the night and the military picket on our side heard
their shrieks too during the night as if they were being raped.  Later
on those women never crossed the bridge on this side.  The above facts
were conveyed to the police by the Additional Police Head Constable,
Ranjit Singh who is also with the police picket at the bridge.  The S.
H. O. verified these facts from the Gurkha Jamadar too”.

**XV**

*Murder and Abduction* (*Jhelum*)

On the night between the 4th and 5th December, 1947 two non-Muslim
evacuees were killed and two young girls were carried away forcibly and
the property of the rest was looted near Khanpur, District Jhelum.

**XVI and XVII**

REPORTS OF INDIAN LIAISON OFFICERS

*Sale of women*

“Girls abducted from Mirpur side are sold in Jhelum city at Rs. 10 or 20
each.  The local police refuses to interfere on the ground that the
girls were not removed from the Punjab and also they express their
helplessness because of the attitude of the armed Pathans possessing
these girls. I am bringing this to the notice of the West Punjab
Government but I am afraid nothing would come out of it and in our
helplessness all these girls shall have to stand hardships for all their
lives and suffer misery.”

*Abducted Girls Sold*.

According to the information received most of the girls abducted from
Jammu and Kashmir States and some of the girls abducted from Gujranwala,
Jhelum, Mianwali, Jhang and Dera Ghazi Khan districts are taken to the
North-west Frontier Province and from there to the tribal territory.  At
Mansera and some other places (North-West Frontier) there are regular
camps where Hindu girls are being sold.

**XVIII**

THE MUZAFFARABAD MASSACRE.

*Statement of S. Khazan Singh, son of S. Chain Singh of Village Kotli,
Tehsil and District Muzaffarabad* (*Jammu and Kashmir State*).

On the 3rd of Kartak (October, 1947) our village was attacked by the
Pathan raiders who butchered all those who came across them.  According
to my estimate 20 persons were shot dead in the assault launched by the
raiders.  The rest fled away in confusion to proceed into the interior
of the state to village Chakaor, in the same district.  In the way they
were surrounded by a mob of Afridis, who were armed with automatic
weapons.  The entire Hindu and Sikh population showed an intention to
surrender to the raiders and were taken by them to Domel.

From other places (villages and towns) in the district of Muzaffarabad,
Hindu and Sikh population including aged and young people, women, girls
and children were concentrated at Domel.

They segregated the girls and the women from the males and the
children.  The males were then made to put off their clothes at the bank
of the river near the customs post.  Afridis then requested the Nawab of
Boiwala to open the nefarious job of shooting down the Hindus and Sikhs
by firing the first shot himself.  He did so and then a general massacre
ensued in which practically all of them were shot dead and thrown into
the river.  The least number shot down must be over 1000.

I may mention here that while travelling with the other Hindus and
Sikhs, I lost my son and daughter in the jungle and Went in search of
them with my wife, while the caravan was marching past. I thus, was able
to save my life and was an eye witness to all this tragic incident from
the top (peak) of a detached hill.  Among those who were shot dead, were
my two real brothers, and their 7 sons and other relations.  In all I
lost my 50 relatives far and near.

After the grown ups and the aged were done to death the children were
butchered most mercilessly by striking them against the rocks.  Afridis
had earlier remarked that the evil should be nipped in the bud.

They said that if they spared the children they would grow up and be a
menace for Pakistan.

I was captured by the villagers of Ranwar and taken to this village.  I
was converted to Islam.  After 20 days some military personnel of
Pakistan Army happened to visit this village and when they came to know
of me, they came to me and brought me to Pattan Khurd, post office
Kohalla, District Hazara.  A part of the village people were in favour
of my being killed while the others opposed the proposal.  I spent 3
months there.  They were unable to support me and on my expressing a
desire to settle down in some town in Pakistan and earn my livelihood,
they agreed to send me away.  I was sent with two guides, a Maulvi and a
resident of the village to escort me safely to Rawalpindi.  They left me
there and went back.

From Rawalpindi I managed to escape and travelled by train to Lahore. 
Here, fortunately I came to know of a refugee camp for the non-Muslims
and I after a good deal of hard labour reached there.

On the strength of my personal observation and what I learnt from other
sources, I give below certain tips regarding location of the abducted
girls:-  
 

|                                    |     |
|------------------------------------|-----|
| Tahsil Mansehara                   | 300 |
| Ghari Habib Ullah                  | 50  |
| Ghari Tahsil District Muzaffarabad | 100 |
| Muzaffarabad area                  | 500 |

Abducted by Afridis out of the group that marched to Domel, 13 girls and
one boy of my village viz-Kotla are with a barber of village Patan
Khurd.  Three girls are the daughters of one Hira Singh of my village.

Three girls of my village were abducted by the residents of my village
and were given in marriage to the local Mohammadens.

Dated 17.1.48.

<div align="right">

Sd. Khazan Singh

</div>

**XIX**

From “The Hindustan Times”, Friday, April 16, 1948.

THE SACK OF RAJORI-TOWN RAZED TO GROUND  
HUNDREDS MASSACRED

(*From The Special Correspondent*)

RAJORI, April 14 (1948) -  This is the story of what happens when the
raiders retreat from a town.  I am writing it just as it has occurred in
the old Moghul town of Rajori, known as the “Granary of Jammu Province”,
and where Emperor Jehangir died on his way back from Srinagar.  Our guns
are still firing intermittently in the distance and the raiders are
still carrying out desultory snipping and mortaring, in the nearby hills
and ridges.

This is the story of the death of a town-of a horrible and ghastly
tragedy which the advancing Indian troops, in spite of their best
efforts, have been unable to prevent and of which they are mere helpless
spectators.  Here is its sequence:

First, the raiders and their officers order the inhabitants of the town
to collect in the public square together with all their movable
belongings and cattle.

Rumours spread to the mud-houses and streets of Rajori, where men and
women sit cross-legged on charpoys.  Word passes from mouth to mouth
that Indian troops are advancing from Naushahra and are likely to be in
the town in a day or two.

At once there are two parties among the inhabitants-one consisting of a
few who want to flee in panic and the other, an overwhelming majority,
who want to stick to their ancient homes and calmly await the arrival of
the Indian troops.

But the townmen have no choice.  Those who don’t want to collect in the
town square are made to do so by the raiders at the point of the
bayonet.

Then the raiders take charge of all the cattle and drive the animals
into the hills.  Next, Muslim inhabitants are ordered to separate
themselves from the non-Muslims.

As soon as this is done, the Muslims are ordered to flee into the
interior along a particular route taking their movable belongings with
them in bullock carts, and the non-Muslims are ordered to form
themselves into a line.

Then begins a systematic massacre of all males except those between 25
and 35 who are healthy and strong.  These are formed into a slave labour
gang and ordered to dig new positions for the raiders on nearby hills
and ridges.  The women and their belongings are distributed by the
tribesmen among themselves.

Then starts the application of the scorched earth policy to the town. 
All houses are set fire to and those which appear capable of resisting
the flames are ordered to be demolished one by one with picks and
shovels.  The local inhabitants (a few of whom are still hanging about
the place) protest and one or two of them are shot out of hand.

Darkness is now descending and columns of smoke can be seen belching out
of the town.  But men of the Indian armoured column can’t do much to
save the town until the infantry arrives; and from the ridges and hills,
commanding the approaches to the town, the tribesmen are systematically
mortaring and snipping our troops.

So there is natural delay as the Indian infantry plods across its weary
way from hill to hill, from feature to feature.

The troops are making superhuman efforts to reach Rajori as quickly as
possible, because they know that every second is precious now, every
minute counts and every quarter of an hour may mean all the difference
between life and a sordid death to many innocent inhabitants of the
town.  But they are unable to make any substantial advance until the
morning.  The gods seem to have conspired against them; darkness,
terrain and an unknown route have caused the delay.

When they enter Rajori, they are just too late.  The town has been razed
to the ground and all that can be seen are a few mutilated corpses,
including some of women and children which lie scattered.

During the last week that I have been following the advance of the
Indian troops in this sector, mile by mile, yard by yard, I have seen
this story repeated on a smaller and less dramatic scale in half a dozen
places. I have seen it happen in Chingas, I have seen it happen near Raj
Pur Saraj, I have seen it repeat itself in the innumerable clusters of
hamlets which lie dotted along these hills near Rajori.

No accurate estimate of the number of people massacred here in cold
blood by the retreating tribesmen is yet possible.  But there can be no
question that it has been a massacre on a “major scale”, and one or two
people who have now managed to make their way into the Indian lines
declare that the town had a population of well over 5,000 a week ago.

But the terror tactics of the raiders are having an inevitable result. 
They are producing hatred and revulsion against these self-styled
“Islamic Liberators” even among -the Muslim population of this area.  I
have just been talking to Khuda Bux, a former resident of Rajori, who
has managed to escape from the clutches of the raiders and he declares
that the people in the area want nothing more than to get rid of the
raiders.

And the Indian Army High Command has just decided to launch an intensive
propaganda drive to enable the local inhabitants to save themselves from
the raiders.  Hurriedly prepared posters and leaflets are being dropped
from the air on all nearby villages and towns asking the local
inhabitants to feel and make their way to the Indian lines where they
would be adequately protected.

**XX**

*Statement of Shrimati Chander Kanta, daughter of Bhagat Gobind Ram,
aged 13, of village Choba Bhagatan, Tehsil Kahuta, District Rawalpindi,
to the Chief Liaison Officer, Lahore.*

My father was a teacher at Mirpur.  We had left our village and had gone
to Mirpur to seek shelter from the disturbances which had started in
March last.  When the raiders came we, the people of Mirpur ran and at
Akalgarh the Muslim Military surrounded us and they sorted out young
girls.  Abdur Rahman captured me and took me to Sakhrana, Tahsil
Kahuta.  I was married to him at Sakhrana and lived with him as his wife
for one month.  The police visited Sakhrana and found me out and took me
to Rawalpindi Camp.  I was lodged in the camp at Rawalpindi for a month
and ten days, when I was brought to Lahore with Pandit Nihal Chand. 
There are 48 girls in the Camp at Rawalpindi.  The Muslims who visited
the camp to meet the girls to whom they are married usually threatened
them that if they go to India they would be killed by the Sikhs and
Hindus and thus warned them that they should not express their
willingness to be evacuated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
