+++
title = "24 XXXXI"

+++
**XXXXI**

Pt. Chuni Lal Jaitli, S. D. O. Canals living in Chichoki Malian Canal
Rest House, Distt.  Sheikhupura with members of his family was murdered
by Muslims.  On 27.8.47 they were attacked by Muslims and looted and
abducted as under:-  

Jiwan Devi (40) Shiv Devi (70) Rajeshwari (20) Nirmala Devi (18)
Kalawanti Devi (40) Harkishen Lal (14) Har Parkash (4) Darshan Kumar
(12) Inder Mohan (6) Manmohan (2½).

  

Pt. Nand Lal, brother of Pt.  Chuni Lal who went to complain to Police
was thrown into the Upper Chenab canal by police and drowned.  Pt. 
Chuni Lal was shot dead later by Ali Mohd., Lambardar, of Nokrian
village with the help of police.

Mr. Sena Pati Ram Sahni, Distt.  Engineer of District Board at Lahore
was set upon by subordinates on 12.9.47 and sawn and brutally murdered.

**XXXXII**

THE PUNJAB NOT A MUSLIM PROVINCE

“I place my claim”, wrote Master Tara Singh upon the fact that the
Punjab is not a Muslim Province.  “I do not even admit that the Muslims
are in a majority in the population.  Punjab History in the Sikh
History.  It is the birth-place of the Sikh religion and the Sikh Gurus;
most if not all the Punjab Martyrs are the Sikh martyrs.  The Sikhs are
the only people who take pride in Punjabi culture and language.  Muslim
poet will sing of Mecca and Madina; a Hindu poet will sing of Ganga and
Banaras; but the Sikh poet will sing of the Ravi and Chanab”.

**XXXXIII**

EXHORTATION TO NON-MUSLIMS NOT TO QUIT PAKISTAN

In a speech of June, 18 (1947) Acharya Kripalani said, “The
representatives of minorities from East Bengal, the West Punjab and Sind
have approached me for advice as to what they should do when the
territories they live in become part of an independent State of
Pakistan.

“Most of them fear that their lives, honour and property which are
unsafe now and would become even more unsafe then. I do not share that
fear.  On the contrary I hope that once the State of Pakistan is
established its Government or Governments would have enough sense of
reality not to discredit themselves by unfair treatment of the
minorities.

“Until now the Muslim League felt that it was its interest to create an
atmosphere of conflict and strife.  Henceforth it would obviously be in
its interest to create order, for the spirit of lawlessness roused
against the minorities would sooner or later be turned against its own
Government.”

**XXXXVI**

(NEWSPAPER REPORTS)

*January* 4, 1947.

Rawalpindi, January 4. - Reports of further raids in villages of Hazara
District were received last night.  According to the latest information
Mallach, a prominent village of about 400 non-Muslims houses situated
between Dunga Gali and Nathia Gali Was raided on the afternoon of
January 2 by a mob of about 400 armed with deadly weapons.

It is stated that after ransacking several houses they set fire to them
and burnt several persons alive.

Arjan Singh, the only survivor of a family of a dozen persons, who
arrived here last night after travelling 60 miles on foot, mostly over
snow-covered ground, related his pathetic tale to pressmen here.

*January* 24.

Seven front rank leaders of the Punjab Muslim League were arrested in
Lahore on Friday afternoon when they obstructed the Police in carrying
out searches in the Muslim League National Guards Headquarters on McLeod
Road.

The arrested persons included Khan Iftikhar Husain of Mamdot, Mr. Firoz
Khan Noon, Sardar Shaukat Hyat Khan, Begum Shah Nawaz, Mian
Iftikhar-ud-Din, Mr. Mumtaz Daultana and Syed Amir Husain Shah.

Hundreds of students of the Islamia College who had collected there,
staged a wild demonstration, about a dozen of them climbing on the top
of the police van as it removed the leaders.

The police action followed the Punjab Government’s order under the
Criminal Law Amendment Act, declaring the Muslim League National Guard
and the Rashtriya Swayam Sewak Sangh as illegal organisations.  Raids on
the headquarters of these volunteer corps were carried out
simultaneously.

A strong police force, headed by Mr. P. B. Roy, Superintendent of police
(C.I.D.) armed with search warrants, came to the McLeod Office of the
National Guards at about 10-30 a.m. The inmates led by Mian
Iftikhar-ud-din offered them passive resistance and refused to let them
carry out the search.

The inmates presumably contacted other leaders by telephone, whereupon
the Khan of Mamdot, President of the Provincial League, Malik Firoz Khan
Noon, Sardar Shaukat Hyat Khan, Mr. Mumtaz Daultana and Begum Shah Nawaz
motered to the place.

By this time the search party had been reinforced by lathi police.  The
police, however, did not force an entry till after two hours persuasion.

Earlier, the houses of Major Khurshid Anwar, Salar of the All-India
Muslim National Guards and Mr. Amir Husain Shah and another officer of
the Guards were searched.

The officials of the Sewak Sangh did not obstruct the search at any of
the 21 offices of the organisation in Lahore raided by the police on
Friday.

Mr. Amir Hussain Shah, immediately before his arrest, declared that
“this unwarranted attack” on the Muslim League National Guards seas part
and parcel of the “general onslaught of the present Coalition Government
on the civil liberties of the people of the Punjab.”

Besides the seizure of 1,000 steel helmets the police took possession of
a large quantity of assorted volunteers badges bearing the insignia of
dagger, sword and revolver.

*January* 25.

There was organised defiance by the Muslim League in Lahore of the order
prohibiting demonstrations and processions, and this resulted in a
number of arrests in different part of the city.  Prominent among the
arrested persons were seven Muslim League M.L.As. who at about 1-30 p.m.
marched out of the Assembly Chamber, where the League Assembly party had
been meeting since the morning to take stock of the situation created by
the leaders’ arrest, shouting slogans and proceedings in a procession
towards the Mall.

They were followed by a posse of armed police headed by Mr. Fearn, the
District Magistrate and taken into custody when they had crossed the
bounds of the Assembly Chamber.

Earlier, two leaguers were arrested in front of the Assembly for
disobeying the police order to vacate the place.

The M.L.As. who courted arrest on Saturday were Begum Tassaddaq Hussain,
Sufi Abdul Hamid, Chaudari Mohamad Akram, Malik Wazir Mohamed, Rana
Nasrullah Khan, Rai Mohamed Anwar Kharral and Chaudhry Zafrullah Khan.

*February* 25.

The Muslim League agitation assumed dangerous proportions in Amritsar
where the police had to open fire on several occasions on Monday.

A Sikh constable was beaten to death by a wild mob in the Civil Lines. 
The Additional District Magistrate, Mr. Ikramul Haq, was brutally
assaulted, being severely wounded in the head and a murderous assault
was made on a Sub-Inspector by a demonstrator who was killed by police
fire.

Altogether 29 constables were injured.  The Government communique
described the Amritsar situation as “exceedingly serious”.  Troops were
requisitioned, but not used.

At Rawalpindi too, the police had to resort to firing to disperse the
demonstrators.  Further details are lacking.

The Lahore district courts were raided twice, first by Muslim students
who took the authorities unawares.  They ransacked every room, smashing
windowpanes, mocking at the court employees and tampering with their
files.

The second invasion of the courts was by women and children who were
even more difficult to handle, although police had arrived on the scene.

Earlier the women processionists had stormed the Secretariat creating
considerable nuisance for some length of time.  Young schoolboys
throughout the day indulged in holding up vehicular traffic on the Mall
by squatting in the middle of the road at the crossings.

By sundown there was the usual large procession which ended in a
lathi-charge by the police.

*February* 27.

The Muslim League civil disobedience movement was called off on
Wednesday following a settlement between the Punjab Government and the
leaders of the Provincial League.

The Government has accordingly ordered the release of all prisoners,
detained under trial or convicted, other than those accused or convicted
of voluntarily causing grievous hurt.  It has also removed the
restrictions on public meeting in all districts, the ban on processions,
on military drill and on the carrying of arms remains.

The Government has accepted Mr. Jinnah’s suggestion that the Public
Safety Ordinance be replaced by a legislative enactment and a Bill will
be introduced in the ensuing Budget Session of the Punjab Assembly.

*March* 4.

Nine persons were killed in Lahore on Tuesday including a student of the
D.A.-V. College, as a culmination of the mass Hindu-Sikh demonstrations.

Communal rioting broke out in the evening when a procession of Hindus
and Sikhs clashed with Muslims at Matti Chowk inside the walled city.

The police arrived on the scene and dispersed the rioters by fire. 
Later eight dead were removed to the mortuary under heavy police guard.

A clash between the students of the D.A.-V. College and the police took
place outside the College hostel.  One student was shot dead.

*March* 5.

Lahore, March 5. - The Governor of the Punjab has issued a proclamation
under Section 93 of the Government of India Act, 1935.

*March* 6.

The evening train from Batala was stopped near Sharifpura.  It was
attacked by a large crowd armed with hatchets and knives.  Several
Hindus and Sikhs were killed.  When the train eventually arrived at
Amritsar, it was found that there were pools of blood in several
compartments including the women’s compartments.

*March* 7.

Amritsar, March 7. - Amritsar is a veritable inferno.  There were
several fires in different parts of the city throughout Thursday. 
Several shops in Hall Hazar, Katra Jaimal Singh and the surrounding
residential areas have been completely or partially destroyed.  The
Police and the Military continued to patrol throughout the day and
night.

Casualties in the Civil Hospital are 27 killed and over 100 injured
since Wednesday.  Several casualties have not been reported to
hospitals.

The police fired several times, but with little effect.  One cinema
house is completely gutted.

A large number of Hindus and Sikhs living in predominantly Muslim
localities have been evacuated to the Golden Temple or the Civil Lines. 
The fate of several others still left bf-hind is unknown.  Is stray
assaults severe brutalities are being prepetrated by the assailants.

A number of persons were killed and many injured in a communal clash in
Multan on Thursday.  Some shops were set on fire, while many other were
looted.  The District Magistrate has imposed the curfew in the city from
-6 p.m. to 7 a.m. He has also banned all public meetings and processions
for a period of one month under the Public Safety Ordinance.

Latest information gathered from civil and other hospitals^([1](#1))
shows that so far eight bodies-seven Sikh and one of a Muslim
constable-have reached the mortuary, says an earlier message delayed in
transmission.  The dead include Mohan Singh, a student of the local
Khalsa College.

The total number of injured admitted to hospitals is 38.  Injuries in
most cases are from swords, axes and hatchets.  The injured have been
picked up from all parts of the city.

Some bodies are reported to be still lying on road sides.  Hostile
crowds interfered with the fire brigades in the performance of their
duties.  The municipal and Sewa Society’s fire brigades are proving
helpful.

*March* 8.

A senior officer of the Punjab Government described the communal
situation in Rawalpindi as “most anxious”.

Terrible rioting has broken out in the city and the villages in between
Rawalpindi and Murree.  Killing, loot and arson have been rife and the
minorities according to official information are in a bad way.

Amritsar is quiet except that some people attempted to defy the curfew
and came into conflict with Police and Military patrols.  There was no
casualty.

In Jullundur nine persons died and about 36 were injured.  Multan is
said to be settling down.

In Lahore, of the four cases of stabbing on Friday one proved fatal. 
Another person was shot down for looting.

An A.P.I. message from Rawalpindi says that a mob drawn from rural areas
attacked some “mohallas” last night.  The raiders were driven away by
the residents of the “mohallas” after a pitched battle.  The attack took
place during curfew hours.  No train left from Rawalpindi for any
direction last night.

The raiders are still reported to be in the outskirts of Rawalpindi. 
The military has been posted at strategic points.

The total number of casualties in two days’ of disturbances, according
to official estimates, are 50 killed and about 200 injured.

After curfew hours on Saturday morning stray assaults have been reported
from different parts of the city.

The Up Frontier Mail, heading towards Peshawar, terminated at Rawalpindi
on Friday night without completing its journey up to Peshawar.  The
train was detained near Chaklala by a mob of 300 to 400 armed raiders.

About half a dozen cases of arson are reported to have been committed in
Rawalpindi during curfew hours.

Details available of Friday’s hold up of the Down Frontier Mail show
that the train was stopped by a mob of armed villagers, about 800
strong, at the Taxila railway station.  They pushed out passengers and
attacked them with hatchets and lathis, resulting in injuries to about
50 persons.  People from Hazara District, in the Frontier Province,
invaded the Muree Region, and the bazars of Jhikka Gali, Ghora Gali and
Lower Topa had been burned, it was officially announced in Lahore on
Sunday evening.

According to confirmed reports, the major portion of Murree town, famed
health resort in Northern India, is completely gutted by fires.

The situation in Rawalpindi is reported to have quietened since Saturday
night, according to information received in Lahore.  Tension, however,
continues.

Raiders from rural areas, who attempted to force entry into some of the
mohallas in Rawalpindi on Friday night and had collected in the
outskirts of the city, are reported to have set fire to some of the
surrounding villages inhabited by both the communities.  The loss of
property and life has not yet been ascertained.

According to travellers reaching Lahore over 100 people were killed
during the disturbances in Multan and about 150 injured.  Many families
are reported to have perished in the conflagration which raged in the
city for about two days.  The loss is estimated at about 50 lacs. 
Ludhiana and Rohtak figured among the disturbed towns on Wednesday.  The
situation in Attock district is described as showing no signs of
improvement.  Increased Military aid is being provided there.  Bands of
persons moving about are being intercepted.

“Looting and arson” according to the Punjab Government communique, has
been reported from several areas in Attock District.  Two attempts were
made to raid the town of Mianwali by a large number of Pathans.

The rural area of Rawalpindi still gives cause for anxiety, but there is
distinct improvement in the north-east, where troops are moving about on
a wide scale.  This was officially announced in Lahore on Wednesday
evening.

About 10,000 men equipped with arms, attempted to raid Mianwali town on
Tuesday morning.  The raiders surrounded the town.  The District
Magistrate, however, tactfully handled the situation with the help of
local Pathans and officials.  No loss of life or property is reported.

A case of arson is reported from Moghalpura, a suburb of Lahore at a
distance of five miles.  It is stated that before 1 a.m. on Thursday a
mob of about 40 men, armed with axes and lathis, raided the premises of
Craco Stationery Works Limited and set fire to the Factory.  Lahore
Corporation and Railway fire engines arrived on the scene and fought the
flames for over four hours.

After conference at Rawalpindi with Military Officials, Sardar Baldev
Singh and party visited the refugee camp where about 9,000 persons are
seeking shelter.

The Defence Member later received deputations of Hindu and Sikh leaders
from Rawalpindi and Attock districts who apprised him of the first hand
details about the situation in the two districts.

The party returned to Lahore in the evening.

*March* 14.

Communal tension flared up at Khushab on Friday resulting in some shops
and religious places being burned, according to information received
from Sargodha.  The District Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police
hurried to the spot with police and Military detachments and brought the
situation under control.

The District Magistrate has promulgated Section 144 Criminal Procedure
Code, prohibiting assembly of five persons find carrying of arms
throughout the District for an indefinite period.

Sir Evan Jenkins, Governor of the Punjab, accompanied by Sir John
Bennet, Inspector-General of Police, paid a flying visit to Sargodha on
Saturday morning.  During their one hour stay in Sargodha, they
discussed the communal situation with the local officials and
non-officials.  The Governor flew to Mianwali on Saturday to acquaint
himself with the communal situation there.

There was a two hour battle between the police and military on one side
and the raiders from across the Indus on the other at Jand, in tehsil
Pindigheb, Campbellpur district.  Four raiders were killed.

The situation in the jurisdiction of police stations Chauntra,
Fatehjung, Pindigheb and Pind Sultani is reported to be exceedingly
serious, says an official announcement on Friday evening.

Reports have been received of riot, arson and murders from villages in
the Chakwal Tehsil, District Jhelum.  Dudial was attacked by a mob of
2,500 and although the military and police stationed there exchanged hot
fire with the looters, they were unable to save the village from being
burned.  They were however, able to evacuate most of the people.

In Attock reports of looting and arson are still being received in
district headquarters.

All has been quiet in Jullundur, Ferozepur, Kangra, Sheikhupura and
Gurdaspur.

Amritsar continued to be quiet and there have been no further incidents
of any importance.  There is still considerable nervousness in the city
and also in the rural parts of the district.

All districts in the Ambala Division report no incidents and the
situation is quiet everywhere.  Rounding up the riot situation in the
Punjab a spokesman of the Punjab Government says: “It is quite clear
from reports from all over the affected districts that these disgraceful
scenes are due entirely to completely false rumours spread deliberately
by mischief-mongers and bad characters.  The favourite method appears to
be to spread a rumour that a religious building of one community or the
other has been attacked or burned.”

*March* 17.

The Frontier Government issued the following communique on Saturday
night on the communal situation in the Province:-

“Relief parties reached Chajian, south-east of Haripur, yesterday and
found that in Thursday’s disturbances there 47 Hindus and Sikhs had been
killed and three wounded.  There are now about 1,500 evacuees in Haripur
town.”

At Garhi Habibullah, also in Hazara District, a place of worship was set
on fire and three shops looted.

“In Peshawar City one Hindu was stabbed this afternoon and a case of
arson occurred in the Sadar Bazar area last night.  The curfew is still
in force in Peshawar city and Sadar Bazar.

Reports have been received of about 90 forcible conversions of Hindus
and Sikhs from the village of Mushtarzai and Sheikhan in Peshawar
Tehsil.

*March* 18.

The situation in Khushab and the Soon Valley in Shahpur district, still
remains tense.  A case of attempted arson has been reported from Khud, a
village in police station Khushab, and reinforcements have been sent
there, the announcement continues.

In Attock District, Pindigheb and Fatehjung tehsils are still seriously
disturbed and reports of looting, arson and casualties are still being
received from different villages all over these two tehsils.  The
military dispersed by firing a crowd which had assembled to attack
Adhwal, in tehsil Fatehjung.

Trouble still persists in the Kahuta tehsil of Rawalpindi district and
the Deputy Inspector-General of Police is personally dealing with
conditions there.

*March* 20.

Peshawar, March 20. - Red Shirts moved about in the city yesterday
afternoon and the streets of this interesting city, which is normally
colourful, became more so with the splashes of red of India’s “RED”
Army.^([2](#2))

Two hours after they had entered the Hindu area where the silversmiths
live. I saw Hindus and Sikhs emerge from their houses, for the first
time in seven days.  They seemed dazed by the sunlight.  It was obvious
that they were still nervous for they did not venture beyond the barbed
wire barricade at the end of the lane.

*March* 21.

The Punjab Government on Thursday estimated total casualties from
communal disturbances in the provinces up to midday March 19, at 2,049
dead and 1,103 seriously injured.

The Government made it clear that the figures from Rawalpindi and Attock
districts were not reliable.  *It was feared that when correct figures
were ascertained, the list would be formidable*.

*March* 28.

Mr. Jinnah made a speech to the Muslim Chamber of Commerce, Bombay.

It was Mr. Gandhi, he said, who first raised the point.  I after due
deliberation, say that exchange of population is necessary and it has to
be done.  It cannot be done by a private organisation.

Peshawar-“Hindu and Sikh passengers on the railway train which left
Kohat for Rawalpindi this morning were attacked by a mob armed with
firearms at Gorzai, 17 miles from Kohat.  Six persons were killed and 20
injured, says a communique is sued by the Frontier Government tonight. 
The wounded have been taken to Jan.  A superintendent of police with a
detachment of troops and some armed cars has proceeded to Gorzai.”

According to unofficial estimates the number of casualties as a result
of the looting of the passengers train between Lakband and Samigund, on
the Kohat-Rawalpindi railway line, is believed to be six killed and 21
injured, says a Rawalpindi message.  One woman, with her child is
reported to be missing.

It is alleged that the raiders entered a women’s compartment of the
train and started looting and killing passengers of the minority
community.

A large number of non-Muslims are leaving Kohat following Wednesday’s
incident.  The exodus of members of the minority community from various
Frontier towns continues and streams of people are arriving in
Rawalpindi by every train coming from the Kohat side.  On the other hand
a large number of people are migrating from Rawalpindi to places in the
United Provinces, Delhi and Patiala State and other towns of south-east
Punjab.  Tension continues to persist in Rawalpindi town.  About 7,000
Hindus and Sikhs-nearly-a quarter of the minority population of Peshawar
city have left Peshawar city for the Punjab and other parts of India
since March 20, declared a source connected with the Congress here,

*April* 12.

Fifteen men were killed and 32 injured in Amritsar on Friday afternoon
when communal trouble broke out again after about five weeks respite.

The police had to open fire to quell the riot.  The city, where four
localities were set on fire, has been placed under a 24 hour curfew.

British troops are once again patrolling the deserted streets.  A high
police official told a representative of the “*Civil & Military
Gazette*” that the situation late on Friday night, was well in hand.

Inquiries made by the Associated Press of India at 12.30 a.m. showed
that 14 places including two factories in Qilla Bhangian, three shops in
Kucha Chaparwala and eight houses, seven in Kucha Swaroop Singh and one
in Katra Sher Singh, were entirely gutted in Friday’s conflagrations.

The fire brigade recovered some pieces of cloth soaked in kerosene oil,
with a broken bottle of the kerosene oil, in front of half dozen houses
with their doors slightly burned in a lane in Katra Sher Singh adjoining
the Royal Talkies, which was burned during the last disturbances.

The trouble started in Lachhmansar area, where about 5000 Muslims had
collected in a mosque in Chowk Pragdas for Friday prayer.

*April* 17.

Peshawar, April 16. - Numerous fires were raging in Dera Ismail Khan
yesterday.  The situation in the city “is serious,” according to the
communique issued last night by the Frontier Government.

Troops and the constabulary have been sent from Bannu to assist the
Military and the Police already in the Dera Ismail Khan town.  The
curfew has been imposed.

A procession started from the Muslim League Office yesterday morning and
divided itself into different parties.  One party went towards the
courts and the post office and caused damage to the buildings.  The
other parties went into the city and set fire to shops and residential
houses in different parts of the town.

According to unofficial reports from D. I. Khan several shops in Pawinda
Bazar have been gutted.  Fire is spreading to Bhatianwala Bazar.  A
cinema house, the Town Hall, the V. B. College and one place of worship
were set ablaze.  Hall the city of Dera Ismail Khan is burned, according
to information reaching Peshawar.  The fires which started on Tuesday
are reported to be under control.  The total number of casualties is ten
killed and 22 injured.

On Tuesday night the village of Paroa, near Dera Ismail Khan, was raided
by unknown persons, who indulged in arson and looting.  It is understood
three persons were killed in Paroa and 54 shops and houses were burned.

*April* 18.

Peshawar April, 18. - According to an unofficial report received from
Tank today, about 50 shops have been burned there, three persons killed
and three injured.  The situation is now under control.

The village of Gumal Bazar, near Tank, was raided last night by some
unknown persons.

Trouble is reported to have spread in rural areas north and south of
Dera Ismail Khan, where looting and rioting is reported from some
villages in the jurisdiction of Paharpur and Paroa police stations.  One
person was fatally stabbed this morning in Peshawar near the Cunningham
Park.

Peshawar April 28. - Since the commencement of the atrocities in
December last in Hazara, casualties including those in parts of D. I.
Khan has totalled 400 killed and 150 wounded revealed Mr. Mehr Chand
Khanna, Finance Minister, at a press conference here yesterday.

Fifty places of worship had been burned, over 300 persons forcibly
converted and about 1,600 shops and houses burned and looted.

*May* 1.

The communal rioting in Lahore on Friday crossed the highest degree of
bitterness and conflict ever witnessed in the capital of the Punjab with
the biggest conflagration in its history raging in a dozen localities
within the walled city.

The day drew to a close with the huge fires reduced to smouldering
embers, but a high wave of panic and tension sweeping the whole town.

The stabbings, which started in the morning soon after the relaxation of
the curfew hours at eight, continued unabated throughout the day.  The
total number of casualties collected from different hospitals up to
midnight on Friday showed that 18 bodies were brought from different
parts of the city and the number of injured was in the neighbourhood of
46.  There were about 20 cases of maimed or injured reported to
hospitals, and these persons were discharged after first aid.

*June* 14.

While the fate of Lahore hangs in the balance awaiting the decision of
the Boundary Commission, a large number of people have already started
quitting Lahore.  They particularly include domestic servants,
labourers, and a sprinkling of the business community belonging to the
minorities.  The Sikhs, however, are determined not to show the white
feather.  Lahore is their home town, they say.

The unsettled and uncertain conditions which have prevailed in the city
for some times now have contributed largely to the large scale exodus. 
The recent four week communal out burst has resulted in bringing
business to a standstill.  A large number of big business firms have
already shifted their head offices from.  Lahore.

*June* 20.

The peace of Lahore was disturbed during the early hours of the morning
when a country-made bomb was thrown in a place of worship inside Masti
Gate.  The missile exploded with a loud report.  The priest of the
shrine, who received injuries, was removed to hospital.

A country-made incendiary bomb exploded this morning in Kucha Moolomata,
near the Water Works and caused a fire.

Immediately after the relaxation of the curfew, one person was fatally
stabbed on Fleming Road, near Qilla Gujar Singh.  Another knife attack
took place near Lohari Mandi.  The victim was removed to hospital in a
precarious condition.  Upto 10 p.m. on Thursday night as many as 20
cases of fire raising were reported from different localities in the
city and suburbs, the areas affected being Katra Purbia, Kucha
Hawagaran, Brandreth Road, Ichhra, Moti Bazar, Kucha Masadimal, Akbari
Mandi, Bhati Gate, Sheranwala Gate, Lohari Gate and outside Mochi Gate. 
In Amritsar about a dozen casualties including one dead, had been
brought to the civil hospital up to 12 noon.

The associated Press of India was officially informed late on Thursday
night that there was no improvement in the communal situation in Lahore
on Tuesday.  Military patrolling continued in the city and suburbs.

Thirty-five fires blazed in Lahore during the day eight of which were of
a serious nature, the localities seriously affected were Mohalla Sarin,
Chowk Surjan Singh, Shahi Mohalla, Mohalla Sathan (inside Bhati Gate)
and the Garhi Shahu, Mozang and Faiz Bagh areas.

All available military fire brigades, in addition to the Corporation
fire engines were fighting the flames in different sectors of the city
till late at night.  In Chowk Surjan Singh, the fire-fighting personnel
was fired upon by unknown assailants.  The police fired a few rounds.

Twenty-two persons were killed and 25 injured by fire in Sadar Bazar in
the Cantonment early in the morning.

Twenty-two persons were killed and 16 others injured in knife attacks
during the day.  Three persons were killed on the Grand Trunk Road near
the Hide Market in the Faiz Bagh area in the morning.  Five others were
assaulted in the same locality.  Three persons were fatally stabbed on
Akram Road in Sultanpura, a suburb of the city.  Two more persons were
killed near Bharatnagar in the same locality.

1\. On 12-9-1947, Mr. S. R. Sawhney, Lahore District Board Engineer, who
opted for Pakistan, was murdered in his office.  The Lahore District
Board Office-by his subordinates, who tide him to a pole and sawed him
in two.  The Government of West Punjab has pleaded it cannot trace
murderers.

2\. A non-Muslim Refugee Camp established in Arya Samaj at Lyallpur was
raided at 10 p.m. on the 2nd October, 1948, resulting in 500 killed, 200
girls abducted with many other casualties.

On 1.12.47 details were received by the East Punjab Government of the
cold-blooded murder of a large number of Sikh evacuees, all of them
Government servants, who were stranded at Karor Pacca non-Muslim Evacuee
Camp.  The soldiers, of Pakistan Army separated Sikhs from other
residents of the Camp, took them to sugarcane fields nearby and shot
them dead there.  The womenfolk of these unfortunate Sikhs were taken
away by the Pakistan soldiers.  It was stated that the above mentioned
families were in the forcible detention of Mohammad Amin Khan Kanju of
Karor Pacca, District Multan.  The incident led to very strong protest
to the West Punjab Government that “such indiscriminate action towards
Sikhs in Pakistan would not be tolerated any longer, and it may have
serious repercussions in East Punjab and is likely to create a vicious
circle which has been broken down with great difficulty.”

No reply received from the West Punjab Government.

*December* 3.

The following Press note was issued by the Ministry of States, New
Delhi:-

In a recent Press statement issued from Karachi the Prime Minister of
Bahawalpur complained that Sardar Valabhbhai Patel had singled out
Bahawalpur for having caused grievous loss of life and property to
non-Muslims.

The observations were made by Sardar Patel in the course of his reply to
an earlier statement by the Prime Minister of Pakistan and must be read
in their context.

In refutation of the charges made against the States of Patiala,
Faridkot and Kapurthala, Sardar Patel had said that what happened in
those States could not be isolated from the general flare-up, which had
overtaken the East and West Punjab and for which not one single
community or Government was entirely to blame.

Bahawalpur was mentioned in illustration of the ruthless extermination
of minorities in the State which had acceded to Pakistan.

The non-Muslim population of Bahawalpur State, according to the 1941
census, was 2,40,000 which, allowing for normal increase, is now
estimated to be about 2,70,000.

Of these between 70,000 and 80,000 recently had to eave the State as a
result of the disturbances, the number left behind being stated to be in
the neighbourhood of 70,000.  This leaves over 1,00,000 persons
unaccounted for.

**XXXXV**

Taken from the “Lahore Diary” published by the West Punjab Government,
for August, 1947.

August 1. - “Stabbing cases (3 Sikhs, 2 Muslims, 6 Hindus).

August 2. - 8 cases of arson in non-Muslim houses.

August 12. - 81 stabbing cases (34 Hindus, 41 Sikhs, 6 Muslims).  
16 cases of arson.  Mob attacks a train, killing 13, wounding 6.

August 13. - 39 stabbing cases, of which only 5 were Muslim victims.

August 14. - 60 non-Muslims stabbed.

August 15. - 47 non-Muslims killed.  One Gurdwara burned.

August 22. - 80 Sikhs killed.

August 25. - 19 Sikhs killed.

August 26. - Sikhs and Hindus killed in train coming from Multan etc.
etc.

**XXXXVI**

List of Desecrated Temples and Gurdwaras in West Punjab.^([3](#3))

Lahore

[TABLE]

No Moorties exist in any temple.

*Gujranwala* District

All the undermentioned places of worship have been desecrated:  

*Sikh Gurdwaras*  
Damdama Sahib.  
Patasa Sahib.  
Baba Bhulla.  
Talao Devi wala.  
Bhagat Singh.  
Singh Sabha.  
Bhag Singh.  
Mongian.  
Rai Mool Singh.  
Dadu Panthian.  
Ram Basti.  
Mal Chimni Bakhtewala.  
Kesho Rajput.  
Gali Arainwali.  
Sialkoti.  
Ranjit Singh.  
Dharmsala Kakrian.  
Dharmsala Batalian.  
do           Machandia  
Gurdwara Sarak Gondalian.   
          (b) Hindu Temples:   
Majjhu di Chhapri.  
Jain Mandir.  
Mandir Maira.  
Mandir Devi wala.  
          do Gali Bohar  
          do Kasiana.  
          do Sutharian.  
          do Thathnian.  
          do Ralla.  
          do Jalabwala.  
          do Sidhan.

  
*Multan* District.

All Hindu and Sikh places of worship in this District have been damaged,
burned or desecrated.

*Lyallpur* District.

All the undermentioned places of worship have been turned into mosques
or desecrated by refugees:-

\(a\) Sikh Gurdwaras:

Gurdwara Bara Rail Bazar.  
          do           Guru Bazar.  
          do           Subedar.  
          do           Sant Ram (Douglaspura)  
          do           Piara Singh (Harcharanpura)  
          do           Bara Santpura.  
          do           Pratap Nagar.  
          do           Guru Nanakpura.

\(b\) Hindu Temples:

Mandir of Mahabir Ji (Karkhana Bazar)  
          do           Gopi Vallabh ji.  
Mandir of Raghu Nath Ji.  
          do           Devi.  
          do           Bawa Sita Ram ji.  
          do           Ghanishyam.  
          do           Gaushala.  
          do           Guru Nanakpura.  
          do           S. D. High School.  
          do           Arya Samaj (Douglaspura)  
          do           Arya Samaj (Congress wali)  
          do           Arya Samaj (Montgomery Bazar)

*Sargodha* District

In Sargodha City the Gurdwara of Block No. 3 which is a palatial
building is used as Baitul Mal (Store) by Muslim Leaguers and one shop,
which is part of the estate of this Gurdwara is used by a butcher for
selling meat.

*Jhang* District

All Hindu temples and gurdwaras desecrated.

*Montgomery* District

In Gurdwara Baba Jawala Singh no articles of worship remain.  All sacred
articles, relics, books etc. have been removed.

*Sheikhupura* District

Doors and windows of several Gurdwaras have been removed and used as
firewood.

**XXXXVII**

Below are given some eye-witness accounts of the happenings in
Rawalpindi District in March, 1947.

*Dhamali* (Tehsil Kahuta)

8.3.47. Owing to happenings elsewhere in the Tehsil the atmosphere at
Dhamali was tense, and consequently 5 strong defensive posts were
improvised at different points in the village.  There were 15 men to
defend each position.  Persons were also deputed to guard the village. 
Further there were men kept in reserve for unforeseen emergencies.

9.3.47.  At about 10 p.m. a band of about 1,500 raiders appeared.  There
was a mutual exchange of fire and 15 of the raiders were accounted for. 
The raiders took to their heels and the next day passed off peacefully.

11.3.47.  A crowd of 4,000 appeared.  They were mostly from the
neighbouring villages, and there were also local Muslims.  The Hindus
and Sikhs acquitted themselves well and the raiders retreated to the
neighbouring hills and knolls.

12.3.47.  The raiders re-appeared in the evening of 12.3.47. There was a
thick mass of many thousands.  They started setting the village ablaze. 
There was also an exchange of rifle fire.  The raiders offered terms
through one Bakshi Balmokand, retired D. S. P., who was defending one of
the village posts.  The raiders demanded Rs. 14,000 and surrender of
three rifles.  Bakshi Balmokand paid an additional sum of Rs. 18,000 on
behalf of Hindus.  He also delivered to the raiders 3 rifles used by the
Sikhs.  The safety of Hindus was thus secured.  This inevitably weakened
the defence.  The Sikhs then had to fight single-handed.  A part of the
raiders left late in the evening after despoiling and burning down the
town.

13.3.47.  The raiders appeared in still larger numbers at about 5 p.m.
(according to some, they were about 20,000).  It would seem that the
numbers were swelled by those who had by that time completed their
devastating work elsewhere, and could easily join the mob investing
Dhamali village.  The besieged with swords in their hands, rushed out;
many of them were killed, while a few escaped with some injuries.  The
long drawn-out contest ended on the 13th.  The casualties of the village
were heavy and the number of those killed could not be less than 500.
Dhamali is one of those villages which fought stubbornly and lost
heavily.  Their exploits have evoked general admiration.  It is
significant the police of Kalar police station and also the military in
spite of repeated requests for succour did absolutely nothing for this
brave village while it waged its heroic fight against overwhelming
odds.  Military lorries were rushing towards Kanoha which had already
been finished but had no thought for Dhamali, which yet stood unharmed. 
Military lorries did not of course, reach Dhamali when it lay in ruins.

*Harial*.

About 6 miles from Gujarkhan.

Hindu and Sikh population about 150, (Master Tara Singh’s birth-place).

8.3.47. Thick column of smoke rising into the sky from Bassali and Takht
Pari villages alarmed the people.

9.3.47. About 10,000 raiders beating drums appeared.  People fled in
panic and hid themselves in gorges.  Before the raiders appeared on the
spot. 2 military lorries with Sub-Inspector of Police of Mandra and the
Naib-Tehsildar, Gujarkhan, had visited the spot and panic-stricken
people had repeatedly sought their help.  No help was forthcoming.  The
raiders looted the village and burnt, it down.  Master Tara Singh’s
house received special attention at their hands and it was demolished
with particular care and frenzied fury.  Among those who were killed was
Master  Tara Singh’s uncle, Sardar Gokal Singh who served the cause of
education for about 30 years, turning out of his school, of which he was
the founder, hundreds of Muslim students.  His second uncle Ram Chand
was also killed.  Hindus of the village suffered along with the Sikhs.

Bhai Gurbaksh Singh Granthi of Harial was reported to have been burnt
alive in his house and about 20 persons of the village lost their lives.

*Harnal*

Village about 6 miles from Gujarkhan.  Non-Muslim population about 150.

This village is mostly populated by Brahmans.

9.3.47. It is reported that the Sub-Inspector of Police, Mandra, and the
Naib-Tehsildar of Gujarkhan were approached for help to avert the
impending raid.  It is reported that their reply was that a compromise
had been arrived at between the raiders and the people of Harial village
and that Harnal should follow suit.  Thus Harnal suffered like Harial
without any official help.  The village was looted and burnt down.

*Dora Budhal*

5 miles from Gujarkhan.  Hindu and Sikh population about 200.

6.3.47 and 7.3.47. Egress from Dora was blocked by Muslims and care was
taken that none should leave the village.  To this end the local Muslims
established their watch and ward system to see that there was no egress
from the village.

2.3.47. A joint meeting of Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims was held.  On
behalf of Muslims, Sikhs were told that those who proceeded to Gujarkhan
would do go at the cost of their own lives, and that Hindu; and Sikhs
must not leave the village and that Muslims would protect them.

10.3.47.  Kesar Singh, Ajit Singh and Santokh Singh proceeded to
Gujarkhan under cover of darkness, to seek succour in view of the
imminent danger, but no help was available.  They went back and by that
time about 900 raiders had enveloped the place.  The Sikhs assembled in
the Gurdwara. Lambardar Mohd.  Zaman demanded that they should either
surrender their arms or deposit them in his house.  At the third
repetition of this demand, the Sikhs surrendered two of the kirpans and
seemingly there was to be peace.  But as soon as the guarrantor of peace
went out he declared that the crowd of the raiders was thick, he could
not help them and that they should look to their own safety.  Two shots
were fired from outside and the outskirts of the village were set on
fire.  The Sikhs and Hindus grew panicky, and ran to seek shelter in
their own houses or in their friends’.  Then the raiders looted the
village and burnt it down.  Four Sikhs and Hindus lost their lives. 
Mohd.  Zaman, Lambardar was mentioned as a prominent author of the
mischief.

*Kanayat Khalil*

6 miles from Gujarkhan.  Sikh population about 200. 10.3.47. The local
Muslims professedly mounted guard on Sikhs and averted that this was
intended for their protection.

11.3.47. Mirza Mohd.  Sadiq, Lambardar, suggested to Sikhs to vacate the
village and run for their lives as he said there was great danger ahead
and that Pathans were coming to loot the place.  The Sikhs were yet
getting ready when to their consternation they found the local Muslim
coming out to loot them.  In the evening there came raiders from other
areas too and Sikhs sought refuge in the nearby gorges at night. The
place was looted and burnt down by the raiders.

*Jand Mehlu*

5 miles from Gujarkhan. Hindu and Sikh population about 200.

9.3.47. Qazian had been set on fire and hence-alarm was created at the
place.  The Muslims assured the Sikhs and Hindus of their goodwill and
mounted guard for the night.

10-3-47.  The danger of a raid was perceived to be imminent and
therefore Sikhs and Hindus approached Sahibzada Rahmat Shah who had
previously assured them of their protection.  He said that he was
helpless and they should escape if they could, in half an hour’s time. 
Therefore they met together in Kirpal Singh’s house.

In the meantime there appeared 2,000 raiders who started setting the
place ablaze. The Sahibzada demanded that the Sikhs should surrender
their arms and that he himself would escort them to Gujarkhan.  The
Sikhs refused to surrender arms; a grim fight was imminent when 3 good
Muslims acted as mediators and brought about peace, and arms were
surrendered.

The Sikhs and Hindus passed the night in a mosque and the next day they
reached Gujarkhan.  The village was looted and burnt.  During the course
of negotiations for peace after the surrender of arms, there was a loss
of five lives.  The names of those who lost their lives are :- 1. 
Kaniya Lal was burnt alive and his wife was wounded and killed. 2. A
girl named Wanti was burnt alive. 3. A Sadhu was killed. 4. Prem Singh
was hacked with a hatchet.

*Mandra*

9 miles from Gujrakhan on the G. T. Road.  It is a railway junction. 
Hindu and Sikh population 500.

7.3.47. A meeting was held.  There was anti-Sikh and anti-Hindu
propaganda.  The atmosphere grew tense.  There went about a rumour that
Mandra would be set on fire.

9.3.47. Some prominent local Muslims, Qamar Zaman, Abdul Malik, Abdur
Razaq, Subedar Gulzar Khan, assured the Hindus and Sikhs of their
goodwill and exhorted them to open their shops.  Faith was put in these
assurances and Sikhs and Hindus opened their shops.  The Muslim
shop-keepers however, started clearing goods out of their shops.  This
created a strong suspicion regarding a plot to burn shops.  At about 10
a.m. gangs of raiders began to pour in.  They were about 2,000 in all. 
At 12.30 p.m. fire was started, panic was created and people took
shelter in the local police station.  The town was reported to be looted
and burnt in the presence of the Police and the Military.  They took no
action.  The Naib-Tehsildar of Gujarkhan is reported to have been at
Mandra on the day and at the time of occurrence.  Two Hindus are
reported to have been burnt alive, while on 10.3.47, 3 Sikhs, 2 from
Bassali and 1 from Harial are reported to have been killed at Mandra
Railway Station.

*Dhangdeo Isran*

4 miles from Gujarkhan. Hindu population about 225.

There had been plenty of anti-Sikh and anti-Hindu propaganda in the
surrounding area and the whole atmosphere was full of tension even
before 7.3.47.

7.3.47. In the evening Master Tek Chand who was proceeding to Rawalpindi
was assaulted.  A false news was circulated that Gujarkhan Sikhs had
killed 26 Muslims boys and a prominent local Muslim was told that his
son was one of them.  There was considerable excitement.

8.3.47. There was a tense atmosphere and communal feelings were openly
engendered and embittered.

9.3.47. Qazian was set on fire. This intensified the danger.

10.3.47. One thousand raiders appeared at night and slogans were
shouted.  Lal Khan of Dhok Kalrian threateningly showed his pistol and
demanded a sum of Rs. 5,000.  The Hindus said that they would pay to Lal
Khan.  Nobody came to Hindus during the rest of the night and the Hindus
removed their families to the house of one Godar Khan in a nearby
village.  Godar Khan took good care of them.

11.3.47. Lal Khan came to Godar Khan’s house and demanded the Hindus’
conversion.  The Hindus asked him to state exactly what he wanted.  He
demanded (a) The Muslim League flag to wave over the temple, (b) they
should recite the Kalma and become Musalmans.  The terms were accepted. 
Then the Hindus were required to kill a cow and eat beef.  The Hindus
hesitated and wavered.  The Muslims looted and burnt the village.  At
Godar Khan’s intervention the killing of the cow was put off for a day. 
For two days and nights, Godar Khan took care of them and on 10.3.47 he
escorted them to Gujarkhan and saved over 100 lives.

*Banda*

Hindu-Sikh population about 700.

About 1½ months before the occurrence, the danger was realized and the
matter reported to the police.  Mohd.  Afzal of Takhti held a meeting of
Muslims on 6.3.47, and Somundar of Pari said that 7,000 Pathan raiders
were about to raid the town and that Sikhs and Hindus must vacate the
town.  Some of the surrounding villages had already, been looted and
burnt.  Many people left the village.  Some of them were deprived of
their valuables in the way.  Two days before the raid the impending
danger was reported at the police station but no action was taken.  The
raiders visited the town on 10.3.47 and it was looted and burnt. 
Thirteen Hindus and Sikhs lost their lives.  About 178 persons took
shelter at Dhok Budhal and the Muslims of that place dealt kindly with
them and took good care of them.

11.3.47. Military lorries conveyed them to Rawat and on 12.3.47 they
reached Gujarkhan.  Banda, Bassali and Takhat Pari village were burnt
down the same day.

*Mohra Brahmanan*

11 miles from Gujarkhan, Hindu and Sikh population about 225.

9-3-47.  About 2,500 raiders, many of them armed with rifles and some of
them wearing steel helmets, after burning down Kanoha visited this
village.  The villagers fled and took shelter in the strongly built
Gurdwara of Tapiana Sahib of Sant Attar Singh and in their absence the
raiders looted and burnt down the village, and at leisure looted and
carted the looted property and conveyed it to their homes for two days. 
There was only a brief encounter with the raiders and 3 Sikhs were
killed.  The raiders did encircle the Gurdwara but could not get into
it.  Military lorries arrived on 12.3.47 and they fired at the raiders
and dispersed them.

*Bhagsana*

5 miles from Gujarkhan, population 150 Sikhs and Brahmans.

8.3.47. There came 1,000 raiders beating drums.  The youth of the
village had joined this mob.  There was none to put up a fight.  The
villagers fled, but were pursued and hunted out. The place was looted
and burnt and most of the people were converted forcibly.

*Choha Khalsa*

18 miles from Gujarkhan. Population 1,400, 600 Sikhs.

9.3.47. 1,500 raiders appeared.

10.3.47. The number of raiders swelled to about 2,000.  The villagers
improvised four strong positions.  The raiders demanded their conversion
and payment of Rs. 14,000.

12.3.47. The Sikh ladies in their extremity either committed suicide or
entreated their husbands and fathers to kill them.  This was done.  Thus
the ladies saved their honour.  Most of the Hindus under Pressure
accepted Islam.  Only one of them, Hem Raj died fighting.  There was
much loss of life, but exact figures are not available.  Only 30 Sikhs
are reported to he alive.

*Kuri Dalal*

Hindus and Sikhs about 350.

7.3.47. Jamadar Gulab Khan said to the audience in the local mosque as
reported by Man Singh who was one of the audience: “Khizar resigned on
3. 3. 47; now Pakistan has been established.  The Qaid-Azam (Mr. Jinnah)
commands that Hindus and Sikhs of your Ilaqa should be converted.  Carry
out this duty.”

8-3-47.  The imminent danger was repeatedly reported to the police but
no action was taken.

8.3.47. Kuri Dalal was looted and burnt down.

10.3.47. The villagers took shelter in the Mandra police station.

*Mohra Bhattan*

The Mohemmedans sent word that as the village had harboured Hindus and
Sikhs of Mankiala Brahman, therefore as a punitive measure the village
should be raided.  At this the villagers turned out S. Nanak Singh of
Mankiala and his family. In spite of this a thick mass of raiders about
10,000 in number raided the village and the village was burnt and looted
on 9.3.47.

*Ghungrila*

4 miles from Gujarkhan.  Sikh population about 300.

9.3.47. At about 4 p.m. about 1000 raiders visited the place and the
villagers were asked to surrender their arms and thereby save their
lives.  Suspecting treachery, the villagers refused to lay down their
arms and rot ready to resist them with 2 rifles, one pistol and
brick-bats.  The Police had been pre-informed of the impending
occurrence but no action was taken.  The contest lasted for 14 hours and
5 villagers lost their lives while the raiders lost about 10.

10-3-47.  Military lorries evacuated them to Gujarkhan.

*Dera Khalsa*

18 miles from Gujarkhan.  Sikhs about 300.

7.3.47. A raid as anticipated, but Zaildar Mubarak Khan did nothing to
avert it, or to help the villagers.

8.3.47. About 2,500 raiders appeared on the spot.  The villagers
collected on tops of two lofty houses and there was but feeble
resistance on the part of the villagers.  The village was looted and
burnt down.

9-3-47.  Military lorries evacuated the villagers to Gujarkhan and
Rawalpindi.

*Kallar*.

About 15 miles from Gujarkhan, Sikh population about 800.

The resistance of this village reads like an epic.  The raiders came in
a thick mob, armed with guns, hatchets, spears, etc.  It is reported
that the villagers vacated their houses and the raiders finding the
coast clear went into the shops and houses for loot; the villagers then
encircled them and killed many of them. More raiders in overwhelming
numbers arrived and the villagers took shelter in the mansion of the
late Raja Sir Gurbakhsh Singh and exchanged fire with the raiders for
two days.  Military lorries came and dispersed the raiders.  Full
details, however, of the villagers’ fight which is reported to have been
extremely stubborn, are not available.  It is, however, freely
mentioned, that thousands of raiders, like a cloud of locusts had
invested the town.  When the villagers had taken shelter in the mansion
referred to above, the raiders found the field open for the usual loot
and arson, and the village was looted and burnt.

*Nakrali*.

Sikh population about 200.  Adults about 35.  Elderly persons 23.

There was some resistance.  Four men were killed.  The rest accepted
conversion under pressure and they seemed to be much ashamed of
themselves.

*Sukho*.

About 6 miles from Gujarkhan.  Population 2,500 Sikhs.  Hindus about
500.

10-3-47. At about 12 noon about 10,000 Muslim raiders from surrounding
villages assembled in the Islamia School, Sukho, and sent for Chaudhries
of the town.  They demanded money for ransom, to spare the town.  There
were however, dissentients among Muslims who opined that the town must
not be spared for money.  No settlement was arrived at and the
Chaudhries returned.  Then the raiders, by beat of drum moved to Singh
Sar, at about 4-30 p.m. On 9-3-47 the Deputy Commissioner, Rawalpindi
was at Sukho and the people of Sukho brought home to him their impending
danger.  He sent some 15 British soldiers with guns to protect the
town.  At about 4-30 p.m. arrived the said Military picket.  The raiders
enveloped the Tommies but when the latter aimed their guns at them, the
raiders gave way and made way for them.  The raiders, even when the
military was there, started setting fire to the outskirts of the town. 
A Gurdwara and School of Bedi Kaur Singh were set on fire.  Two
Gurdwaras were burnt and destroyed. About fifty houses were burnt down. 
The military never fired to drive away the raiders.

The people of Sukho in conjunction with the refugees from Banda put up a
tough fight, after offering a fervent Ardas.^([4](#4)) They had
improvised fourteen strong positions.  They repulsed the raiders and
accounted for about seventy-five men, wounding a much larger number. A
few raiders hid themselves in a house and the Sukho people by accident
or design set fire to the house.

Rakhshi Avtar Singh Kir, Subedar Kartar Singh and Lt. Gurbakhsh Singh
did creditable work in defending the town, and saving the major part of
the town and its inhabitants.  The people of Sukho were inspired to
heroic exploits by Sant Hari Singh of Pindi.  He infused a heroic
chivalric spirit in all.  The story of Sukho reads like an epic.  Sant
Hari Singh was constantly reciting Sukhmani Sahib, and inspiring them. 
The town of Sukho is intact and defied all danger till September, when
people were evacuated to India.

**XXXXVIII**

Atrocities committed on Sikhs and Hindus in West Punjab, admitted by the
West Punjab Government in their official publication:

(Actual words from “Sikhs in Action” have been quoted below).

September, 1947.

“An evacuee train carrying non-Muslim refugees from Rawalpindi was
derailed near Lahore; a refugee convoy in trucks was held up by some
Pathans near the Ravi Bridge and two^([5](#5)) of the refugees killed.”

“Four non-Muslims were killed at the Lahore Station and 12 near
Moghulpura.”

“The next day (22-9-47) the non-Muslim refugee train berthed at
Moghulpura was attacked and 32 people were killed.”

“There were isolated stabbings in Rawalpindi (in September); sixty
non-Muslims were killed on the 11th and 14 on the 24th.  A Muslim mob in
Multan Cantonment attacked lorries carrying non-Muslims.”

“On the following day; (3-9-47), several villages in P. S. Sadar Multan
were looted by a Muslim mob, and on the 5th 300 Hindus were killed near
Shujabad.”

“A non-Muslim Refugee convoy was attacked near Arifwala.  A convoy of
Sikhs and Hindus was looted on the 22nd near Pakpattan.”

“There were attacks on non-Muslims in Sargodha, Mianwali, Dera Ghazi
Khan, Muzaffargarh, Attock and Campbellpore and on many of these
occasions, the Pathans joined the local riff-raff in looting.”

In Gujranwala “a train carrying non-Muslims refugees was attacked by a
mob, at Kamoke on the 24th.  Three hundred Hindus and Sikhs were
killed.”

“Two trains were derailed by mobs, near Wazirabad on 26th and 27th.”

**XXXXIX**

Table of illicit arms recovered from Muslims by the Punjab Police.  
 

[TABLE]

There are 28 entries against which in the Religion Column of the
individuals involved ‘not known’ is entered.  These are doubtless cases
of recovery from Muslims, which are deliberately left unspecified by the
investigating officer.

NOTE :-- *The Police being overwhelmingly Muslim, very few recoveries
arms were made from Muslims, and fewer still were recorded*.  
 

LIST OF INCIDENTS AND ATROCITIES DONE TO SIKHS AND HINDUS.

NOTE :- *This list must be studied with this caution fully kept in
mind*:-

1\. It is not full-not as a matter of fact more than a small fraction of
what actually happened in Western Pakistan.  Spread out such happenings
a hundred-fold or more, and you will perhaps get the right proportions. 
These are only a few available statements of refugees in Amritsar
Camps.  These refugees would be not more than one per cent of the total
number of Hindu and Sikh refugees.  And these statements do not even
cover all these refugees, but have been picked out of the tales of a
few, almost at random.  But they are representative of the character of
what happened everywhere in West Punjab and other parts of Western
Pakistan.

\(2\) The dates given alongside of each occurrence, the character of the
assailants and the nature of atrocities have their own moral to reveal. 
These attacks occurred in two waves, everywhere simultaneously - first
in March, 1947 and then near about August, 1947.

(There was also a widespread attack in the Frontier Province in
December, 1946 and January, 1947.)

(*a*) A common programme and policy made them synchronise over wide
areas at exactly the same time.

(*b*) Muslim Police, Military and Officials fully helped and even led
the assailants.

(*c*) No barbarities and indignities were spared to the unfortunate
victims.

  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))Amritsar, in this and the two next paragraphs.

^([2](#2a))The Frontier Red Shirts or “Khudai Khidmatgars”.

^([3](#3a))Shri Mohan Lal Saksena stated in the Indian Parliament on
22.l.’50 that 800 places of worship (Sikh and Hindu) were reported
demolished in Pakistan.

^([4](#4a))Sikh prayer.

^([5](#5a))13 dead bodies of victims of this attack were shown to
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Health Minister of India, at Amristar. (Present
writer’s note).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books) [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
