+++
title = "19 Goes for the Jugular"

+++
NINETEEN  
Goes for the Jugular[1](#1)

Barnard Katz

Buckle up your seat belts as Warraq takes us for a nerve-wracking ride
through the seamy and sordid parts of Islam. With his book as travel
guide, you'll never forget the dark and treacherous sides of Islam.

Warraq has the credentials because he's taken the journey himself - one
that started with the certainties of growing up in a Muslim family, then
through the dark night of doubt and, finally, to rejecting completely
all revealed religion. He now considers himself a "secular humanist who
believes that all religions are sick men's dreams, false - demonstrably
false - and pernicious."

Two events galvanized him into writing this book: "nauseating" Western
apologists ("liberal journalists, scholars and woefully misguided
Christian clergy") who tried to get Islam off the hook for passing a
death sentence on Salman Rushdie, and the many Muslims who are victims
of the resurgence of fanatical Islamic fundamentalism.

Warraq takes his title from Bertrand Russell's *Why I Am Not a
Christian*, using Russell's own ideas against Islam, as well as many
other top guns (see his 8-page bibliography). This a very good idea for,
as Warraq points out, any argument that has been used against the
revealed religions of the West - like Christianity - may be used with
equal force against Islam.

Warraq acknowledges that Christian fundamentalism is not the same as
Islamic fundamentalism because most Christians have moved away from the
literal interpretation of the Bible while "all Muslims - not just a
group we have called 'fundamentalist' - believe that the Koran is
literally the word of God." Since it is valid for all times and places,
its ideas are absolutely true and beyond all criticism. Thus to question
the very word of God is blasphemous. It is every Muslim's duty to
believe it and to obey its divine commands. This is the worst legacy of
Muhammed, for this very attitude "closes the possibility of new
intellectual ideas and freedom of thought that are the only way the
Islamic world is going to progress into the twenty-first century."

And therein lies Warraq's attack. He systematically goes for the
jugular. He explores the origins of Islam and the Arabic idolatry that
preceded Muhammed. He highlights the treachery and rationalizations of
Muhammed as the "Prophet" revealed God's word in the Koran, including
the contradictions and barbarities of Muhammed himself. He discloses the
hodgepodge, garbled nature of the writings of the Koran - full of
borrowings from talmudic Judaism, apocryphal Christianity, the
Samaritans, gnosticism, Zoroastrianism and pre-Islamic pagan Arabia.
Warraq demonstrates the totalitarian nature of Islam and its
incompatibility with democracy and human rights. He points up Arab
imperialism, colonialism and slavery. Warraq underlines the great
inferiority of women under Islam as well as the barbarity of female
circumcision. He underlines the taboos about the wine, pork and
homosexuality. Warraq spotlights the maltreatment by Islam of its
heretics and freethinkers (like Rushdie). Finally, it was most
disturbing to find out that contrary to the propaganda of how much we
owe the transmission of science and mathematics to the Muslims, that
Islam has always had a hate affair with Western science because "all
sciences endangered the faith."

This is, in short, a kind of encyclopedia of unbelief that zeroes in on
Islam. As such it takes its rightful place on my shelf of *crème de la
crème* books.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This review appeared in the *American Rationalist*, March/April
1996.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
