+++
title = "21 Was Mohammed a liar?"

+++
TWENTY-ONE  
Was Mohammed a liar?

Hans Jansen[1](#1)

The tradition teaches that Jesus and his family were from Nazareth but
that he was born in Bethlehem. Why again was it that he was born in
Bethlehem? Because of Roman Emperor Augustus' order to organize a
census. The Bible narrates how this census took place when one Quirinius
was Roman Governor of Greater Syria. For this census, we are told,
Jesus' parents had to go to Bethlehem, and there his birth took place.

Much in this census narrative is historically unclear or problematic,
but one thing is completely beyond dispute: Quirinius became Governor of
Syria only in AD 6.

After Jesus' birth, the story continues, his parents fled to Egypt
because king Herod the Great threatened to kill all the boys newly born
in Bethlehem: the Bethlehem Slaughter of the Innocents. In that story
too, much is unclear and problematic, but one thing is completely beyond
dispute: this King Herod died in the year 4 BC.

The details of the story narrated by the Gospel writers create a period
in which Jesus cannot have been born because his birth must fall before
Herod's death (in 4 BC) and after Quirinius' nomination (in AD 6). Such
a period does not exist, but in that period Jesus was born!

Yet, most believers do not seriously worry about this. The point for
them is not the dates of Quirinius and Herod but for instance the
Christian call to charity which forms a healthy corrective in a society
full of competition and rivalry.

The ones to ponder over these dates are historians who want to find out
what exactly happened at the time. Every scientific reconstruction of
what happened around the beginning of the Christian era, selects
elements from the traditional narrative, adds other available data,
considers the archaeological elements if any exist, and thus tries to
construct a coherent story.

The 'scientific', historical-critical reconstruction is not more than an
attempt. It is quite possible that a future generation of researchers
discovers mistakes in the prevalent construction and comes up with
something better. That the traditional narrative cannot be right, is
certain.

It is a pity that Christian Fundamentalists are always so obsessively
and fanatically concerned with the Creation narrative vs. Darwin; the
decade in which Jesus cannot have been born is where our Fundis could
really work wonders.

**Whoever writes**, prints, sells or reads the above, need not fear
being murdered by Christian Fundamentalist commandos. Things are harder
for a Muslim who collects similar stories about Islam. A US-based,
apparently Pakistan-born scholar has consequently published similar
considerations under a pseudonym: *Why I Am Not a Muslim*, by an author
who calls himself Ibn Warraq.

The title is an allusion to Bertrand Russell's collection of articles
famous (or notorious?) in England and America, *Why I Am Not a
Christian*, first published in its present form in 1957 but mostly
written in the 1940s. Russell had naturally made enemies with these
articles, but with death he had never been threatened. That, as everyone
knows, has happened regularly to people like Salman Rushdie since 1989.

That Ibn Warraq has chosen to use a pseudonym is a pity, but not
paranoid. Islam punishes apostasy and insulting the Prophet with death.
It takes only one excitable young man of unshakable Islamic and
fundamentalist conviction to get that verdict informally carried out.

That millions of other Muslims will seriously disapprove of this murder
will certainly provide consolation to the widow, but does not make the
death of the victim any less irrevocable. Even in a modem country like
Egypt, there have frequently been killings of people because of their
alleged apostasy from Islam; the most famous among them is certainly Dr.
Farag Foda, killed in 1992, whose witty columns have on occasion been
republished in the NRC.[2](#2) Ibn Warraq explains that his book is his
own contribution to the war against the kind of people who want to
murder Rushdie, and that it is his first book. That could well be true,
for while the book is written in a fascinating style, it is also
somewhat fragmented.

That has one great advantage: when our Prof. Wilhelmus ('Pim') Fortuyn
wants to write another little book against Islam, he won't have to just
invent it as he did in *Tegen de islamisering van onze cultuur*, but
will have a decent work of reference at his disposal.[3](#3)

In the episodes of Islamic history which Ibn Warraq describes, he makes
no difference at all between Islam and Islamic fundamentalism. He thinks
both aim at imposing their will on everyone. Does this equation of Islam
and Islamic fundamentalism deprive Warraq's thesis of its force?

Perhaps Ibn Warraq is right, that Islam and Islamic fundamentalism are
the same, but trying to be boss in a polite and non-violent way is not
punishable under any human or divine law. By contrast, using violence to
achieve this end does invite punishment.

It is quite arguable that a difference between Islam and Islamic
fundamentalism does exist. It would lie herein, that Islam is a broad
religious tradition which, like every religion, focuses on
uncontrollable dimensions such as the hereafter. Fundamentalism in its
turn has reduced this religion to an ideology. That ideology reaches for
the gun slightly faster than is desirable in the modern age.

According to most researchers, there is a difference between a religion
and an ideology, therefore also between Islam and Islamic
fundamentalism. Religion is no religion if it doesn't also have a
message about God's plans with man after his death. A system which only
focuses on what should be done on earth is an ideology (whether or not
religious). An ideology belongs in the world of politics: ideology and
politics are not about the uncontrollable hereafter but about the
controllable division of money, power, jobs, housing and everything a
man can want.

But even if Ibn Warraq is wrong in equating Islam and fundamentalism,
that doesn't render his book unimportant. Ibn Warraq's attack is
directed straight against Islamic religion itself, hardly against its
modern politicized varieties.

One of Warraq's hardest attacks is on the Quran itself. Is God Himself
of speaking in the Quran, as Muslims believe, or has Mohammed (570-632)
cheated? Has Mohammed mendaciously ascribed his own human words and
views to God? Ibn Warraq makes ruthlessly clear that there is no middle
way on this. If the Quran is not God's word, Mohammed is a liar; another
conclusion is, in Ibn Warraq's opinion, impossible.

This also has consequences for the Biblical sciences. If God does make
statements about the life of Jesus in the Quran, is the modern
historical-critical investigation into Jesus' life still necessary? Why
are Western scholars plodding on about topics like Jesus' life without
even wanting to consider the Quran as a source?

If Bible scholarship has proven beyond doubt that the psalms cannot all
be the work of King David (ca. 1,000 BC), while the Quran says they are,
has it not been proven then that the Quran is wrong? If the Quran is
wrong, can it really be the word of God?

The same reasoning can also be developed concerning for instance the
prophet Jonah (of the whale), a prophet in whom the Quran takes an
extraordinary interest. After all, the Jonah narrative is about a
prophet who, just like Mohammed, predicts the downfall of a city, but
the city's inhabitants convert, just like those of Mohammed's city,
Mecca. God decides to spare the city which had converted. The theme of
the story is the prophecy which had not come true and about the
resulting difficulties.

If Western Biblical scholarship shows that Jonah cannot have been a
historical character, does this not undermine the truth calibre of the
Quran? For the Quran simply assumes Jonah's historicity. The same is
true of characters like Noah (of the Flood) and Adam (of Creation).

While discussing these and other matters, Ibn Warraq in passing often
gets very angry with modem Western scholars who in his opinion present
Islam in an unwarrantedly nice and benevolent light. Ibn Warraq expects
of Western researchers a flaming condemnation of what he, Ibn Warraq,
finds wrong in it. It is the question whether this expectation is
justified.

Things would get very unwieldy when someone writing about history or
religion always has to mention that he finds this or that event
scandalous, or that he himself certainly does not believe in the
religious doctrine just described. Even a writer about a genocide will
not want to write in every other line that to him this genocide wasn't
really needed. Reporting with precision what exactly happened is already
hard enough.

Yet, the scholars whom Ibn Warraq pillories have often formulated their
profound findings in such approving terms that it is easy to understand
why to a startled ex-Muslim, a bit less would be more than enough. This
certainly counts for the popular Scottish professor and prolific writer
Montgomery Watt. The laudatory tone in which this pious Christian
Islamologist writes about Islamic tolerance for instance can indeed be
totally misleading, as Ibn Warraq shows.

This way, Ibn Warraq also discusses what Watt has to say about the
sincerity of Mohammed, the prophet of Islam. Did Mohammed invent his
revelations? Did he deceive his contemporaries? Was he a cheat who
managed to fool millions of people? Such allegations, says Watt, can
certainly be laughed off. After all, according to Watt, a successful
religion founder is no fraud. Ibn Warraq points out that "laughing off"
is not the same thing as providing arguments. Neither has Mohammed
convinced millions of Muslims, as Watt seems to believe, but only a few
thousands of contemporaries. The rest, according to Ibn Warraq, was a
matter of compulsion.

Ibn Warraq's preference for subjective descriptions sometimes makes him
invoke 19th century authorities, who saw no need to spare Muslim
sensibilities but who are naturally also obsolete here and there. But
even if they are not obsolete: every scholarly historical-critical
reconstruction or correction is not more than a note in the margin of
Islam's traditional self-history. As Bernard Lewis, the famous
Anglo-American scholar, once said: the official story of Church and
Mosque is certainly wrong, but the scholarly story is uncertain.

Ibn Warraq pits modem Bible scholarship against Islam, but he doesn't
stop there. Islamic law, to which public opinion in Muslim countries
attaches great value, is pilloried as well. Ibn Warraq denounces in
strong terms the rule that non-Muslims cannot testify against Muslims.
Such rules demonstrate, in his opinion, that Islamic judges are not
interested in finding the truth, merely in confirming the superiority of
Muslims over non-Muslims.

In an Islamic world where day in and day out, all the media extol the
superiority of Islam, such a remark is incredibly hard-hitting. For this
remark alone, it is already unthinkable that this book will be made
available for sale in any country with a Muslim majority. And even in
the Netherlands, enemies of the freedom of expression could still create
a mighty upheaval.

In the pages which Ibn Warraq devotes to the position of women, he bases
himself very largely on the work of the Dutch researcher Ghassan Ascha,
who works at Utrecht's Theology faculty. It is an open question whether
Ascha should be happy about this, but the choice proves that Ibn Warraq
knows his subject, for Ascha is indeed the most authoritative publishing
researcher in this field.

Ibn Warraq shows that it is simply untrue that some Quran verses
("Ladies, stay within the house"!) can also be explained as pro-woman
(as Professor Fortuyn seems to believe). The Quran and Islam simply
prescribe a veil, at least to the Prophet's wives, not to the female
subscribers of *HP/DE Tijd*; but the Quran argues for this commandment
with the claim that the Prophet's wives would be "purer" when they go
veiled. Now, in the reasoning of Muslim jurists, when the Prophet's
wives are "purer" when they veil themselves, doesn't this count all the
more strongly for ordinary women? So, the veil is a must for all women.

Unfortunately Ibn Warraq does not show us that to those who care to look
for them, the Bible contains similar women-unfriendly passages. Women
are not to exercise authority over men, women must obey their husbands,
and monogamous marriage was defended with the argument that woman is a
bad thing of which you'd better have as little as possible. (I am aware
that a different explanation is possible.) Apparently
women-unfriendliness lies not in the exact text of the holy scripture,
but in the hearts of the believers.

Ibn Warraq's book will either be ignored with deadly thoroughness or
cause an enormous riot. It shows that the Muslim world is not a closed
front - not any more than the "free world" is. The book contains
precisely that which many Muslims assume is in Rushdie's *Satanic
Verses*: a direct attack on the claim to veracity of the teachings of
Islam.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Prof. Hans Jansen teaches Arabic and Islamic history at the
prestigious State University of Leiden in the Netherlands. He
contributed this review of Ibn Warraq's *Why I Am Not a Muslim* to the
Dutch Weekly *HP/DE Tijd*, The Hague, 4 April 1997. The English
translation with footnotes has been provided by Koenraad Elst.

[2](#2a) NRC = *Nieuwe Rotterdamse Courant/Handelsblad*, Holland's
leading quality newspaper. Even more famous than Farag Foda is Egypt's
Nobel Prize winner Nagib Mahfouz, who barely survived a knife attack in
1994 after his public criticism of the Islamicist movement.

[3](#3a) Prof. Jansen's point is that every "fragment" in Ibn Warraq's
book briefly restates the basic facts about every separate aspect of
Islam. Prof. Pim Fortuyn's book, "Against the Islamization of our
Culture" (1996), is a right-minded but amateurish warning against the
tendency to concede Islamic demands (e.g. in 1992 some Dutch
policy-makers considered allowing female circumcision as a matter of
multiculturalism, a move aborted by protest from Somali women saying
that that they hadn't fled to such an enlightened country to see their
daughters subjected to this barbaric practice). Like the Rashtriya
Swayamsewak Sangh (RSS), Fortuyn confused *religious and national*
aspects of the matter, by assuming that Enlightenment values are part of
the "Dutch" heritage (though the Dutch parliament still includes several
Christian Fundamentalist parties which reject the secular state and
women's rights on Biblical grounds) while Arabs or Pakistanis are
intrinsically Islamic. In reality, the Dutch had to free themselves from
the grip of revealed religion, and the Arabs and Pakistanis are or will
be going through the same process.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
