+++
title = "22 A Religion Incompatible with Human Rights"

+++
TWENTY-TWO  
A Religion Incompatible with Human Rights[1](#1)

N. Innaiah

**Overview**

"The ability to listen to a story," said the renowned Telugu
litterateure Rachakonda Vishwanatha Shastri, "is as important as the
genius for writing one." Similarly, if writing a book is one dimension
of the effort, publishing is another. These days, it often takes courage
to publish a controversial book. In the wake of the persecution of
Salman Rushdie and the Bangladeshi writer Taslima Nasreen, many
publishers have become reluctant to bring out controversial books. They
are particularly chary of publishing anything that is critical of
Muslims, Prophet Muhammad, the Koran or Islamic laws. In the
circumstances, the courage shown by Prometheus Books of U.S.A. in
bringing out Ibn Warraq's *Why I am Not a Muslim* is praiseworthy.

The author who calls himself Ibn Warraq (not his real name) was born
into a Muslim family, but became a severe critic of Islam. There are
many works critical of Islam written by non-Muslims. These are routinely
ignored by most Muslims. But when such a book - as the one under review
- authored by one of their own faith appears, the reaction is swift and
inhuman, and may even mean death for the author. The late Ayotollah
Khomeini, the 'spiritual leader' of Islam issued a *fatwa* of death
sentence against Salman Rushdie, the author of *The Satanic Verses*.
After the publication of her book *Lajja* ('Shame') Taslima Nasreen of
Bangladesh was forced to leave the country and live in exile in Sweden.
These are only two of the best known cases of authors persecuted in the
name of Islam. And yet, all these countries are signatories to the
Declaration of Human Rights!

The book under review, Ibn Warraq's *Why I am Not a Muslim* is a work of
great depth, based on intensive study and analysis of a large number of
scholarly works on Islam. After this research (and his own experience),
the author has declared himself unable to continue as a Muslim. His
willingness to share his findings and views on this highly combustible
topic bears testimony to his extraordinary courage.

Sources: facts and fiction

When Bertrand Russell published his *Why I am Not a Christian*, it was
wholeheartedly welcomed by adherents of other faiths. Ibn Warraq makes
the insightful observation that if Allah were to be substituted for
Jesus in Russell's work, it would still be substantially on the mark.
The same in fact may applies to all religions. Recently, Ramendra Bihar
has written a book called *Why I am Not a Hindu* which may be said to be
in the same vein as the books of Russell and Ibn Warraq.[2](#2)

In his book of 17 chapters, Ibn Warraq has examined every aspect of
Islam - both its doctrine and its application. The book opens with the
Rushdie affair. The details are well known: in February 1989, Ayatollah
Khomeini of Iran issued a *fatwa* (religious decree) of death sentence
against Salman Rushdie for his *Satanic Verses*. As Ibn Warraq notes,
almost as reprehensible was the conduct of some Western liberals some of
whom even justified Khomeini's *fatwa*; no less a person than the French
author Michel Foucault welcomed it. One can only speculate as to the
causes: greed for favours, or fear perhaps.[3](#3)

At a doctrinal level Christianity is as dogmatic as Islam. But as Ibn
Warraq has noted, to some extent at least, Christians have begun to take
notice of academic progress and the results of modern science and
research, something which Muslims have yet to do. He has also observed
that the Koran does not tolerate any academic examination of its claims.
(Progress among 'Christians' is due to the rise of secular-humanism in
the West, and not due to any inherent tolerance of dissent or the growth
of scientific spirit within Christianity.)

The second chapter discusses at length the origins of Islam and also the
influence of Christian and Jewish source books from which the Koran has
heavily borrowed. The author points out that though supposedly opposed
to idolatry, Muslims have installed and worship a Black Stone at Kaaba,
their holiest shrine. (Astrophysicist Carl Sagan and others have
identified it as a meteorite. Before Islam, Kaaba seems to have been
known to Hindus of India as a place of pilgrimage.) According to Ibn
Warraq, the choice of the spot of Kaaba was in all probability due to
its proximity to the well of Zam Zam - a precious water source on the
caravan route that passed through Mecca on its way to Yemen and Syria.

The third chapter examines the problems associated with the sources of
Islam. It shows that many of the traditional beliefs about the Koran
have little or no historical basis.

The fourth chapter takes a critical look at the message and teachings of
Muhammad. The author highlights the fact that many who have criticized
the Prophet were not necessarily non-believers, but sincere scholars who
nonetheless stated simply as facts many things that the orthodox may
find unpalatable. During the first period in Mecca, Muhammad appears to
have been religiously motivated, sincerely seeking truth. His attitude
seems to have undergone a sea change in subsequent years as he gained in
power and influence.

The fifth chapter presents a critical overview of the Koran. For
Muslims, the Koran is holy, wholly God-given, and of which every word is
true to the letter. The author demonstrates that this has no basis in
reality. On the other hand, the Koran is full of inconsistencies, with
many contradictions, later textual additions, and variant readings. All
this is supported with the help of profuse examples.

What is particularly telling is the author's observation that all
Islamic countries are signatories to the Declaration of Human Rights,
while their sacred book - the Koran - is filled with teachings that
grossly violate human rights. In addition, like the Bible, the Koran too
rejects the Theory of Evolution and other findings of science.

Islam and the state

The author next brings out the uncompromisingly totalitarian nature of
the 'religion' of Islam; democracy and Islam are fundamentally
incompatible. It is full of "do" and "don't" injunctions which it uses
to regulate the whole of human life from birth to death. It is not just
democracy which Islam is opposed to, Islam has no place for secularism.
It does not separate religion from polity.[4](#4)

The Islamic law or *Sharia* rests on four pillars: the Koran, the Sunna
(sayings and traditions of the Prophet), the ljma or the consensus of
orthodox scholars, and the Qiyas or reasoning through analogy. But
according to the author, the Koran was written down over a period from
the 7th to the 9th century AD, appropriating large portions from
apocryphal Christian, Zoroastrian and Samaritan traditions. It is filled
with countless irrationalities, grammatical errors and
self-contradictions - hardly living up to the claim of the infallible
word of God.

There are occasional homilies about the need for generosity and kindness
towards parents and so forth, but these are greatly outnumbered by its
voluminous negative outpourings - of extreme intolerance towards pagans
and other nonbelievers, calls to violence and slaughter, gender
inequality and other similarly inhuman teachings. The Prophet of Islam
expresses his disgust at human reasoning - the enemy of blind faith.

Orthodox Muslim scholars stoutly deny the existence of a priestly order
in Islam, but the reality is different. In the name of *ulema* its
priesthood has held on to a monopoly over the interpretation of Islam
and has for centuries been a barrier to progress. It is these mullahs
who have turned back every attempt at progress, from the spread of
rational thinking to the growth of science. The author is uncompromising
in his indictment of Sharia; it was drawn up over a thousand years ago
and can hardly be used as a panacea for every human situation today.
Such obstinacy, he argues, can only retard moral and every other kind of
progress.

Human Rights

Muslim countries have signed the Declaration of Human Rights of 1948
while at the same time professing unwavering loyalty to Islam. They also
continue to be members of the United Nations. But Islam violates human
rights at every step. Men and women are treated as unequal in Islam, and
the testimony of a woman in a court of law is worth only half of that of
a man.

To begin with, the Declaration of Human Rights does not countenance
gender inequality. But Islam restricts the freedom of women in almost
every respect; the insistence on the veil (*purdah*) is only one example
of it. For another, Muslim women cannot marry non-Muslims.

The Declaration of Human Rights is also against religious
discrimination, but non-Muslims living in Muslim countries have almost
no rights - sometimes not even the right to life. Persons belonging to
other faiths are forbidden from offering their prayers, building temples
and churches, or reciting their sacred texts. Slavery is legal
(according to the Koran), and men are allowed to cohabit with any number
of concubines.

Torture and degrading punishment are also against human rights, but they
are commonplace in Islamic societies. Such savage punishments as public
flogging, scores and even hundreds of lashes (in public) for women,
amputation of limbs, and stoning to death are freely prescribed.

Human rights imply universal equality as a fundamental principle, but
Islamic countries flagrantly violate this principle. For instance,
conversion to Islam is permitted and even encouraged, but apostasy - or
leaving Islam - is forbidden under pain of death. Islam does not
recognize freedom of conscience; in fact, it sees it as a great evil.

The author has provided pages upon pages of testimony showing that human
rights have no place in Islam. According to him secularist reform is
unavoidable if Muslims are to keep pace with the rest of the world. This
means religion and polity must be separated. (But if this happens Islam
will collapse. Islam without the power to control and regulate the
people is inconceivable.)

Women in Islam and other topics

The author devotes a whole chapter to the attitude of Islam towards
woman. Islam like Christianity believes that the creation of man came
before that of woman. (They both borrowed the idea from Judaism.) It
gives precedence to man, and as the author shows with numerous examples,
Islam has been savage in its treatment of women. Here are a few
examples.

A women during the menstrual period is not. permitted to touch the
Koran. She is not allowed to go anywhere near the Kaaba. She can neither
pray nor fast. In all this, regarding woman as inferior to man is both
axiomatic and mandatory (Koran 2.282). Even in matters of division of
property, the daughter is entitled to only half of what a son is
assigned. Pursuit of vengeance is also sanctioned in the Koran (Koran
2.178). Muslim jurists have declared that man possesses greater wisdom
than woman. The author discusses the dominance of man in sexual mores
and also how Muslim women themselves treat other women.

Regarding women as slaves, keeping them strictly confined to the home
and treating them as inferiors are best exemplified in the practice of
wearing the veil (*purdah*) by women. It is mandatory, women have no
choice in the matter. In some countries Muslim women have discarded the
veil, but both Islam and the clergy look down upon such a practice.
Also, whenever the clergy manage to gain control of the state - as in
Iran - they invariably reverse the trend by re-imposing the veil. The
author provides many such instances.

The author has also dealt with the poetic tradition in Islam, and the
role of women and wine found therein. Here also there are
inconsistencies. In one place Prophet Muhammad refers to wine as of
divine origin (Koran 16.69), while he prohibits it elsewhere (5.92).
(The Prophet was himself said to enjoy a drink of wine once in a while
as do many of his followers, especially in the West.)[5](#5)

All religions impose certain restrictions in matters of food and drink.
Hinduism and Christianity are no exceptions. Islam regards pigs as
unclean and has banned pork in any form (again borrowing from Judaism).
But Muslims in China consume pork while calling it mutton. Even in the
staunchly Islamic Morocco, pork is eaten widely if clandestinely.

Personality of the Prophet

Ibn Warraq devotes a full chapter to the personality of Prophet
Muhammad, including positive traits in his character which made him
stand out in history. During the Mecca period, his conduct appears to
have been marked by sincerity and even nobility. But his personality and
attitudes seem to have undergone a radical change during the Medina
period. He began to see himself as the infallible Messenger of God and
intercessory. (In other words, he became a megalomaniac.)

Muslims hold that there is no salvation for non-Muslims - that is, for
those who do not believe that Allah is the Only God and Muhammad is His
(Last) Prophet. They also believe it is the sacred duty of Muslims to
spread this message to the whole of humanity (by the sword if
necessary). The author has convincingly argued that there can be no
greater hallucination. Bertrand Russell bears testimony to the
untenability of such a stand.

The author has also shown that the growth of fresh ideas and
intellectual freedom have suffered grievously because of Prophet
Muhammad's declaration that the Koran is divine in origin, the sole
repository of ultimate truth to the exclusion of everything else. (His
followers have ensured that this claim is not questioned by anyone
concerned about one's life.)

Summary and warning

*Why I am Not A Muslim* is not a book of fantasy - or of veiled attack -
like Salman Rushdie's *Satanic Verses*. It is a deeply felt intellectual
tour de force by a great Muslim scholar whose heart bleeds for the fate
of his fellow Muslims, and whose thirst for knowledge has led him on a
path of incomparable research and study. Because of the well-known (and
widely feared) Muslim proclivity to violence the book had to be brought
out by an American humanist publisher rather than any of the major
publishing houses. It is doubtful that there exists another work on the
subject as scholarly, as detailed or as comprehensive, not to say as
courageous.

Looking at the scene in India, the writings of Hamid Dalwai and A.B.
Shah have set many people thinking about the nature of Islam. If Ibn
Warraq's book were to be made widely available in India, it may serve to
open the eyes of the people further. After placing before us the Koran
in its true colours, the author has highlighted the danger of continuing
the practice of dinning into the impressionable minds of innocent Muslim
children the contents of the 6000 odd Suras making up the Koran, forcing
them to commit them to memory to the exclusion of everything else.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This review appeared in the Telegu monthly, *MISIMI*
("Brilliant") of April, 1997. The monthly is published from Hyderabad in
Andhra Pradesh. It has been translated into English by S. R. Ramaswamy.

[2](#2a) Here the reviewer appears to be guilty of the common error
committed by most intellectuals of equating the scripture of dogmatic
creeds like Christianity and Islam with the more flexible Hindu
tradition. Unlike the Koran for instance which is a book of authority,
Hindu works offer only guidance. They are open also to challenge and
reform.

[3](#3a) Leftist intellectuals in India were not so brazen as Foucault;
they only sat in petrified silence.

[4](#4a) The highest goal of Islam is the installation of a world empire
or Caliphate - a theocratic empire ruled according to the rules of
Islam. It sees any attempt to separate religion from the state as a
great evil.

[5](#5a) This was before the revelation prohibiting wine was sent by
Allah.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
