+++
title = "25 The Koranic View of Government"

+++
TWENTY-FIVE  
The Koranic View of Government[1](#1)

Anwar Shaikh

The book *Why I am Not a Muslim* by Ibn Warraq is a nice aggregate of
learning, intellect and courage. I was delighted when its author paid me
a visit in the early part of 1997. During the conversation, I was
impressed by his motive and mastery of the subject.

Ibn Warraq is the pen-name of the author whose parents emigrated from
India to Pakistan as a result of the Partition. He was brought up in
Pakistan, which was supposed to be an Islamic Republic. His experience
revealed to him that the Muslims of India had been cheated in the name
of Islam and its projected principles of equality, free will and
democracy. As he grew up, he noticed that Islam had become an effective
tool of convenient morality and achieving political goals; a religious
or secular leader could prove anything from the Koran and Hadith to suit
his purpose, yet every faithful believes that there is no contradiction
in the verses of the Koran! During his long cogitation on the subject,
Ibn Warraq became suspicious about the Divine Origin of the Koran: It is
a case of intellectual anarchy, he realised. But the curiosity that had
been spurred by the zeal of enquiry, demanded a thorough study of the
Koran, the Hadith and the History to Islam. As a result, came into being
his famous work: *Why I am Not a Muslim*. It testifies to the fact that
he has abandoned Islam, which he once dearly loved as a matter of faith,
without realising what it was all about. To him, faith is the enemy of
reason, which is the root of humanity; a man with suppressed intellect
is no better than a monkey: religion is the source of regression and not
progression. Thus, blind faith, the essence of religion, is not
acceptable.

Unless Ibn Warraq had the courage of his convictions, he could not have
dealt with the major principles of Islam to expose their irrelevance to
humanity in general, and problems of the modem age in particular. As it
is not possible to enumerate all aspects of this book, I may mention the
Koranic view of government as understood by the author. He laments the
fact that Islam does not permit separation of government from the
religious dogma. And he is quite right in his observation because the
Koran clearly states:

God has created mankind only to worship Him (L1:55).

It goes without saying that worship denotes a mentality and discipline
much viler than slavery. According to the Koran, man is God's slave and,
therefore, he must do what he is told by Allah, the Master, who makes it
crystal clear that "He associates in His government no one" (XVIII:25).

Thus, Allah is the greatest dictator that human mind can imagine.
Therefore, a Muslim ruler being His representative on earth, is an
absolute ruler, immune from public accountability. However, Allah does
encourage the man, who rules in His name (the Caliph) to set up a
consultative body (III: 150). The Caliph may consult his advisers but
their advice is not binding on him. He comes to his own conclusions. The
principle of majority-opinion has no relevance in this process of
consultation. Yet the Muslim jurists have drummed up the idea of
democracy!

This is nothing but a form of gross hypocrisy, which nauseates Ibn
Warraq, who grew up in the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, which boasts of
an elected Parliament. From the Koranic point of view, it is an illegal
institution because Islam, not only staunchly advocates Divine
dictatorship, but also forbids law-making by declaring the Koran an
eternal and unchangeable code of law.

Ibn Warraq's book is devoted to exposing the inadequacy of the Koranic
law, which the Muslims cannot practise because of its irrelevance to the
problems of the modem age, yet believe in the veracity and supremacy of
the Islamic legal code. This is what has distorted the vision of the
Muslim world, and has become the major cause of its regression.

He has also noted that the high-sounding Islamic slogan of human
equality is nothing but an unfounded boast. He explains this fact with
reference to the rights of:

> 1\. The non-Muslims, and  
>
> 2\. Women.

With regard to non-Muslims, the Koran has stated in no uncertain terms
that:

> 1\. "The true religion with God is Islam" (III:15).  
>
> 2\. "Whoso desires another religion than Islam, it shall not be
> accepted of him" (III:75).  
>
> 3\. "It is He (God) who has sent His Messenger (Muhammad) with the
> guidance (the Koran) and the religion of truth (Islam), that he may
> uplift it above every religionâ€¦" (XLVIII:25).

These verses show that all religions are false except Islam, and
therefore, no other faith is valid. This is why Allah has sent the
Prophet Muhammad to raise Islam above every other religion. It is for
this reason that the Koran declares:

"God is an enemy of unbelievers" (II:90).

In fact, hatred of non-Muslims is the fundamental law of Islam: LVIII:
20 has laid it down that non-Muslims are the party of Satan and Muslims
are the party of God. Allah, assuring victory to His party (i.e. the
Muslims), commands them to wage a war against the infidels until they
are humbled and pay tax as an expression of their humiliation (IX:25).

Since Allah, being the enemy of unbelievers, has declared a perpetual
war against them until they are humbled, it is obvious that in an
Islamic state the non-Muslims cannot have any human rights. Ibn Warraq
has stated the pathetic plight of the Dhimmis (non-Muslims) under Muslim
rule.

The social status of woman in an Islamic state is even worse: she is
just a sexual delight for man, who can have four wives at the same time,
in addition to an unlimited number of concubines; Emperor Akbar of India
had five thousand concubines whereas his son, Saleem, had a harem of six
thousand women! A man can divorce his wife at will without giving a
reason for it; his share of inheritance equals that of two women; her
evidence is not readily acceptable in a court of law, and when it is
admitted, two female witnesses equal one man. Again, women are forced to
veil themselves and stay within the four walls of their houses; they are
forbidden to participate in social activities or hold public offices.
Still worse, a wife is a tillage for her husband who can treat her as he
wishes (I1:220). If she does not please him, he is empowered to beat her
until she surrenders (IV:35).

Disclosing the earthly sources of the Koran and artificiality of the
Hadith, Ibn Warraq has displayed the inappositeness of Islam to real
life. He has shown that Islam is neither a code of law nor can it be
practised as such. It is only through the force of brainwashing that the
believers are driven to acknowledge it as the Word of God. It saddens
him to see that almost every Muslim has come to possess a split
personality for unconsciously following a code of practice contrary to
his Islamic faith, which declares the Koranic Law as perfect and
infallible during all ages.

*Why I Am Not a Muslim* is a highly readable and instructive book. It
consists of 402 pages, bearing ISBN 0-87975-984-4 and has been published
by the Prometheus Books, New York 14228-2197.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This review is written for *Liberty*, July 1998. The monthly is
published from Cardiff in England.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
