+++
title = "27 Far more dangerous than Nazism"

+++
TWENTY-SEVEN  
Far more dangerous than Nazism[1](#1)

Dr. Jan Knappert

**Ibn Warraq: *Why I am not a Muslim*. Prometheus Books, New York 1995,
xvi, 402 pages, ISBN. 0-87975-984-4.**

Ibn Warraq grew up in a Muslim family. Islam is a jealous religion so
that any man who grew up in a Muslim family and is, for that reason
considered a Muslim, not by his own volition, has to remain a Muslim for
life, or else he is sentenced to death, and this sentence will be
carried out as soon as a Muslim assassin can get him in the crossed
hairs. Apostasy, in Arabic *irtidad* or *ridda*, is considered "treason"
and a "danger to the (Islamic) state". An apostatic woman is not
executed but imprisoned until she agrees to be a Muslim again.

Incidentally, let the reader have no illusion about the application of
Islamic law: it is not limited to the borders of Islamic states, but it
is universal, so, death will strike anywhere.

The above paragraphs only serve to explain why certain excellent writers
have to live in hiding even in Western Europe, ever since they have lost
their faith in Islam, and said so in public.

A Muslim woman has to wear the veil everywhere, not just within the
borders of an Islamic state. If divorced, her children can be kidnapped
from her and smuggled to an Islamic state; that is legal by Islamic
principles, for the children belong to the father, whether they want to
or not. Women and children have no choice in Islam, they just have to
obey.

At long last a writer has risen to the challenge posed by this religion
of compulsion in the Middle of the World, and has put together in one
book all the objectionable rules of Islam, and has made it into *one of
the best books about Islam* that I have seen in many years.

Ibn Warraq has divided his book into 18 chapters (though the number 18
does not appear in the table of contents), including all the subjects
you ever wanted to know about such as: The Totalitarian Nature of Islam;
Is Islam compatible with Democracy and Human Rights? (answer: no);
Arabic Imperialism, Islamic Colonialism; the Arab conquests and the
position of non-Muslim subjects. Here the Ottoman Empire should have
been discussed, one of the cruellest empires that ever existed,
especially in the 19th century, witness the massacres in Bulgaria in the
1870s. Even after the dissolution of the empire the Turks went on
massacring Christians in Asia Minor, during the nineteen twenties. They
did it so thoroughly, that Adolf Hitler, when learning about this, is
said to have exclaimed: "What an excellent idea, we could try that on
the Jews." He did. Now he stands condemned and the Turks go free. They
can even continue their hideous work in Kurdistan with American
agreement. But let us go back to this excellent book. It proposes: "to
sow a drop of doubt in an ocean of dogmatic certainty by taking an
uncompromising and critical look at almost all the fundamental tenets of
Islam." (p. xiv)

To this end, the author quotes all the classical European Islamologists,
including Arberry, Bell, Blachere, Bousquet, Gibb, Goldziher, Hiskett,
Holt, Hughes, Hurgronje, Lane, Lewis, Margoliouth, Muir, Nicholson,
Nöldeke, Schacht (Snouck is the same as Hurgronje), Watt, Wensinck,
Zwemer and of course, as many Oriental scholars: Al-Ma'arri, Al-Bukhari,
Ibn ISHaq etc.

My problem is that all these names are familiar to me, but this book for
the first time sets out clearly the common message of all these
scholars: that Islam if it will one day be used by a demagogue of
Hitler's calibre, will be a weapon far more dangerous than Nazism, since
it claims a universal tenet: world conquest willed by an Arabic speaking
God. At the moment of writing the Muslims are busy reconquering Bosnia
by means of enthusiastic American generals. Nato is busy creating a
Trojan horse in Europe, for future Islamisation.

This book is so rich that it is difficult to review all the subjects Ibn
Warraq discusses so capably. Very important is his, to me convincing,
argumentation that Islamic history as we read it in most of the history
books, is based on a number of fictions. Firstly, the Koran (ch. 5) is a
book full of contradictions in a confused and pompous style. Yet,
Muslims must believe that it is the true word of God, and memorise it.
It is obvious to the careful reader that the Koran cannot be the word of
God. Numerous passages are spoken by Muhammad. More worrying for Muslims
is the fact that the Koran is obviously heavily edited at different
periods of its history.

Chapter 4 deals with Muhammad who was probably an epileptic (p. 89-90)
who also showed clear signs of schizophrenia, as a result of which he
had visions of angels and devils.

In Medina, Muhammad organizes raids on passing caravans which, he says,
are justified by God. Soon he encourages his followers to assassinate
political opponents. The booty is his. Read on: it is a fascinating
story of crimes:

Muhammad's life. Read also ch. 14: Women in Islam. That history still
has to be written, although the first timid books written by women who
had escaped from Islamic states are now appearing. It is a history of
endless suffering at the hands of Muslim husbands who believe that women
are treacherous demons, or at least tricky, amoral, irrational, unstable
and so, inferior. This is one of the best chapters in the book, and
should be studied by every woman contemplating to marry a Muslim man.

Islamic propaganda, funded by the unlimited means of the Gulf states, is
responsible for a plethora of untrue ideas about Islam. Firstly, that it
is a religion of peace. It is not and never was, witness the endless
expansive wars fought by Muslim rulers and raiders. Even now the
majority of conflicts of the world have Islam at their roots: Bosnia
about which we are particularly misinformed, the Sudan, Chechenia,
Afghanistan, Sin Kiang, Kashmir, Timor, Azerbeijan and the Philippines.
Muslims will not rest before they rule the state. And when they do there
will be no more democracy, witness the chapter on "the Position of
non-Muslim subjects" (p. 214). Islam is a religion of dominance. The man
has absolute power over his wives and children. The men in turn are
ruled by the *imam*, the rector of the local mosque. No matter how
peaceful a man's character may be, if his *imam* incites him from the
pulpit to kill non-Muslims, he will do it, believing that it is God's
will and therefore justified, even praiseworthy. The ruler of an Islamic
state is always *one* man. If there is a woman prime minister she does
not have the real power. Elections are either non-existent or a
foreboding of disaster, as in the case of Algeria and Turkey.
Enlightened rulers such as King Hassan, King Hussein or President
Mubarak, is the best Islam can hope for. God forbid that Islam should
ever come back to Europe. We shall all be slaves and serfs!

Greek Philosophy (chapter 11) never really influenced Islam. Some
classical works on mathematics and medicine were translated into Arabic.
Much fanfare is made about that, but it is forgotten that the essence of
Greek science is development, not slavish copying. In Europe, science
has developed, whereas in the Middle East it stagnated. Arab and other
Muslim doctors still use the compendium of Galen (Gallenus, in Arbabic
Djallênus) as pharmacology.

Ibn Warraq's book is so inspiring and so full of brilliant ideas and
hard facts as well, that the reviewer never stops wanting to mention
further chapters. Chapter 10 deals with Heretics and Heterodoxy, Atheism
and Free Thought, Reason and Revelation. It proves that Islamic culture
was never tolerant. Ibn Warraq displays here an incredible knowledge of
Islamic philosophical history. It becomes clear while reading him that
Islam did not produce or encourage the philosophers but condemned them;
many died in prison.

They still do. The tyranny which we witness in Iran is not exceptional
in the history of Islam. Persons of other persuasions have always been
eliminated and exterminated. That is what is happening now to the
Christians of Timor and Nias, those in Azerbeijan, the Sudan and
Algeria.

Chapter 17 is likewise of vital importance for all social scientists,
and: for all social workers. Muslims mutilating the genitals of girls
will claim that they have a right to do so since our countries protect
religious freedom (their own countries do not). There is, however, a
limit to the freedom any religion can claim, when such freedom results
in suffering either of children or of animals, as in the case of
slaughter without anesthesia. Forced marriages of minors is a problem
that feminists will have to turn their attention to. But it is easier to
confront western men who are infinitely more reasonable, than Muslims,
who are polite but determined. When Islam comes, men have little to
lose, but women lose their freedom of movement, freedom of employment
and so forth.

We must be extremely grateful to Ibn Warraq for his revealing book.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Dr. Knappert is at present a Professor in the School of
Oriental and African Studies, University of London. He knows many Asian
and African languages and has travelled widely in the two continents for
studying their literatures, religions and cultures. He has already
published more than thirty books on many subjects including Buddhism,
Hinduism and Islam. The photocopy received by us does not mention where
and when the review was published.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
