+++
title = "Strong conviction"
+++

In the corporate world, there is a quest for "repeatable process", done under the rubric of "scientific management". Another related slogan is "data driven" decision making. What I have found is that the most important decisions are not easily formalized this way. In reality, the question "What should be our course of action?" on some issue, if we probe it further, goes like this. It first transforms into "What do we *believe* we ought to do?" and then it becomes "What is our core conviction?" and that leads to the eventual "Who am I?"

This is why I give as much weight to "Do we have a conviction? If so, what is it?" as the data.+++(5)+++ It is perfectly valid to not have a conviction on a topic (start at zero), but if we really want to make a difference with our actions, we must find one, but we cannot force it.+++(5)+++ Actions that are based on strong convictions held non-egoistically are much more likely to be purposeful and fulfilling. That is a form of success in and of itself. How can we hold a strong conviction and be non-egoistic? Evaluate calmly the idea that we could be wrong!

I stress test my conviction by imagining my twin who holds the opposite conviction and conduct a civil debate in my head with that imaginary twin! How well does it hold up under that scrutiny? Sometimes my colleagues are exposed to that debate and they can get confused 😂 I do change my mind when it is warranted and I announce that I have changed my mind. Have I changed my mind on something big? The most important issue is formal credentials. I obtained a PhD and that was out of my youthful conviction that they matter. I made a U-turn. My abandoning academia happened due to my debate with my imaginary twin "What if my PhD is a complete waste of time?"+++(5)+++ It was blasphemy - the prestige of Princeton was supposed to quell those questions! It was tough to accept too.

That streak never left me. "What could make us go out of business" is the kind of question I ask and by now my colleagues don't get too startled, though it does make people squirm when their CEO asks that. I ask people to contemplate that without emotional baggage. 

There is a particular custom where we smear holy ash on the forehead - a mark of humility. Eastern spirituality teaches us to calmly accept the inevitability of death and the impermanence of the body and our material attachments. That's an important attitude in business. This idea that we can separate a business decision from deeper purpose and inner conviction gives rise to dualistic thinking. Our actions become misaligned with ourselves, our Self. Avoiding that dualistic trap is how we achieve inner peace and calm. 🙏