---
title: 549 LXXXVIII

---
  

  


## LXXXVIII

228 WEST 39TH STREET, NEW YORK,  
*8th Dec., 1895.*

DEAR MRS. BULL,

Many thanks for your kind note of welcome. I arrived last Friday after
ten days of a very tedious voyage. It was awfully rough and for the
first time in my life I was very badly seasick. . . . I have left some
strong friends in England who will work in my absence expecting my
arrival next summer. My plans are not settled yet about the work here.
Only I have an idea to run to Detroit and Chicago meanwhile, and then
come back to New York. The public lecture plan I intend to give up
entirely, as I find the best thing for me to do is to step entirely out
of the money question — either in public lectures or private classes. In
the long run it does harm and sets a bad example.

In England I worked on this principle and refused even the voluntary
collections they made. Mr. Sturdy, being a rich man, bore the major part
of the expenses of lecturing in big halls — the rest I bore. It worked
well. Again, to use rather a vulgar illustration, even in religion there
is no use overstocking the market. The supply must follow the demand,
and the demand alone. If people want me, they will get up lectures. I
need not bother myself about these things. If you think after
consultation with Mrs. Adams and Miss Locke that it would be practicable
for me to come to Chicago for a course of lectures, write to me. Of
course the money question should be left entirely out.

My idea is for autonomic, independent groups in different places. Let
them work on their own account and do the best they can. As for myself,
I do not want to entangle myself in any organisation. Hoping you are
enjoying good health both physically and mentally, 

I am yours, in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.