+++
title = "02 3. The Muslim birth rate"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**3. The Muslim birth rate**

**3.1. Muslim fertility**

       Is there anything demonstrably intentional about this Islamic
demographic expansion?  In an article seeking to "explode the myth" of
Muslim demographic aggression, journalists Namita Bhandare, Louise
Fernandes and Minu Jain themselves admit that according to official
surveys, "the disapproval of family planning is highest among Muslims",
while "the practice of family planning methods in 1980 was lowest
amongst Muslims (only 23% of those surveyed practised it as opposed to
36% Hindus)".[\[1\]](#_edn1)  They further admit that between 1971 and
1981, "the Hindu population was up by 24.15%, whereas the Muslim
population shot up by 30.59%".  Further, they give the decline in
fertility levels in the same period: 20.1% decline for urban and 20.0%
for rural Hindus, 18.5% for urban and 17.3% for rural Muslims.  This
means that the already lower fertility level of the Hindus is declining
faster than that of the Muslims.

       Let us hear the same indications from an official source: "The
total fertility  rate (TFR) is 3.4 children per woman. (...) Muslims
have considerably higher fertility than any other religious group. 
Muslim women have a TFR of 4.4, which is 1.1 children higher than the
TFR for Hindu women."[\[2\]](#_edn2)

       The implication of these data is that the Muslim rate of growth
in percentage of the Indian population will go on increasing.  Instead
of extrapolating across centuries, we may make a safer prognosis for the
next few decades.  It is safe to predict that the 2001 census will show
another sharp increase in the rate at which Muslims are demographically
catching up with the Hindu majority.  It is then that the full effect of
the birth control campaigns of the 1960s and 70s will become visible. 
Given the higher Hindu participation in the birth control effort of the
1960s and 70s, we must now be witnessing a cumulative effect, of a
proportionately smaller number of Hindu mothers (born in that period)
having in their turn each a smaller number of children than the
proportionately larger number of Muslim mothers, on average.  

 

**3.2. The economic explanation**

       Unable to refute the Hindu Revivalist perception of a visible and
increasing Muslim demographic growth, the journalists retreat to their
next line of defence: they admit the fact of Muslim demographic
expansion but disconnect it from Muslim identity.  They offer as their
explanation that it has nothing to do with Islam as such nor with any
aggressive designs: it is all due to Muslim poverty, "the reason has to
do with economics and not with religion".[\[3\]](#_edn3)  This is the
old Marxist cliché: reduce everything to economic factors.  It is still
the most common explanation for the higher Muslim growth rate: the
average Indian Muslim is poorer and less educated than the average
Hindu, and poverty and low education both happen to lead to a higher
birth rate.

       Baljit Rai, a retired police officer who was a personal witness
to India's failure in containing the rising tide of illegal immigration
from Bangladesh, refutes this argument by pointing to the birth rate
among Kerala Muslims, who have a high level of education and a
relatively high standard of living.  Mani Shankar Aiyar had claimed on
the basis of statewise figures for the southern states that "Muslim
birth rates in all these enlightened states are very much lower than
Hindu birth rates in unenlightened states like Uttar
Pradesh".[\[4\]](#_edn4)  However, Rai's closer analysis of the figures
shows that the Kerala Muslims have a higher birth-rate than the national
Hindu average and even than the Hindu average in poor and backward
states like Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan: the population growth
(+28.74% for 1981-91) in the Muslim-majority district of Malappuram
(with female literacy at 75.22%, far higher than among Hindus in the
Hindi belt) is more than twice as high as the average for Kerala
(+13.98), and well above the Hindu national average
(+23.50).[\[5\]](#_edn5)

       A secularist journalist confirms: "In spite of this 'near total
literacy' the population growth rate of Muslims who constitute
one-fourth of Kerala's population is as high as 2.3 per cent per year,
which is more than even the national PGR \[= population growth rate\] of
2.11 per annum and is almost double the PGR of Hindus in Kerala
itself."[\[6\]](#_edn6)  

       The figures for Kerala exemplify a general rule: at any given
level of literacy and economic status, Muslims will have a markedly
higher birth rate than their Hindu counterparts, even to the extent of
having a higher birth rate than Hindus in a lower educational or income
bracket.  A secularist journalist, Pranay Gupta, estimates that in
Hyderabad, which has a large Muslim middle-class, a typical Muslim
family has eight children while a Hindu family has four.[\[7\]](#_edn7) 

 

**3.3. The literacy factor**

       Ever since the propagation of birth control among the Hindu
masses, rich and literate Muslims have more children than poor and
illiterate Hindus -- the religious determinant overrules the economic
determinant.  This comes out clearly when we compare with the admittedly
high growth rate for the Scheduled Castes: "The high growth rate of
Muslims, due to poverty, illiteracy etc., is comparable to the growth
rate of Scheduled Castes", writes Ashish Bose; but he himself gives the
SC growth rate as 31% for the decade 1981-91 against the Muslim growth
rate of 32.8%.[\[8\]](#_edn8)   True, *some* Muslims fall in the same
low-income category as the SCs; but taking into account the Muslim
middle-class, some old landed gentry and a lot of guest workers in the
Gulf states, the average Muslim income is considerably higher than the
average SC income.[\[9\]](#_edn9) 

       Likewise, illiteracy is definitely higher among the SCs than
among Muslims.  And yet, the Muslim growth rate is still 1.8% higher
than that of the SCs.  "Even after controlling for the level of
education among women, religious differentials in fertility persist. 
Scheduled Caste women have a higher TFR (3.9) than Scheduled Tribe women
(3.6) and non-SC/ST women (3.3)"[\[10\]](#_edn10) -- all of them
considerably less than the Muslim TFR of 4.4.

       The same is true for the rural-urban differential: just like in
other countries, Indian rural couples have a higher fertility (5.7 for
Hindus, 6.2 for Muslims) than urban couples (4.2 for Hindus, 4.9 for
Muslims), but this secular determinant of fertility is overruled by the
religious determinant, for Muslims are more concentrated in the cities
but have a higher over-all birth rate nonetheless.[\[11\]](#_edn11)

       Incidentally, the source just cited, Mohan Rao, provides an
example of the misplaced confidence with which secularists berate Hindu
Revivalists as unreliable, mendacious etc.  Though riding a very high
horse in his denunciation of "communal propaganda", Rao himself makes a
conspicuously counterfactual statement: "The Hindu population increased
by 0.71 per cent between 1961-71 and 1971-81.  The population of Muslims
rose by 0.05 per cent, much less than that of Hindus. (...) the growth
rates of Hindus will continue to be higher than those of
Muslims."[\[12\]](#_edn12) 

       He confuses the figures for the increase in population with the
actual population figures.  The Hindu growth rate increased between 1971
and 1981, from 23.71% to 24.42% (a finding on which Mani Shankar Aiyar
builds a similarly mistaken case against a further Hindu decrease and
Muslim increase)[\[13\]](#_edn13), but remained far below the Muslim
growth rate of 30.85% c.q. 30.90%, so that the effective Hindu
percentage decreased (by O.37%).  Moreover, this increase was a freak
development in a long-term decrease of the Hindu growth rate due to
family planning, and was easily undone by a decrease twice as big (to
22.78%) in 1991.[\[14\]](#_edn14) 

 

**3.4. The Muslim growth rate worldwide**

       The same trend as witnessed in India is conspicuous at the
international level: Muslim countries are among the champions of
demographic growth.  The economic explanation for high and low
birthrates breaks down when confronted with the figures for Muslim
countries: the rich and orthodox Saudi Arabs procreate much faster than
the relatively poor but more secularized Turks. 

       The yearbooks of the *Encyclopedia Brittannica* give a wealth of
countrywise data, including the population's doubling‑rate, which is a
more accurate indicator of effective demographic growth than the birth
rate.  It turns out that no Muslim country has a markedly lower growth
rate than India.  Indonesia, Turkey and Tunisia are at about the same
level as India, which is already seen by many as a demographic disaster
area itself (doubling in ca. 33 years).  It is no coincidence that these
are the three most secularized Muslim countries.[\[15\]](#_edn15)  The
more Islamic a country, the higher the birthrate: Iran, Jordan, Lybia,
Kuwait and Eritrea double their populations in 20 years or less, up to
twice as fast as India.[\[16\]](#_edn16) 

       The Arabs are the champions: "In no Arab country does the
population increase at a rate lower than 2.5% per year.  In practically
every Arab country, more than 4 inhabitants in 10 are youngsters below
15."[\[17\]](#_edn17)  Pakistan is Asia's fastest-growing non-Arab
country, doubling its population every 24 years.[\[18\]](#_edn18)  No
country is known to have a higher birth‑rate among non‑Muslims than
among Muslims, but countries where the opposite is true are
numerous.[\[19\]](#_edn19)  The starkest differential is probably found
in the European countries.  Thus, to use another demographic indicator,
the percentage of the under-25 age group in Britain is 33 for natives,
48 for Indians (mostly Hindus) and Caribbeans, 60 for Pakistanis and 63
for Bangladeshis.[\[20\]](#_edn20)  A similar indicator for the
Subcontinent: the under-15 constitute 46.3% in Pakistan, 45.1% in
Bangladesh, and 35.2% in India.[\[21\]](#_edn21) 

       In Belgium, the average native couple (Christian or secular) has
1.7 children, the immigrant Moroccan couple (Muslim) has 3.25 children,
i.e. nearly twice as many.[\[22\]](#_edn22)  About American Islam, a
Pakistani observer makes an estimate for the year 2,000: "The US (...)
may by then become the 14th or 15th 'largest Islamic country'.  Islam,
in fact, is the fastest-growing religion in the US".  Though the growth
is largely due to immigration, he also sees "a higher birth rate" as "a
major factor".[\[23\]](#_edn23)  

 

**3.5. Islamic government policies**

       In Malaysia, where Muslims were only 50% at the time of
independence, just enough to declare it an Islamic state, the Government
pursues a natalist policy at least as far as the Muslim Malays are
concerned (non-Muslims are mostly members of the Chinese and Tamil Hindu
minorities).  It is only in countries where Muslims are in an
overwhelming majority and demographic competition is simply not an issue
that Islamic governments and religious leaders, faced with the problems
resulting from overpopulation, have made an effort to curb the birth
rate. 

       Iran now tries to encourage a three-children-per-family norm, and
prides itself on reducing the yearly increase in population to 1.75%,
about half of what it was in the 1980s.[\[24\]](#_edn24)  But this will
not markedly curb population growth in absolute figures for the next few
decades: "Although the rate of population growth has come down (...) the
girls born in response to Khomeini's call for more Muslims will soon
reach marrying age; 45.5% of the population is under
15."[\[25\]](#_edn25) 

       Given the extremely high birth rate in the generation now growing
up to become the fathers and mothers of the next two decades (much more
numerous than the generation presently in their twenties and thirties
and trying to stick to the three-children-per-family norm), even a
two-children-per-family norm would still amount to an impressive
demographic growth for two more generations.  With a norm of three
children per family, Iran is not even pursuing a policy aimed at
achieving demographic zero growth, but even if it were, it could only
achieve it at a much later date, and at a much higher population level,
than countries with a more stringent commitment to demographic
responsibility.[\[26\]](#_edn26)

       There is no indication that even one Muslim country will achieve
a substantially lower growth rate than India's Hindu community within
the next decades. 

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[1\]](#_ednref1)  "A pampered minority?", *Sunday*, 7-2-1993, with
reference to a 1980 survey by the Operations Research Group.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[2\]](#_ednref2)  K.M. Mathew, ed.: *Manorama Yearbook* 1996,
p.458-459.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[3\]](#_ednref3)  "A pampered minority?", *Sunday*, 7-2-1993.

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[4\]](#_ednref4)  M.S. Aiyar: "Sex, lies and tushtikaran", *Sunday*,
24-1-1993.

</div>

<div id="edn5" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[5\]](#_ednref5)  See Baljit Rai: *Is India Going Islamic?*, p.103 ff.

</div>

<div id="edn6" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[6\]](#_ednref6)  K.B. Sahay: "Incentives and Disincentives",
*Hindustan Times*, 19/12/1995.

</div>

<div id="edn7" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[7\]](#_ednref7)  P. Gupta: *India, the Challenge of Change*
(Methuen/Mandarin, LOndon 1989), p.219.

</div>

<div id="edn8" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[8\]](#_ednref8)  A. Bose: "Muslim rate of growth", *Indian Express*,
9-9-1995.

</div>

<div id="edn9" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[9\]](#_ednref9)  As Ashish Bose regretfully notes, the 1991 census
gives no cross-tabulation between the data on religion, income and
literacy, so we have to make do with old data, informed guesses or
separate regional investigations into the connections between these
factors.

</div>

<div id="edn10" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[10\]](#_ednref10)  K.M. Mathew, ed.: *Manorama Yearbook* 1996,
p.458-459.  TFR: total fertility rate.

</div>

<div id="edn11" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[11\]](#_ednref11)  Figures given in Mohan Rao: "Not born of faith",
*Indian Express*, 9-11-1993. 

</div>

<div id="edn12" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[12\]](#_ednref12)  M. Rao: "Not born of faith", *Indian Express*,
9-11-1993. 

</div>

<div id="edn13" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[13\]](#_ednref13)  M.S. Aiyar: "Sex, Lies and Tushtikaran", *Sunday*,
24-1-1993.

</div>

<div id="edn14" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[14\]](#_ednref14)  "Census 1991", in S. Shahabuddin, ed.: *Muslim
India*, Sep.1995, p.386.

</div>

<div id="edn15" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[15\]](#_ednref15)  Mohan Rao ("Not born of faith", *Indian Express*,
9-11-1993) argues that "the percentage of couples using contraceptives
in predominantly Muslim countries is very high", and to prove his point,
he cites figures for Indonesia, Turkey and Egypt, three countries where
the Government policies are denounced as *un-Islamic* by the guardians
of orthodoxy.

</div>

<div id="edn16" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[16\]](#_ednref16)  Figures taken from the countrywise data in the
*Encyclopedia Brittannica Book of the Year 1994*.

</div>

<div id="edn17" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[17\]](#_ednref17)  "Arababy's", *Trends* (Brussels), 6-9-1990.

</div>

<div id="edn18" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[18\]](#_ednref18)  Confirmed in a different set of demographic
indicators given in *The Economist*, 3-10-1992.

</div>

<div id="edn19" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[19\]](#_ednref19)  The only countries competing with the top Muslim
countries for the highest demographic growth rate are some African
countries (Kenya, Ivory Coast); at least on paper, for their projected
doubling-time will have to be revised downwards because of the AIDS
epidemic.

</div>

<div id="edn20" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[20\]](#_ednref20)  Figures given by Prof. Judith Brown, Beit
Professor of Imperial History, Oxford, speaking at the Annual South Asia
Conference, Madison, Wisconsin, October 1995.

</div>

<div id="edn21" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[21\]](#_ednref21)  *Encyclopedia Brittannica*, 1996 yearbook.

</div>

<div id="edn22" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[22\]](#_ednref22)  Guy Tegenbos: "Gezinnen kroostrijkst bij
Marokkanen en Israëlieten", *De Standaard*, 17-8-1994.

</div>

<div id="edn23" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[23\]](#_ednref23)  Abdus Sattar Ghazali: "Middle East poised to
confront demographic explosion", *Dawn* (Karachi), 3-11-1989.

</div>

<div id="edn24" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[24\]](#_ednref24)  "Iran brengt groei bevolking sterk terug" (Dutch:
"Iran strongly reduces population growth"), *Volkskrant* (Amsterdam),
13-7-1995.

</div>

<div id="edn25" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[25\]](#_ednref25)  "Arrows in the heart of Iran", *The Economist*,
3-10-1992.  The title is a pun on Ayatollah Khomeini's natalist
exhortation that "every Muslim child born is an arrow through the heart
of America".

</div>

<div id="edn26" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[26\]](#_ednref26)  E.g. Vietnam, with a two-children-per-family norm
but still increasing by over 1 million per year, not to speak of China
with its draconic one-child-per-family norm but a population still
increasing at a rate of over 10 million individuals per year. 

 

**[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/demogislam/part4.html)**

**[BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/demogislam/part2.html)**

</div>

</div>
