+++
title = "13 12.1.  Banning all that hurts"

+++
# 12. Book banning

## 12.1. Banning all that hurts

In the same week when the Kar Seva was due, the speaker of the Uttar
Pradesh Assembly, H.K. Srivastava, made a proposal to attack the problem
of communal friction at what he apparently considered its roots. He
wanted all press writing about the historical origins of temples and
mosques to be banned. And it is true : the discussion of the origins of
some mosques is fundamental to this whole issue. For, it reveals the
actual workings of an ideology that, more than anything else, has caused
countless violent confrontations between the religious communities.

However, after the news of this proposal came, nothing was heard of it
anymore. I surmise that the proposal was found to be juridically
indefensible in that it effectively would prohibit history-writing, a
recognized academic discipline of which journalism makes use
routinely.[¹⁹³](notes.htm#note193) And I surmise that it was judged
politically undesirable because it would counterproductively draw
attention to this explosive topic.

The real target of this proposal was the book Hindu Temples : What
Happened to Them (A Preliminary Survey) by Arun Shourie and others. In
the same period, there has been a proposal in the Rajya Sabha by
Congress MP Mrs. Aliya to get this book banned, in spite of the fact
that about half the book had already legally been published in different
papers. The police dropped by the printer and later the publisher to get
a few copies for closer inspection.

The really hard part of the book is a list of some two thousand Muslim
buildings that have been built on places of previous Hindu worship (and
for which many more than two thousand temples have been demolished). In
spite of the threat of a ban on raking up this discussion, on November
18 the U.P. daily Pioneer has published a review of this book, by Vimal
Yogi Tiwari, which I reproduce here in full.

The book is a collection of articles written by Arun Shourie, dr. Harsh
Narain, Jay Dubashi, Ram Swarup and Sita Ram Goel. It is perhaps the
first endeavor on the part of scholars to dig from the graveyard of
history the identity of some 2000 temples destroyed by the Muslim
invaders and rulers. The book is not an exercise in rewriting history,
but is an effort to present the facts and give a bird's eye view of the
truth hitherto unknown. The book has as its subject matter not only the
Ram temple at Ayodhya but nearly 2000 temples throughout the length and
breadth of the country which met the same fate as that of Ayodhya,
Mathura and Varanasi.

The revealing articles provide the readers with an insight into the
history and nature of the problem the Hindus have faced and continue to
face. The list of temples destroyed or desecrated helps to nail down the
big lie, propagated by some historians, that Muslim raiders and rulers
plundered temples only for the wealth. There may have been a few rich
temples, otherwise most temples must have been as poor in the past as
they are now.

The book does not furnish great details for the simple reason that it is
just a preliminary survey. Yet the facts are very revealing and go a
long way in clearing the clouds of doubts which have been purposely
woven around the facts. It lists some 2000 sites where temples were
destroyed and mosques were built. Not only were the temples destroyed
but even their material was used in constructing mosques at those
places. This was plainly done to hurt the sentiments of the Hindus.

*"History is not just an exercise in collection of facts though, of
course, facts have to be carefully sifted and authenticated as Mr. Sita
Ram Goel has done in this case. History is primarily an exercise in
self-awareness and reinforcement of that self-awareness. Such a
historical assessment has by and large been missing in our country. This
at once gives special significance to this book."*

By December 1990, a ban on this kind of historical writing seemed out of
the question. By that time, especially after Indian Express published
dr. S.P. Gupta's convincing article on the archaeological findings in
Ayodhya, both prime minister Chandra Shekhar and Congress leader Rajiv
Gandhi said the archaeologists should have a say in the Ram Janmabhoomi
issue. Therefore, at least that one contentious Muslim construction was
open to scrutiny.

Still, just like Doordarshan censors out all news that could harm
harmony, many secularists would like to ban all writings attributing any
systematic misbehaviour to one community (except the Hindus, who can be
unreservedly accused of instituting untouchability, forcing widows on
the funeral pyre, and worse even, being communal). On top of that, they
also want books that might *hurt the feelings* of a community, to be
banned.

The best known case where this was effectively done is, of course,
Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses. This book was banned in India
immediately after its publication in England, as part of a deal with the
Babri Masjid Action Committee to call off a Muslim march on Ayodhya. The
book makes fun of a fictional character, Mahound (and of other people as
well). However, the writer's contention that the story was entirely
imaginative and fictional, is not sustainable. Mahound was a deformed
version of Mohammed's name, used in Christian polemical writings against
the *pseudo-prophet*.[¹⁹⁴](notes.htm#note194) The women in a brothel
described in the book, bear the names of the wives of the historical
Mohammed, in order to attract clients. There is just no denying that the
writer is making gory fun of the Prophet.

Nevertheless, is that a reason for banning the book? When some Hindus
wanted a ban on the TV serial Tipu Sultan, for its glorifying and
whitewashing a cruel fanatic who had destroyed temples and forcibly
converted people, this was dubbed bigoted. Even the fact that it
contained blatant distortion of history (which with some common sense
can easily be distinguished from mere dramatization of history), was not
counted as a sufficient reason for keeping it off the TV screen (which
would still not be a wholesale ban). When some Hindus wanted a ban on
Ambedkar's Riddles in Hinduism, for its pathetic allegations against
Rama and Krishna, this was termed Hindu chauvinism. Even the protest
against the republication of the book with state funds was to no avail,
and the book has been ceremoniously presented to foreign visitors in the
Ambedkar centenary year including Nelson Mandela. So, Hindu demands for
a ban are to be ignored.

But Muslim demands to curb free speech and freedom of artistic
expression, should they be conceded? According to secularists, yes.
Khushwant Singh defended the ban.[¹⁹⁵](notes.htm#note195) M.J. Akbar
defended the ban. Even Girilal Jain, then editor of the Times of India,
defended the ban, arguing that otherwise it would only being a lot of
riots and damage to property. The weekly Sunday published excerpts from
the book, and was condemned for that by the Press Council, in November
1990. It consequently offered apologies to any readers who might have
felt hurt.[¹⁹⁶](notes.htm#note196)

When the death sentence against Rushdie was pronounced by the Ayotollah
Khomeini, on February 14, 1989, many secularists advised Rushdie to
apologize and to withdraw the book. When people got killed in
demonstrations against the book, the secularists blamed Rushdie, not the
BMAC, not Khomeini, not their own implicit or explicit support to the
anti-Rushdie agitation. And many secularists of the not too intelligent
variety have tried to downplay the affair by arguing totally beside the
point that the ban didn't matter much, since hardly any Indian can read
Rushdie's English.[¹⁹⁷](notes.htm#note197)

The good thing discussion on Islam going. Especially Khomeini's fatwa
made people ask: is this really Islamic ? Of course, some liberals,
Muslim and non-Muslim, came out to say that the death sentence against
Rushdie was un-Islamic. You know, *the tolerance which Islam inculcates,
doesn't allow this*, etc. But their misgivings about the fatwa were put
to rest by competent authorities.

Shortly after the debate was sparked, the Islamic Research Foundation
published two Urdu books defending the fatwa : *"JNU professor Maulana
Mohsin Usmani Nadwi's Ahaanat-i Rasool ki Sazaa (Punishment for
Criticizing the Prophet), and Maulana Majid Ali Khan's Muqaddas-i Ayat
(The Sacred Verses). Their point was very simple : in this case there is
absolutely no scope for doubt, Rushdie must be killed. Firstly, he is
effectively an apostate. In fact, he himself has said that much. He once
described how he decided to break with Islam. He was still a teenager,
and he went to a fast-food place and ordered pork pie and a portion of
shrimps. Were they tasty! In a statement written months after the fatwa,
from his Muslim"*. For him that doesn't mean he is an apostate, for he
was made a Muslim as a child, and that doesn't count. But according to
the learned Urdu authors, Rushdie is quite certainly an apostate. And
for apostasy there is, on the authority of the Sahih Bukhari Hadis, only
one punishment: death.

But Rushdie has done far worse than just leave Islam. He has insulted
the Prophet. Not that any of those Imans and Mullahs and Ayotollahs can
be really sure of their allegation, they haven't read the book. But, in
parenthesis, even secularists puke venom over books they haven't read.
Mani Shankar Aiyar totally condemns one of Arun Shourie's books, and
then goes on to declare that he has decided not to read it : *"Shourie
gave the final touches to the manuscript of his book on Islam, a work so
vicious and perverted that every English speaking Muslim I know was
outraged... I decided then to show my solidarity with secularism by not
reading the book."*[¹⁹⁸](notes.htm#note198) As the late Ayatollah used
to say: *"It is not necessary to jump into the dungheap in order to know
that it stinks."*

Rushdie has insulted the Prophet. And the Hadis say very clearly what
the Prophet's line of action (forever to be emulated by every Muslim) is
in such case. There were some poets and poetesses making sarcastic songs
about him and criticizing his pretense of being God's messenger. Did the
Prophet bring them to a court where they were given a chance to recant
(as some legalistic Muslims say is the true Islamic procedure)? No, they
were just mortally stabbed in the still of the night, each of them. They
were unceremoniously assassinated at the personal orders of the Prophet.
Therefore, our Urdu-writing Maulanas correctly conclude that it is
perfectly Islamic to kill Rushdie.[¹⁹⁹](notes.htm#note199)

Indians may recall that such death sentences against people who have
insulted the Prophet, have been carried out earlier this century:
against Arya Samaj propagandists Swami Shraddhananda and Pandit Lekh
Ram, and against Rajpal, the writer of the Rangila Rasool (more or less
*Playboy Mohammed*). This was a book on the sex life of the Prophet and
his wives, certainly insulting, and as a criticism of Islam rather
beside the point, but understandable as a reaction against a similar
vilifying Muslim pamphlet about Sita. These murders had the desired
effect, for the Arya Samaj became less straightforward in its criticism
of the Prophet.

Rushdie, being a mere human being, and with no belief in eternal reward
for martyrs, chose at long last to do that which seemed the best way of
getting back into normal life: kneeling, renouncing the *blasphemous*
passages in his book, and embracing Islam. On December 24, 1990, he came
out with a statement: *"I do not agree with any statement in my novel
The Satanic Verses, uttered by any of its characters, who insult the
Prophet Mohammed or who cast aspersions upon Islam or upon the
authenticity of the Holy Quran or who reject the divinity of Allah"*.
Moreover, he promised *"to witness that there is no god but Allah and
that Mohammed is his last Prophet"*, to prevent the publication of
further translations, not to bring out the paperback version, and *"to
continue to work for a better understanding of Islam in the world, as I
have always attempted to do in the past"*.

This turn in the Rushdie affair was partly the work of Hesham El-Essawy,
described as a Muslim moderate, who is chairman of the Islamic Society
for the Promotion of Religious Tolerance. Well, it is a telling
illustration of *religious tolerance* in Islam: arranging for someone's
embracing Islam in order to save his life. A perfect illustration of the
general rule that Islam has mostly collected its converts by means of
threats. However, the less moderate Muslim were not satisfied even when
they saw Rushdie crawling in the dust before them. An Iranian paper and
some Iranian clerics declared that the Ayatollah's fatwa is irrevocable.
The British Muslim leader Kalim Siddiqui called on Iran to come and
kidnap Rushdie and take him to trial in an Iranian Islamic court.

In a reaction to Rushdie's conversion, the Delhi Iranian Embassy Press
Attache S.H. Davisbara describes how Islam opposes slander and backing,
and asks:*"How can a religion which is so strict in safeguarding the
reputation of ordinary people allow a Salman Rushdie to cast aspersions
against its own Prophet? And if anybody does so deliberately, as the
ill-fated author did, the punishment according to Islam is nothing but
death. It is for the same reason that no Islamic scholar objected when
Imam Khomeini ordained that Salman Rushdie should be killed. The fatwa,
as it involves an extremely sensitive issue like the personality of the
exalted Prophet himself, is by its very nature irrevocable. Recently the
successor of Imam Khomeini, Ayatollah Syed Ali Khamenei, also has
reiterated that the fatwa cannot be withdrawn. It should also be pointed
out that fatwa do not lapse with the passing away of the issuing
authority. It is punishment for a crime already committed and a warning
to other potential wrongdoers."*[²⁰⁰](notes.htm#note200)

The Muslim Youth Movement of Britain also rejected any plea for
pardoning Rushdie, unless some demands were met. Remark, the threat to
kill Rushdie is not linked to his horrible guilt (and therefore
irrevocable, as for Iran), nor to his apology and conversion (and
therefore to be revoked), but merely to the fulfilling of demands.
Promising to lift a death threat in return for concessions : this is
pure terrorism. The demands were the following :

1.  official recognition that Islam is the largest practicing religion
    in the U.K. (this is correct if Christianity is considered split
    into its different denominations);
2.  withdrawal of all copies of the book from the bookshops; 3) a pledge
    from Rushdie that his book will not be produced anywhere in any
    manner ; 4) enactment of a law that will protect Muslim religious
    sensibilities from future insults and abuse.

Mohammed Siddique, the president of the Movement, declared :*"Rushdie is
misguided if he believes that his 'goodwill gesture' will appease
Muslims. Until Muslim demands are met, there can be no
peace."*[²⁰¹](notes.htm#note201) Remark that a remark how a Muslim
clearly spells out the Muslim attitude towards co-existence : *"Until
Muslim demands are met, there can be no peace."* Do you need more
explanation for the communal riots in India ?

One secularist comment deserves mention. The poison is in a very little
corner. G.H. Jansen, Times of India correspondent in Nicosia, writes
that Rushdie's conversion *"must have been very disappointing to the
literati-glitterati of New York and London who so enjoyed springing to
arms in defense of Rushdie and of 'freedom'."*[²⁰²](notes.htm#note202)
What are those quote marks doing there around the word *freedom*? It
seems Mr. Jansen doesn't want the right to skepsis regarding Mohammed to
be described as *freedom*. The bootlickers of Islamic terrorism are
treading in the footsteps of the apologists of Communism, who use to
dismiss freedom (whenever someone drew attention to its non-existence in
Communist countries) as *bourgeois-liberalist illusion*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 12.2 Banning criticism of Islam

Rushdie's book is by far not the only one that has been banned in the
secular republic of India, on pretext of its hurting the feelings of a
religious community. Let us mention first of all that, to create a
semblance of impartiality, Rushdie's book was sent into exile in the
company of a film that might have hurt the feelings of the Christian
community : Martin Scorsese's The Last Temptation of Christ, a film that
attributes normal human sexual desires to Jesus. Not that any Christian
had asked for this ban, but that semblance had to be
created.[²⁰³](notes.htm#note203)

In recent years, several books criticizing Islam and its role in Indian
history have been banned. One of them is Richard Maxwell Eaton's Sufis
of Bijapur 1300-1700 (Social Roles of Sufis in Medieval India),
published in Princeton 1978, which debunks the pious fable that the
Sufis were bringers of a tolerant and refined Islam and the pioneers of
a synthesis between Islam and Hinduism. Another is Arvind Ghosh's The
Koran and the Kafir (all that an infidel needs to know about the Koran
but is embarrassed to ask), published in Houston. This book chiefly
groups Quranic verses topic-wise, to give a ready reference overview of
Mohammed's teachings. Then there is the Australian writer Colin Maine's
booklet The Dead Hand of Islam. It consists of little more than literal
quotes from Islamic Scripture. Nonetheless, to appease Muslim pressure,
the publisher is being prosecuted, and the book has been banned.
Incidentally, there was absolutely no trouble concerning his similar
book on Christianity, The Bible : What It Says.

Banning a book for containing Quranic verses...Is this a first step
towards banning the Quran ? And that, moreover, at the Muslims' own
instigation ? Let's face it : the objectionable lines in Colin Maine's
book, for which it was banned, also appear in the Quran and the
surrounding Islamic canon. Why should Mohammed's big book be *more
equal* that Mr. Maine's booklet ?

A head-on call to judge the Quran by the same standards as other books,
was the essence of Chandmal Chopra's famous Quran petition. Mr. Chopra
had filed a writ petition in the Calcutta High Court in March 1985,
seeking a ban on a book which incites to hatred and struggle against a
group of people on the basis of religion. His petition lists several
dozens of quotes from the objectionable book, unambiguously pouring
contempt on, and inciting war against, a group of religious communities
: the non-Muslims. It also quotes the book as pouring contempt on
religious figures sacred to other communities, notably Jesus and Mary.
The book is, of course, the Quran.

The petition was dismissed by justice B.C. Basak in May 1985. A central
point in the verdict was, that Courts cannot interfere with religious
beliefs like the sacred and divine character of the Quran (in marked
contrast to the secularist line on Ram Janmabhoomi, where Hindus are
asked to allow Courts to overrule their religious beliefs). In 1986, a
book was published containing the court documents, with a scholarly
introduction by Sita Ram Goel.[²⁰⁴](notes.htm#note204) The introduction
says that of course no ban on the Quran was ever intended (since
Scriptures and Classics are kept out of the purview of censorship
legislation, there was no chance of obtaining such a ban), but that
attention had to be drawn on the fact that, while some allegedly
provocative books are being banned, a book is widely circulated and
studied intensively in thousands of state-subsidized institutions, which
makes far more explicit calls to communal strife than any banned book so
far has done. They solution is not to ban the Quran, but on the contrary
to honestly read it and judge it for yourself in the light of reason.

For this book, the Calcutta police arrested Mr. Chandmal Chopra on
August 31, 1987, accusing him of entering into a *criminal conspiracy*
with Mr. Sita Ram Goel for publishing the book with the *deliberate*
intention of *provoking communal strife* in Calcutta and West Bengal.
His bail application was opposed *vehemently* by the public prosecutor.
He was kept in police custody till September 8, so that the *conspiracy*
could be *"investigated without his coming in the way"*. Mr. Goel, *"a
co-accused still at large"*, applied for anticipatory bail. This was
first postponed and then rejected. Mr. Goel had to abscond for a while
to avoid being dragged to the Calcutta jail.

While the verdict on the Quran petition had overstepped secular limits
by declaring the Quran a *revealed* scripture (which is a claim beyond
secular proof), and by taking great pains to prove that Islam is a
religion of peace, now the police charge-sheet distorted the facts by
calling the book's academic language *malicious* and *provocative*. At
any rate, Mr. Chopra and Mr. Goel got caught in a long-drawn-out legal
battle, though the book itself was not banned.

Perhaps the most revealing story of a book banning concerns Ram Swarup's
Understanding Islam through Hadis. This is an annotated topic-wise
summary of the Sahih Muslim, one of the two most authoritative
traditions concerning the words and deeds of the Prophet. The book was
first published in the U.S., a secular and multi- religious country. In
India also, the English original circulated for some time without
inviting any governmental attention. But when the Hindi translation was
nearing publication, something went wrong.

The book was at the binders' workshop, which was situated in a
predominantly Muslim neighbourhood. A neighbour must have spread the
word that a book scrutinizing the Prophet was about to be offered for
sale in the bookstores. The one chance for preventing the book from
reaching any readers, was now. Suddenly, a crowd of people gathered
around the binders' shop. They demanded the entire stock of the
objectionable book to be handed over for burning, otherwise they would
set the place itself on fire.

The police was called. They made no attempt to disperse the crowd.
Instead they summoned and arrested the printer and the publisher, and
they made sure that everyone got an eyeful of the arrest show. They also
confiscated the stock of the contentious book. Having thus placated the
crowd, they released the printer and the publisher after 18 hours, but
the copies of the book were not returned. They have not been heard of
since, even though the book was not officially banned.

In deference to a plaint by the Muslim neighbour, the Delhi
administration has had two meetings in 1988-89, to consider whether the
book was objectionable. Twice it was cleared. But the pressure for
banning it was kept up.

The Jama'at-i Islami paper Radiance, on the front page of its June 17,
1990 issue, carried a big caption : *"Is this book not objectionable ?"*
Presenting some excerpts from Ram Swarup's book, it warned its readers
:*"Most parts of the book are concoctions and distortions as well as
defamatory and derogatory to the Holy Prophet Mohammed (peace be upon
him)"*. What concoctions and distortions ?

The same front page quotes four of these objectionable distortions.
Among them :*"Mohammed saw Zaynab in half- naked condition and he fell
in love with her."*[²⁰⁵](notes.htm#note205) Well, maybe this is
objectionable. But it is not Ram Swarup's concoction or distortion. The
source is the Sahih Muslim, one of the two most authoritative Hadis
collections. Ram Swarup has here and there added some sober and factual
comment, but at no point does he come in the way of the Hadis text
speaking for itself. If the Jama'at-i Islami wants to ban such
information from being circulated in India, it should seek a ban on the
Hadis as well as the Quran. If the Quran and the Hadis are allowed to be
read and sold, we should all have the right to read them, shouldn't we ?
And since there is no copyright problem, we can even publish scholarly
selections from them. The Jama'at-i Islami has, in all the years that
the book has been available in bookstores, not sought a ban on Vinoba
Bhave's The Essence of the Quran, a syrupy selection of all the nice and
harmless verses from the Quran.

But no, the Jama'at as well as other Muslim groups, and personalities
close to the Janata Dal (either faction), have sought a ban on Ram
Swarup's book. In September 1990, a court ruled that the book was
unobjectionable. But the pressure continued. And come December 1990, a
third meeting of Delhi administration officials revoked the two earlier
decisions, and issued a ban on the book. It forfeited all the copies
published or to be published in the future, on the ground that the book
*deliberately and maliciously* outrage *"the religious feelings of the
Muslims by insulting their religion and their religious beliefs"*. For
the semblance of even-handedness, it also banned a non-descript book on
Ramayana and Mahabharata, and took care to put the latter ban first in
its official notification. No one is fooled, though.

Arun Shourie has commented : *"The forfeiture is exactly the sort of
thing which has landed us where we are : where intellectual inquiry is
shut out ; where our tradition are not examined and reassessed ; and
where as a consequence there is no dialogue."*[²⁰⁶](notes.htm#note206)

An interesting fact about the Muslim reaction against Ram Swarup's book,
is that Muslim leaders like the Radiance editor expect to get away with
the lie that the embarrassing but faithful quotations from Scripture are
really *concoctions and distortions*. It seems that the common Muslims
do not know the Quran and Hadis from A to Z. Many of them readily
believe their leaders' contention that Mohammed was above the behaviour
ascribed to him by the Hadis and the orthodox biographies. Their
reverence is directed towards a mythical Mohammed, who is different in
character from the historical Mohammed as he appears through the Islamic
Scriptures. And this mythical Mohammed of popular Muslim belief is
slandered when the Scriptural testimonies about the historical Mohammed
are quoted.

The same discrepancy between the orthodox historical Mohammed, and the
mythical Mohammed of popular belief was at the core of an earlier
book-banning episode, dating back to the fifties. Muslims had staged a
riot against the book Muhammad, by Thomas and Thomas, published by the
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay. The Nehru government rewarded them for
their agitation by banning the book.[²⁰⁷](notes.htm#note207) According
to the rioters, or their leaders, the book had defamed the Prophet.

The book narrated how Mohammed had become frightened when the angel
Gabriel came with the first revelation from Allah. He wanted to know
whether he had been visited by an angel or a devil. He told Khadija what
had happened, and she asked him to tell her as soon as Gabriel would
visit him next. He did so. Khadija bared her right and her left thigh
turn by turn, and asked Mohammed to sit on each and see if the visitor
stayed. Next Khadija bared her bosom and asked Mohammed to sit in her
lap. Finally, she asked him to have sexual intercourse with her. Now the
visitor disappeared. Khadija congratulated Mohammed that his visitor was
an angel and not a devil.

This story was by no means *concoction and distortion*. One can read it
in the orthodox biographies of Mohammed. Ibn Ishaq, his first
biographer, relates :

Ismail b. Ibn Hakim, a freedman of the family of al- Zubayr, told me on
Khadija's authority that she said to the apostle of God : *O son of my
uncle, are you able to tell me about your visitant, when he comes to
you?* He replied that he could, and she asked him to tell her when he
came. So when Gabriel came to him, as he was wont, the apostle said to
Khadija : *"This is Gabriel who has just come to me"*. *Get up, O son of
my uncle*, she said, *and sit by my left thigh*. The apostle did so, and
she said :*"Then turn around and sit on my right thigh"*. He did so, and
she said :*'Can you see him ?'* And he replied :*No.* She said :*'O son
of my uncle, rejoice, and be of good heart, by God he is an angel and
not a satan.'*

*"I told Abdullah b. Hasan this story and he said :'I heard my mother
Fatima, daughter of Husayn, talking about this tradition from Khadija,
but as I heard it, she made the apostle of God come inside her shift,
and thereupon Gabriel departed, and she said tot he apostle of God
:**'This is verily an angel and not a satan.'**"*

These two paragraphs can be read by anyone on p.107 of The Life of
Muhammad, published by the prestigious Oxford University Press, Karachi
(first time in 1955, reprinted seven times till 1987). The book is an
English translation by A. Guillaume of Ibn Ishaq's Sirat Rasul Allah
(Biography of Allah's Prophet). The authors of the banned book had not
distorted or concocted anything. Moreover, they bore no malice towards
Mohammed. On the contrary, they were endorsing, after the orthodox
Muslim fashion, that this episode proved the divine source of Mohammed's
revelations.

The average Muslim does not know what is written in the Islamic
Scriptures. He shares the normal moral notions of his Hindu neighbours,
and assumes that the Holy Prophet must have excelled in those virtues
which he himself values. The Muslim politicians and theologians exploit
his ignorance and mobilize him for street riots by ascribing to *enemies
of Islam* what is in fact contained in their own Scriptures. And all
this is being condoned by the secularists, who turn a blind eye to this
deception and misguidance of the common Muslim, and to the attacks of
Muslim politicians and theologians against out freedom of inquiry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 12.3 Secularism and book-banning

When Ram Swarup's book on the Hadis was banned under pressure from
Muslim fanatics, there was of course not a word of protest from the
secularists. If in secular Europe, the pope speaks out against the
Scorsese film on Jesus' temptations, without even trying to pressure
governments to ban it, the European secularist press, as if to pre-empt
any suggestion of a ban, makes it quite clear that there can be no
question of anyhow restricting the public's access to the
film.[²⁰⁸](notes.htm#note208) If people don't want to see it, let them
not go see it. That is their freedom, like it is other people's freedom
to go see it, unimpeded by papal or governmental bans.

While secularism is a European import into India, I just don't recognize
the *secularism* practiced in India. It so happens that I have grown up
in one of the first countries ever to adopt a fully secular
Constitution, Belgium. In my country, we think that secularism implies
the freedom to learn, teach and practice a religion, and also the
freedom to reject, abandon and criticize a religion. But in India, those
who call themselves *secular*, combine a Stalinist propensity to ban
religious education in (non-minority) schools, or to ban *religious* TV
serials, with a bigoted propensity to ban books that take a critical
look at religions. In both cases, they arrogate the right to decide for
others what they can see and read, and what not.

We think that secularism means : let a hundred flowers bloom, let a
hundred ideas compete. But in India, the favourite slogan of secularists
is : *Ban it !* Listen here, friends : banning for secularism is like
f...ing for virginity.

We think we have a right to know about every aspect of life, including
religion ; whether we want to practice it or to reject it, we have a
right to full access to information. But in India, secularists are not
satisfied with the freedom for themselves to know and find out : they
support demands for the *freedom* to limit others' freedom of access to
books and films. And their justification is that these books and films
might *hurt feelings* and thus *disturb communal harmony*. Indian
secularists declare that a critical or *blasphemous* book should be
banned, because it may offend someone's feelings. Genuine secularists
oppose bans because a ban offends our intelligence. And offended it is,
by these inflated book-banners who claim the right to decide for us what
we can read and what not.

In Europe, we have come to protect our constitutional freedoms, and
hardly any bigot will even think of either seriously campaigning for a
ban or using violence to punish people who show interest in the material
to which he objects. All right, there was a bomb attack on a movie
theater showing the Temptation film. But the culprit was simply caught
and put in jail. Nobody has suggested that we should ban the film in
order to avert violence. If at all there is a threat of violence, then
there are no two opinions about the duty of the state to uphold the
constitutional freedoms, and to prevent terror-mongers from dictating
who can see what.[²⁰⁹](notes.htm#note209)

In India, by contrast, the secularists are systematically on the side of
the terror-mongers. They wee the first to support the latter's demand
for banning The Satanic Verses. Terror-threatening bigots said :*Ban
this book, or else...* And secularists echoed :*"We must ban this book,
or else..."*

But Indian secularists not only side with armed bigots ; there is also
the Stalinist streak in them (incidentally, Stalin was an
ex-seminarian). They not only want to ban what is objectionable and
*hurting* to followers of some religions : they also want to ban what is
sacred or at least valuable and uplifting to members of another
religion.

A great many secularists have blamed the Ramayana and Mahabharata TV
serials for the *"rise of Hindu communalism"* and for the *Ram
hysteria*.[²¹⁰](notes.htm#note210) Of course, Ram was never that far
away from the ordinary Hindu's consciousness, that the TV serials could
have made much of a difference. Through Tulsidas' Hindi Ramayana, the
common people in North India are thoroughly familiar with Ram, Sita and
Hanuman, and they don't need TV serials to remind them. For the urban
elites, it may have been a reminder of the culture they are in danger of
forgetting. But for those secularists who have been completely alienated
from their culture, these TV serials were anathema, and so, of course,
they wanted them to be banned.

Not that a ban would have been in the interest of peace and communal
harmony. While most Hindus had no need of this TV serial in order to
keep up their devotion for Ram, once it was there they avidly watched
it. And they would have been very angry if its showing had been
suspended. It might have led to some outbursts, who knows. At any rate,
if you ban books in order to pre- empt Muslim riots, you should take the
possibility of Hindus starting riots also into account (or do our
secularists subscribe to the received wisdom that Hindus are less
riot-prone?). But that consideration for Hindus taking to the streets
was not too prominent in the pleas for a ban on the TV serials. And they
could have argued, of course, that such a Hindu reaction would have been
the lesser evil, as the showing of the serials has been instrumental in
the Ram Mandir campaign, which has encountered (*triggered*) enough
violence. But I think it is time the secularists come out and admit that
a ban on *Hindu* TV serials is dear to them not because of the law and
order situation, but because of the fact that these serials remind
Hindus of Hindu culture.

The basic objection of the secularists against the Ramayana and
Mahabharata, both in their written and in their film versions, is that
they are *religious Scriptures* of one community, and therefore their
reading or showing should be limited to places and channels of Hindus
only ; no state-owned TV station should be open for such *communal*
stories.

Having attended some press conferences in Delhi, and having talked to
some press people here, as well as to other classes of intellectuals, I
am amazed to see the crudeness in these secularists' understanding of
religious and cultural matters. Most of them are nice and well-meaning
people, but they are completely illiterate. They just don't have the
education, or the power of discrimination, to distinguish between
cultural epics like Mahabharata and Ramayana, and *religious
Scriptures*.

If at all you want a point of comparison in other cultures, perhaps
Homer's epics Ilias and Odyssea might do : that was a common heritage of
the Greek people, but not a revealed Scripture containing dogmas. Or,
for a more provocative but quite accurate comparison, a good equivalent
of the role of the Ramayana in Hindu culture is the role of the same
Ramayana in Indonesian culture. The question has been put to the
secularists several times, but they have not come up with any trace of
an answer : if Indonesian Muslims can venerate Ram, why can't Indian
Muslims, as well as Indian secularists, do the same ? The well-informed
Indonesians don't object to Ram as a *communal* character, as a *god* of
one religion and therefore anathema to others.

Another non-Hindu tribe that has given a warm reception to the Ramayana
and Mahabharata epics, are the European film and theater audiences.
Between 1985 and 1990, these epics have found their way to the public in
Europe. They have been top of the bill at the Avignon theater festival.
Peter Brooke's Mahabharata, though perhaps not sufficiently true to the
original for Indian purists, has been applauded by the viewers, and has
been shown on many TV stations also. The BBC has even broadcast the
Hindi TV serials. While the comments on certain artistic aspects of
these realisations may vary, the reviewers were unanimously impressed by
the contents of these epics.

The secularists in India like to portray themselves as the bringers of
civilisation from the West to obscurantist India. Well, let them not
fool anybody. In Europe, not one single critic has come up with the idea
that these epics could somehow be *communal*. On the contrary, they have
all stressed that these stories are about universal human values. Of
course, with that quite proper assessment of these epics, any kind of a
call for a ban on these film versions of the epics was totally
unthinkable.

Incidentally, it is time for me to reply to those indignated readers who
might ask : who is this foreigner to comment on our affairs ? Well,
since secularism was imported into India from Europe, and is now held up
as India's only salvation by an Indian-born colonial elite, I do think I
am competent to comment on what these West- oriented civilizers are
making of our precious heritage of secularism. They are making a mess of
it.

As I have pointed out in [chapter 10.4](ch10.htm#ch10.4), there can be
no correct understanding of *secularism* without a correct understanding
of *religion*. If people are so illiterate as to treat the Ramayana as a
*religious Scripture* (by which they imply dogma, authoritarian claims
of infallibility, non-humanism) then their understanding of both
religion and secularism cannot but be defective. It is this conceptual
confusion that keeps their conscience undisturbed when they shield
fanatics in the name of tolerance and defend book-banning in the name of
secularism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 12.4. Banning religion from school

Apart from the subtle point that the Indian secularists lack the
conceptual subtlety to do justice to either religion or secularism,
there is a far more crude way in which they mess up the precious
doctrine of secularism. It is this : they themselves are communalists.
The secularists do not hesitate to support policies of discrimination on
the basis of religion.

One of these is the discrimination against Hinduism in the matter of
educational institutions. This is ban of far greater weight than all the
bans on books, films and Verses together.

According to Bipan Chandra's classical definition, communalism is the
belief that people who share the same religion, thereby also have common
secular interests.[²¹¹](notes.htm#note211) An active communalism not
only postulates that people who share a religion, have common secular
interests ; it also grants them (or withholds from them) secular rights
on the basis of their belonging to a given religion. Therefore, it is
certainly a case of active communalism when we find the secular
Constitution of India (which limits its own authority to secular
matters), in its Article 30, guaranteeing the secular right to set up
educational institutions of their choice exclusively to minorities,
including religious minorities. This case of discrimination against the
*majority community* is outright communalism.[²¹²](notes.htm#note212)
Yet, no secularist raises his voice against it. On the contrary, when
pressed for an opinion, they support it.

When Sadhvi Ritambhara, a pro-Janmabhoomi campaigner (a cassette of a
speech of hers was banned), tells an interviewer: *"Politicians appease
\[the Muslims\] at every step, while the Hindus are taken for granted.
We can't even teach our children our religion in schools"*, the
interviewer replies : *"But this is a secular
nation"*.[²¹³](notes.htm#note213)

No, in these circumstances it is not a secular nation. Either secular
means *anti-religious*, and then all religion teaching should be banned
from schools, also that of the minorities.[²¹⁴](notes.htm#note214) Or
secular means *religiously neutral*, and then the state should leave all
the religions the same right to impart religious education in schools,
including the Hindus. Passing off this communal discrimination as
*secular*, is a very crude lie indeed.

In Belgium, the secular Constitution gives any religious (or
other[²¹⁵](notes.htm#note215)) community the right to found its own
schools, which will be recognized and subsidized if they satisfy certain
legal norms. They can impart religious education within the regular
class hours. In state schools, the curriculum comprises two hours per
week of religious or moral education, with a choice between non-
religious morality, or Catholic, Protestant, Jewish or Islamic religion.
The secular philosophy behind this, is that it is not the duty of the
state to either promote or eradicate religion. The state should be
neutral and limit itself to regulating the genuine demand from the
public for a reasonable dosis of the religious education of its own
choice. A religiously neutral state : that is secularism.

But in India, the secularists intend to put up an all-out fight the day
Hindus take steps to abolish this constitutional discrimination against
them. In my opinion, if the Hindus want to fruitfully use the energy
which the Ram Janmabhoomi campaign has generated, they should direct it
first of all to restoring justice in the field of education.

Both the Arya Samaj and the Ramakrishna Mission have been fighting legal
battles for recognition as non-Hindu sects, in order to safeguard their
educational institutions. Their lawyers have thought up very specious
doctrinal difference between the organization they represented, and
Hinduism. Thus, the Ramakrishna Mission has been arguing that they have
*another God* than the Hindus. Their great saint Ramakrishna was always
perfectly satisfied with Kali, like millions of Hindus. Their founder,
Swami Vivekananda, was the representative of Hinduism in the world
parliament of religions in Chicago 1893. *"Say with pride : we are
Hindus"*, that is what Vivekananda said. Forsaking its roots, the
Ramakrishna Mission goes begging in Court for a non-Hindu
status.[²¹⁶](notes.htm#note216)

It may well be that both the Arya Samaj and the Ramakrishna Mission have
been afflicted with the general shame of and depreciation for everything
Hindu. Behind their Court plea for a non-Hindu status may well be a
theological shift away from Hinduism (although they would have to make
it a very big shift, because very diverse sects exist within the Hindu
fold).

Nevertheless, their official apology to their Hindu supporters is that
minority status is the only way to escape government take-overs of their
schools. Especially the CPM government in West Bengal has been
ruthlessly using the constitutional discrimination against Hindu schools
for justifying take-overs. But have these organizations appealed to
Hindu society to come to their rescue? Have they launched, or asked
politicians to launch, a campaign to end this discrimination ?
Apparently they have absolutely no confidence in the willingness of
Hindu politicians to take up even an impeccably justified Hindu cause.

So, I think Hindu politicians should make this their number one issue.
Article 30 is far more unjust and harmful than Article 370 which gives a
special status to Kashmir. You can better lose that piece of territory
than to lose your next generations. It is also a good exercise in
separating the genuine secularists from the Hindu-baiters. The demand
for equality between all religions in education merely seeks the
abrogation of an injustice against the Hindus, so it cannot be construed
as *directed against the minorities*. It wants to stop a blatant case of
discrimination on the basis of religion, so everyone who comes out in
support of the present form of Article 30, will stand exposed as a
supporter of communal discrimination. It is truly a watershed issue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
