+++
title = "13 "

+++
<div align="right">

**10. Jitendra D. Desai**

</div>

**FIRST DOCUMENT:**

1\. What is the harm in adding Jesus and Muhammad to the 33 crore Hindu
gods and goddesses?  
**Response:** What is the need? Why do we want to add two more gods to
33 crore gods and goddesses? Is this a genuine desire to assimilate two
communities following two Semitic religions?

In my opinion, the Sangh leadership is guided by BJP leadership, which
in turn is guided by desire to achieve political supremacy at any cost,
and this desire (of political power at any cost) has brought down the
BJP leadership to the lowly depths of electoral arithmetic - votes
count, votes of Christians and Muslims also count. Hindu leadership may
recommend addition of two more idols of Jesus and Muhammad in the Hindu
pantheon, but are Hindus prepared to worship them? Are Christians and
Muslims prepared to accept this accommodation?

2\. All Religions (Including Islam) lead to God.  
**Response:** True. But Muslims and Christians do not think so. It is
they (Muslims and Christians) who need to be tutored on this, and not
the Hindus. Most of the wars in modern time have been fought by Muslims
and Christians to convince kafirs and heathens that it was only their
prophet and their book which can lead to God.

3\. Islam is good but Muslims are bad.  
**Response:** If Islam was good, how is it that it has produced so many
bad adherents?  If Islam is good, then show us at least one Islamic
nation which is at peace with itself. Show us one Islamic nation which
is not undergoing a violent turmoil.

The forefathers of the Muslims of Afghanistan, Pakistan, Hindustan and
Bangladesh were all Hindus. What is it that has transformed these
erstwhile Hindus into fanatics?

Before the advent of Islam, the Egyptians and the Arabs were great
people. Islam has turned these great people into morons. Arab nations
which are sitting on trillions of petro-dollars, have failed to produce
a great thinker or a great humanist or a great scientist or a great
artist in all these years. They have failed to improve the economic
conditions of their poor brethren in Asia and Africa; instead they are
frittering away their oil wealth in building mosques and financing
terrorism. Islam has failed to inspire them to improve the status of
their own mothers and sisters.

4\. If Muslims are told of their common ancestry, they will unite with
Hindus.  
**Response:** As rightly stated by Dr. Godbole, this historic fact is
quite well known to the Muslims in the subcontinent.

Has it helped Muslims to unite among themselves, let alone uniting with
Hindus?

And prey, why unite them with Hindus? For narrow political gains? Why
not unite all 70 crore Hindus instead, for some purpose?

5\. Congress used Muslims. Congress treats Muslims as vote banks. We
(BJP) will treat Muslims as human beings.  
**Response:** All politicians treat all their constituents as vote
banks.

The BJP, rather than promising to its would-be Muslim voters a humane
treatment, should quickly think of treating its Hindu voters as human
beings.

Muslims have left the BJP alone and are ‘crying’ to be left alone, so
leave them alone. The whole world is learning to leave them alone.

If at all you want to treat them as human beings, start treating their
women as human beings. This work can be left to grassroot level workers
of BJP’s Mahila Aghadi or Rashtra Sevika Samiti or Durga Vahini… 
“Leaders” should concentrate on “leading” rather than ‘treating’ someone
as a human or an inhuman being.

6\. Sufis are tolerant Muslims  
**Response:** Sufis were not ‘tolerant’, they were tolerated by ordinary
Hindus in the false belief that they were saints and mendicants.

7\. Muslim leaders are responsible for the ghetto mentality of
Muslims.  
**Response:** As stated earlier, Muslims have become a community which
is ‘crying’ to be left alone, and Hindu society alongwith the whole
world has learnt to leave them alone. Hence, the ghettos. Neither the
Muslim leaders nor their Hindu counterparts can pull the Muslims out of
their Islam-imposed exile.

8\. Namaz offered on a disputed site (like Ayodhya) is not acceptable to
Allah.  
**Response:** Why become an unwanted emissary of their Allah? Let them
decide, which namaz is acceptable to whom.  
 

**SECOND DOCUMENT**

**Response: ‘Sarva Dharma Samabhãv’** is a value which is deeply
ingrained in the psyche of every Hindu. It has evolved and flourished
through the ages without the support of a ‘Manch’ or any such thing.

A Hindu is civilizationally trained to tolerate a sect to which he does
not belong. This is because his civilization has gone on throwing up
sects and sub-sects at regular intervals as part of an internal
cleansing, invigorating, rejuvenating process. This has made a Hindu and
his civilization one of the greatest survivors of history.

A ‘Manch’ is not needed by them (Hindus). However, a ‘Manch’ needs to be
crated by Indian Muslims and Indian Christians which will enable Muslims
and Christians to understand the Hindu ethos and value system. Sadly,
such initiatives from Muslim and Christian leaders are not forthcoming.
So be it. Why should Hindu leaders worry about Hindus cultivating
‘Samãdar’ for Semitic religions?

The present-day competitive politics is slowly destroying the
centuries-old values of ‘Sarva Dharma Samabhãv’ of Hindus. There is also
competition among newer and newer Hindu sects to win more and more
adherents.

The competitive politics has also managed to divide the 70 crore strong
Hindu community along caste and community lines.

Hindu leaders need to bring all these Hindus on the single ‘Manch’ of
Dharma. We have to worry more about Hindus having ‘Samãdar’ for their
fellow Hindus rather than worry about Hindusthanis following Semitic
religions.

Muslims will have to follow the example of Parsees in Gujarat, who have
contributed so much for the well-being of their new nation state, but
who at the same time have maintained their separate identity for the
past 1000 years.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer who lives in Surat in Gujarat has been a Swayamsevak of the
RSS since 1980.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


