+++
title = "38 "

+++
<div align="right">

**35. Smt.  M. Sandhya**

</div>

I am reacting only to one of the points raised in Dr. Godbole’s Second
Document, namely, the similarity between Christianity, Islam and Marxism
as distinguished from true religions.

David Frawley in his book, *Hinduism; The Eternal Tradition*, says that
“the attempt to connect human being with the Eternal is the very essence
of true religion”. He further elucidates that true religions base
themselves upon something Universal and function harmoniously with the
World and Nature. They are assimilative, inclusive, spiritual and
tolerant. The individual in true religions has absolute freedom to
choose his own path, evolve his own methodologies and practices to
realise the True Self (God). The true religions like Hinduism, Taoism,
Zoroastrianism, Buddhism, Jainism, the Pagan religions, and the
Indigenous religions of Africa and the Americas have evolved over long
periods of time through the process of assimilation. They promote
universality of vision and strive for spiritual experience. As they are
organically connected to Nature and the Earth, they are peaceful and
passive.

On the contrary, the institutionalised religions, viz. Islam and
Christianity, are monolithic and belief-oriented systems. “Such
religions identify religion with belief in one God, one primary
representative of him, and one book of revelation from him. The right
belief is said to bring about salvation. The wrong belief is thought to
be the worst of all sins and bring about damnation. Such religions are
trying to convert the entire world to their belief, which conversion
they view as salvation for humanity.”

Marxism which lampoons religion as the opiate of the masses has very
close doctrinal affinities with Christianity and Islam. It seems as if
they had all come out, indeed they did, from the same mould. All the
three, viz. Christianity, Islam and Marxism, believe in only one Book -
the Bible, the Quran and the Das Kapital - received through the only
representative - Jesus Christ, Prophet Mohammad and Karl Marx. Division
of humanity into believers and non-believers or bourgeoisie and
proletariat is integral to their doctrines. Aggressiveness and militancy
against heathens, infidels and bourgeoisie in the form of Crusades,
Jihads and Class Wars is in-built into their theologies and ideologies
which strive to establish their own world orders. Conversion,
proselytization, destruction, subjugation and annihilation of
non-believers and class enemies are the methodologies through which
their expansionist and imperialistic designs are sought to be achieved.
Dogma is their central tenet - that their’s is the only true faith, the
only true belief, the only doctrine for salvation, and that all other
doctrines are false and bogus. In the name of Holy Wars i.e., Christian
Crusades and Muslim Jihads, millions and millions of people have been
slaughtered over the centuries. The extent and quantum of destruction
and loss of millions of lives in the so-called Communist Revolutions
(whose halo has already been punctured) in the erstwhile Second World
countries fuelled by Marxist doctrines, is still fresh in the memory of
mankind. One wonders that if the personalities of Jesus, Mohammad and
Marx had not existed, World History would have probably been without so
much blood-flow.

Intolerance within and without is the name of the game. Koenraad Elst in
his book, *Psychology of Prophetism: A Secular Look at the Bible*, says:
“The problem with Christianity and Islam is superficially their
intolerance and fanaticism. But this intolerance is a consequence of
these religions’ untruthfulness; if your belief system is based on
delusions, you have to pre-empt rational inquiry into it and shelter it
from contact with more sustainable thought systems. The fundamental
problem with the monotheist religions is not that they are intolerant
but that they are untrue.” Replace the words “Christianity and Islam” in
the above passage with “Marxism” and we find as if Elst is describing
Marxism and its variants, viz. Leninism and Maoism. Compare this with
the natural religions like Hinduism and non-communist and
non-totalitarian ideologies. They welcome and encourage criticism and
rational inquiry as a help in human advancement and scholarship. Yet
another disturbing ideological congruence which Christianity, Islam and
Marxism share is their totalitarianism in seeking to govern and
establish through the institutions of the Church, the Umma and the
Party, a uniformity and a conformity in every sphere of life and
society.

Ask them: “Why should God have only one Son when all things come from
Him? Why should there be a final prophet when there were previous
prophets and while the capacity for spiritual knowledge can be found in
all people? Why should Dialectical Materialism alone define all aspects
and dynamics of the Universes, history, and society? Why should
dictatorship of the proletariat alone be the methodology of correcting
the inequities?” They cannot answer these simple but vital questions
because the totality of life and society are too complex to fit into any
strait-jacket or over simplistic and artificial definitions and
doctrines. The similitudes in the Christian, Islamic and Marxist
ideologies are not only in their fundamental and essential precepts as
seen above, but as a matter of fact in their modus operandi too. Unlike
the natural religions, Christianity and Islam being bereft of spiritual
teaching, are essentially socio-political ideologies, much the same as
Marxism, with the ultimate aim of attaining absolute power over the
whole of humanity. They therefore promote trans-national and
extra-national allegiances by mentally uprooting people from their
nationalistic and native cultural moorings. In their quest for power
these totalitarian ideologies are ruthless and treat human beings as
mere instruments. They do not show any respect for human individuality
and therefore seek to establish uniformity, thus militating against the
Nature’s principle of diversity. They heap scorn on, indulge in false
propaganda against, and denigrate and debunk the religions, faiths,
beliefs, practices, ideologies, concepts and doctrines of others by
distorting the truth, by painting the others as the infidels, the
kafirs, the capitalists, the bourgeoisie and as the worst sinners and
exploiters to be condemned forever to the Hell or to be annihilated and
eliminated. In their false propaganda they seem to adopt the principle
of Goebbles (or is it vice versa?). They are adept at distortion of
history to suit their exclusivistic claims and to paint others in black.
For instance, the early Christian missionaries by consciously distorting
history made the Jews guilty of “Deicide” (God-murder of Jesus) which
was largely responsible for centuries of Christian anti-semitism
culminating in genocide of Jews in Nazi Germany.

Genetically also there are striking similarities in all the three.
Christianity began by debunking Judaism and Jewish beliefs as false.
Mohammad started his Islam by lampooning Christianity for corrupting the
message and revelation of God. To pre-empt any rational inquiry and
criticism of his Faith, the Prophet put a permanent seal on himself by
proclaiming that he was the last prophet and anyone who claims
prophethood after him should be treated as an impostor and done to
death. On similar lines, Karl Marx started with the disparaging
statement that ‘religion is the opiate of the masses’ and went on to
propound his own delusive concepts of dialectical materialism, thesis,
anti-thesis, synthesis, dictatorship of the proletariat and so on. The
only discernible difference in the proclamations of these essentially
socio-political ideologies of Christianity, Islam and Marxism is that in
the ancient days of people’s gullibility the former two could be masked
and sold as religions, whereas by the time Marxism came into existence
the society (Western) was getting fairly modernised and therefore it had
to remain contented with “ideology” status only unlike its more
fortunate elder brothers - Christianity and Islam. Had Marx been born in
ancient times, Marxism probably would have become another opiate of the
masses. Not that it has not become an ideological opiate of some. But
that difference is only in semantics.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer lives in Jagatsinghpur, headquarters of a district in
Orissa.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


