+++
title = "42 "

+++
<div align="right">

**39.  Ram Autar Singh**

</div>

Reference pamphlet “Time for Stock Taking”, my views on the two
documents from Dr. Shreerang Godbole are enumerated as under  
 

**FIRST DOCUMENT**

*1. What is the harm in adding Jesus and Mohammad to the 33 crore Hindu
gods and goddesses?*  
There is difference between love and infatuation. Infatuation can be
one-sided but love is reciprocal. Devotion is blind. Quite a few Hindus
appear infatuated with Muslims. First the Sikhs sang – *“Pahle Allah
Noor Upjaya”*, and adorned themselves with blue uniform like that of
Mullahs and Sufis, yet Guru Teg Bahadur, Guru Arjun Dev, Guru Govind
Singh and Banda Bairagi were made martyrs by Muslim tyrants. Pakistan
helped Khalistanis against Hindus. Gandhiji too sang, *“Ishwar Allah
tere nam”* and of unity of Ram and Rahim, but with no effect, response
or echo from Muslims. The treachery continued. In Hindi films, Hindus
are shown singing the word “Khuda” or “Allah” but never with reciprocity
from the Muslim characters, who never utter Rama or Krishna. In fact,
the real question is whether Islam allows addition of any God other than
Allah, not whether Hindus are willing to include Mohammad or Allah among
their Gods. The fact is that Hindus have been doing it since the Muslim
invaders entered India, but the Muslims have yet to show any flexibility
or cracks in their dogmas.

*2. All religions (including Islam) lead to God.*  
This concept is alien to Semitic religions. I have read Koran and Bible.
As per Koran, only the members of the “UMMAT” (i.e., those who believe
in Allah and his last prophet Mohammad) can attain Heaven and the rest
will be cast into Hell. Similarly, as per Bible, only Christians can
attain salvation. Since Hinduism is not a religion, but Dharma and a way
of life, it is they and only they who believe that all religions are
different ways towards the One God.

Muslims still use the word “Jihad” - a fight against Kafirs
(non-Muslims), while Christians before acquiring half of the world used
the word “Crusade”. Even now, Western militancy has four wings - the
Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Church.

We can’t forget that Sultan Sikandar Lodi put Bodhan to death for no
other offence than saying that “Hinduism is a true religion like Islam”.

*3. Islam is good but Muslims are bad*  
Since Koran is the word of Allah and Mohammad is his last prophet, their
words are a must meant to be followed in letter and spirit. Because of
his scriptures a Muslim cannot afford to be tolerant to Kafirs or
non-Muslims as they order him not to reside near non-Muslims, not to
salute or greet them, not to mix with them, but to hate them, kill them,
loot them, and always to maintain a separate identity.

Any tolerance shown by Muslims is “Maslihat” in their words, i.e., a
timely compromise and tact. Or a Muslim showing compassion or mercy to
Kafirs, does so under dictates of his conscience, momentarily forgetting
the rigid dogmas and *firmans* of Allah and the Prophet towards Kafirs.

*4. If Muslims are told of their common ancestry they will unite with
Hindus.*  
This is ridiculous and a mere flight of imagination. 99% of Muslims in
India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh are descendants of converted Hindus and
they know it - Jinnah, Liaqat Ali, poet Iqbal and Bhutto, for example.
All of them knew their Hindu origin, but became fanatic bigots and more
brutal than Arab invaders.

They can unite with Hindus under one and only one condition, and that is
if Hindus start to behave and deal with Muslims as the latter behave
with Hindus i.e. if Hindus are united, strong and aggressive.

*5. Congress used Muslims. Congress treats Muslims as vote-bank. We
(BJP) will treat Muslims as human beings.*  
In fact, Muslims used the Congress and deserted it when new powerful
champions were found to achieve political gains. Now they have better
quislings from amongst the Hindus than during the Khilafat Movement, and
achievement of Pakistan and Bangladesh. They wooed our Sikh brothers to
fight Hindus in Punjab, wooed Kashmiri Muslims for Jihad against
Kashmiri Hindus, and are now wooing anti-India groups in Northeastern
States.

In the eyes of every Muslim, Hindus are Kafirs and not worthy of
tolerance. They understand only one language which is the language of
Jews in Israel, i.e., tit for tat.

*6. Sufis are tolerant Muslims.*  
Again a preposterous idea. Sufi saints (?) established Dargahs and
Mazars, and never allowed any other kind of worship. In fact, Sufis were
the advance party or the sappers and miners of invading Muslim armies.
Hundreds of persons, in the garb of Sufi saints, swarmed into India and
established their hemitages(?) i.e. Dargahs in deserted or usurped Hindu
buildings and temples, as in Delhi, Ajmer, Fatehpur Sikri and several
other places throughout India. They posed as a balm to the insulted,
humiliated and plundered Hindus. Look at Medieval History and you find
numerous Sufis springing up like mushrooms (*kukurmuttas*) everywhere,
but are now extinct after the elimination of Muslim rule, as if their
breed was a thing of the past like Dinosaurs. Now-a-days in India at
least, one cannot find any new “Sufi-saint”, but only their Dargahs and
Mazars, where *Qawwali* is held and Muslims (of course some misguided
Hindus too) throng to worship the graves for mundane benefits.

I personally know such a Dargah, that of Pahalwan Sahib at Bareilly. He
was actually the murderer of a Hindu. But Muslims (and alas! Hindus too)
daily go there to bow and worship.

*7. Muslim leaders are responsible for the ghetto mentality of
Muslims.*  
I agree with Dr. Godbole that Islamic theology i.e. Koran and Hadis,
besides Mullahs and Maulvis and Muslim leaders tell Muslims how they are
superior to Kafirs, and how tactfully they should behave in a country
where they are in minority and not in power.

The example of Syed Shahabuddin, ex M.P., a candidate for Jinnahship, is
before us. In the case of Shah Bano, he agitated till Rajiv Gandhi
passed an enactment, nullifying the Supreme Court judgement giving
benefits to Muslim women. He took out Ram Janma Bhoomi/Babri Masjid
dispute out of cold storage and then inflamed it. He boycotted
participation of Muslims in Independence Day celebrations, preached
apartheid by opposing the singing of Vande Mataram by Muslims; and went
to Minakshipuram in support of Mullahs who had indulged in wholesale
conversion of Hindus to Islam.

Indian society is secular in character and culture and Muslims and
Christians are increasing and prospering here, whereas in Muslim
countries the two sects, Shias and Sunnis, cannot offer Namaz together
in a mosque, nor Protestants can go to a Catholic Church in a Christian
country.

Separatism is the keyword propagated by Mullahs and Maulvis and the
ghetto mentality is their own creation, as they detest and abhor
assimilation in the main national stream. They are always scared of
losing their identity.

*8. Namaz offered on a disputed site (like Ayodhya) is not acceptable to
Allah.*  
This theory was advanced by Sri Harihar Shankar Jain, Advocate, and the
Secretary of the Vishva Hindus Adhivakta Sangh, in a Writ Petition in
the Ram Janmabhoomi/Babri Masjid Case. In fact, this wrongful plea is
based on an imaginary presumption and not on any Muslim Scripture.

Islam forbids idol-worship, and so, when Mohammad conquered Mecca, he
destroyed 360 idols affixed in the Kaaba, before offering Namaz. In the
so-called Babri Masjid structure, there were human figures engraved on
pillars on which the three domes rested. As per the Waqf Board Case,
Muslim conquerors read Khutbas there upto 1934 A.D. Namaz was often
offered on Fridays by Muslim gatherings, after which Muslims left it
unattended. Similarly, the other two mosques built by Aurangzeb on
Swargadwar and Treta Ke Thakur were left unattended and turned into
ruins.

Mullahs of the stature of Imam Bukhari of Delhi and other Muslim leaders
had declared through press statements that once Namaz is offered at a
place, it becomes a masjid for ever. So the Muslims in general demand
reconstruction of Babri Masjid at the same place in Ayodhya so that the
symbol of national shame must hurt the Hindus always.

Bishambhar Nath Pandey has tried to justify the greatness of Islam, its
culture and compassion through his book, *Paigambar Mohammad,
Koran/Hadis-Islam Darshan*, concealing the true contents of Koran and
Hadis instead of exposing them. We should remember that a case was filed
in a Calcutta court citing those Ayats of Koran that preach hatred,
bloodshed and loot of Kafirs, but which was not heard under pressure
(from Rajiv Gandhi) and dismissed.  
 

**SECOND DOCUMENT**

“Sarva Panth Samãdar Manch” was floated by the B.M.S. to give a platform
for extending equal honour to all ways of worship, the original idea
being of Sri Dattopant Thengdi, founder of the B.M.S.

Formation of such a Manch is absurd, for Hindus do not need such
preachings; only the Muslims and Christians need them. Hindus already
believe in *Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam*, while Semitic religions believe in
their exclusive superiority. In fact, Muslims think of Hindus as a pack
of fools who organise such Manchs for unity, Bhai-Bhaiship, reservation
in services, secular songs, seminars, stage plays (like that of Sahmat)
or support drawing of nude portraits of Hindu Gods and Goddesses (as was
done by Hussain), or demand ban on books showing any critical evaluation
of Muslim theology.

To speak for Hindus by the Hindus in Hindu India is neither wrong nor
illegal. Emperor Prithviraj Chauhan fought Ghori, Rana Sanga fought
Babar; Maharana Pratap fought Akbar despite Man Singh; Chhatrapati
Shivaji Maharaj fought Aurangzeb despite Jaswant Singh; Banda Bairagi
fought and became a martyr despite neutrality of several Hindu kings who
remained silent spectators. The fight continues and now when we are
independent why can’t we wipe out symbols of national shame imposed by
foreign invaders. It is unthinkable that a few pseudo-secularists or
fifth-columnists can stop the great Hindu tide. Let us, instead, form
“Remove National Shame Manch” in each and every district of India, and
unitedly do the rest.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is a retired R.M.O. living at Haldwani in District Nainital,
U.P.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


