+++
title = "50 "

+++
<div align="right">

**47. Brief Responses**

</div>

**I. Dipen Banerjee**

At first I must thank you, for sending such a valuable document written
by Dr. Shreerang Godbole to a man like me of no importance.

Now I like to say something as a Hindu in general. Though I am not a
Swayamsevak, I am closely related with the R.S.S. So I feel sad when I
see that even a Nationalistic organisation like B.M.S. fails to
understand the basic ideologies of the monotheistic traditions like
Islam, Christianity and Judaism, and harps on the much vaunted theory of
Sarva Pantha Samãdar. I fully see eye to eye with Dr. Godbole in his
view that Sarva Pantha Samãdar goes against the basic principles of the
monotheistic traditions and that what we need is not Sarva Pantha
Samãdar but Sarva Pantha Chikitsã. Dr. Godbole has rightly pointed out
that the basic problem is in those exclusivist ideologies which have
been propagated for long as Dharma. It is sad that we do not go through
the basic texts and try to understand the tenets of Islam and
Christianity. The educated Hindus should read the Quran, the Hadith and
the Bible if they want to know what has gone wrong with the minorities
in India. Then they will see that, inspired by demonic traditions, they
are getting ready to destroy the age-old and the most humanistic
tradition of the world i.e. Hinduism.

So, I appeal to the leaders of the Sangh Parivar to go through the
original texts, and to form a strong movement to free the helpless
Muslims and Christians from their demonic ideologies. In fact, Sarva
Pantha Chikitsã as it is termed by Dr. Godbole is the proper way to
proceed. We have to free them from their brutal tradition to end the
so-called minority problem. We have to wipe out these ideologies. And
this can be done by arousing in them a strong feeling for their
ancestral tradition - Hinduism.

**Voice of India** has done a tremendous job by revealing the inherent
doctrines of the monotheistic traditions, and the big lies spread by the
leftists in the name of History. I hope that you will join hands with
Dr. Godbole to eleminate these ideologies which are known as
monotheism.  
 

**II. Dr. V.S. Bhargava**

My comments on the first document are:

> 1\) This is a fact supported by history that all religions lead to
> God.
>
> 2\) This is also historically correct that Congress used Muslims as
> Vote Banks.
>
> 3\) As a student and Professor of History, I agree with the statement
> that Muslim leaders are responsible for the ghetto mentality of
> Muslims. Therefore the Namaz offered on disputed site or under mental
> tension is not acceptable to Allah.

Postscript in the letter of Dr. Godbole to Shri K.S. Sundarshan is very
much in conformity with my views, i.e. “If they feel that Sanatan Dharma
and Islam are worthy of equal respect, I see no reason for the VHP to
continue its campaign of Parãvartan of Muslims and Christians.”

There should be mass campaigning that “time is ripe when Hindus have to
decide that they are not to follow opportunist politicians who are
worshippers of power and chair because they can barter the hard earned
freedom in the name Development. In the background of their cry of
Economic crisis one can see their self-aggrandisement. Hindus should
decide that for the sake of their very existence and their religious
principles they should do or die.  
 

**III. G.K. Dudani**

Many thanks for sending “Time for Stock Taking” pamphlet.

> 2\. I agree with the two brief comments of VOICE OF INDIA.
>
> 3\. The effort of the RSS to propagate “Sarva Panth Samãdar Manch”
> will be an exercise in futility and will be reversing all the good
> work done by the Sangh so far. It appears that criticism of Hindu
> politicians and the isolation of BJP in the political arena, is now
> telling upon the Sangh.
>
> 4\. Muslims will never accept Hindus as brethren as it will be
> un-Islamic. The Koran-Hadis teaches them hatred right at the young
> age. Fanatic Islamic organisations all over the world are creating
> fanatics who are brainwashed to think that by giving life for Islam,
> they will go to Heaven where they will enjoy beautiful Houris. What is
> needed is making known to Muslims the real facts about the life of
> Muhammad in a rational and critical mannar. But who will do that? Who
> is going to bell the cat?
>
> 5\. What I am trying to drive at is that the two will never meet. The
> philosophy of the Manch will not work: it will be doing harm to the
> cause of Hinduism. Let the Sangh continue its work and spread to areas
> where it is still weak. Results are bound to come and the apple when
> ripe will fall in the lap of the Sangh.

  
**IV. Om Prakash Gupta**

The views expressed by Dr. Godbole on the listed points in italics in
the first document and fine points of the second document seem to be
quite right. There cannot be any dissent.  
 

**V. Prem Sagar Gupta**

I have received your pamphlet “Time For Stock Taking”. I have gone
through the entire pamphlet and find myself in complete agreement with
Dr. Godbole. There appears to be some mistake on the part of our
leaders; otherwise this situation could have been avoided.  
 

**VI. A.K.R. Hemmady**

My grateful thanks to VOICE OF INDIA for contributing to Amrit Manthan
which is already on by circulating Shri Shreerang Godbole’s views. I
fully agree that what we Hindus need is Sarva Pantha Chikitsã and not
Sarva Pantha Samãdar.

I have begun writing my response and hope to complete it in a month’s
time. However, if I am late, please go ahead and publish the responses
that you may receive within the time limit set by you (please let me
know the limit).  
 

**VII. A. P. Joshi**

Thanks for sending the booklet ‘Time For Stock Taking’.

I agree with Dr. Shreerang Godbole’s stand.

There is a lot of confusion regarding words like Secular, Majority,
Minority, Religion, Dharma, Hindutva, Humanity, Socialism, etc.

We have to produce literature for defining the above words in all Indian
languages.

Hindu organizations should be capable of debating with intelligent and
cunning people and able to convince ordinary people. Our people must
know Hindu Religion, Philosophy, History, Arts and also about Islam,
Christianity, Judaism, Socialism, Communism, and Fascism.

This is a difficult job, but because Hindus have lost their political
eyesight as said by Vir Savarkar, we have to do it.

The creator of Pakistan is not Mr. Jinnah or the Muslims League but it
is the Koran, says Vir Savarkar. Hindus have to remain alert and use the
tit-for-tat rule against Islam and Christianity. Hindus have to raise a
militia for their defence.

If BJP/RSS really want to make Hindu Rastra, then they must be practical
as this is a fight for the existence of Hindus. This is a fight between
Akhand Hindustan vs Akhand Pakistan.  
 

**VIII. Hari Narain**

Dr. Shreerang Godbole has in his brief comments (as circulated by VOICE
OF INDIA) raised many pertinent points; several of them have merit. In
analysing these it would be relevant to first go beyond the points of
dispute and see why an emerging line of reasoning which (at least on the
face of it) gives the impression of a tilt or softening of approach
towards the fundamentalist, intolerant or authoritarian aspects of
Islam. It is known that in our democratic set-up, social or cultural
organizations do not wield power but their political counterparts do so.
And political power is the means for propagating your ideology (though
it has also become a means for enriching oneself).

The question is whether after the Babri-structure-demolition electoral
successes the BJP’s ambition to wield powers at the centre was
premature. The failure at New Delhi and elsewhere to maintain the rising
curve of electoral gains and the isolation from the so-called secular
parties has probably made them search for a new vote bank and be
perceived as not inimical towards Islam.

The hard choice is between being in the wilderness for years, working
selflessly for changing, strengthening and broadening the base till
power flows in the right hands, or taking the course that the Indian
National Congress took prior to Independence i.e. power at any cost even
if it be the partitioning of the Motherland.  
 

**IX. K. Narasimhan**

This is in immediate response to the pamphlet sent by you, *TIME FOR
STOCK TAKING*: A Swayamsevak Speaks.

Indeed the *TIME* is overdue *FOR* radical *STOCK TAKING* of Islam, by
way of an open invitation to the *imãms* and *mullãhs* (of Islam in
India) for a *dialogue on Islamic tenets and Islamic history* in India
since the 8th century AD. They need to be shown all the specific
passages in the Koran and the Hadith that have actually instigated the
followers of Islam to perpetrate their ceaseless violence in India
against the Hindus. This I believe has never been done before, certainly
not in secularist Congress regimes in this century. If the *imãms* (of
P.V. Narasimha Rao’s erstwhile audience) refuse to come forward for such
a dialogue, they will only confirm their *servitude* to their
exclusivist *fanaticism*, which is *the cause* of all Islamic violence
and hatred. They will have proved that the Muslims are indeed the
“victims of Islam”.

If in the dialogues, the *imãms* refuse to admit that the instigatory
passages in the Koran need to be abrogated, because they are “the divine
commands of Allah”, then like the cohorts of Khara-DûshaNa in the
RãmãyaNa, they are inviting their own annihilation. They can’t have it
both ways indefinitely! This should have been their reception in *full*
since the first Muslim invasion of India. At this point of time, the
alternatives for the Muslims should be: *Either reconvert to Hinduism or
Quit India* (Hindusthan +Pakistan+Bangladesh).

On the other hand, if India can throw up such ministerial heads as it
has done now, there must be something radically wrong in our political
system. It is just as urgent a *TIME FOR STOCK TAKING* with our
electoral or political system, to deal with our *real* ECONOMY and our
*real* ENEMIES - *Islamists, Communists* (Chinese and Local), and
*Secularists* (Congressmen and their stooges).  
 

**X. A.K. Ray**

Thank you very much indeed for sending me a copy of “Time for Stock
Taking”. On all the major points raised by Dr. Godbole I find myself
completely in agreement with him.

I recall that quite sometime ago, at a meeting at the Deendayal Research
Institute (DRI), at which Shri Sudarshan was also present, someone
floated the idea that there should be an “opening towards the Muslims”
using people like Waheeduddin Khan. I strongly opposed the idea, for I
uncompromisingly believe that it is for the Muslims to take the
initiative to assimilate themselves into Indianness, not for Hindus to
induce them to do so with various palliatives and concessions. The idea
of the “opening” is but another front opened by the Negationists as
Koenraad Elst calls them.

I shall be sending you my detailed response to Dr. Godbole’s points as
well as certain suggestions within the next few days. As against the
fashionable condemnation of Huntington’s thesis about a climactic
civilisational conflict with Islam, which even the Russians have now
begun to echo, I believe that there is no meeting ground between the
utter ethical nihilism inherent in Islam and its proscription of
philosophical thought together with its ideology of world-domination,
and what human civilisation stands for. We Hindus have to educate
ourselves about it.  
 

**XI. Prabhakar Sata**

I am in full agreement with the views expressed frankly by Dr. Godbole  
 

**XII. C. A. Shakya**

There is no doubt that Religion accounted for the foundation of
PAKISTAN. Unless immediate and profound action is taken, there will be
more Pakistans, Isaistans, Akalistans, Buddhistans, Marxistans,
Indo-Anglostans and so forth.

While I comprehend Dr. Godbole’s indignation, sympathise and empathise
with him, I recommend less talk and more action. Such organizations as
*Sarva Panth Samãdar* are, - I fully agree with Dr. Godbole, -
completely on the wrong tack.

As far as Religions go, the HINDU ideal is completely against *any*
organisation of religion. All of them, in fact deliberately, come
between MAN and the INFINITE. Fortunately, there is no HINDU ECCLESIA.
Therefore, Dr. Godbole is right in setting his face against any truck
with the totally unspiritual and purely power-and-pelf-hungry
institutions that make Religion a narcotic, “the opium of the masses” as
Marx aptly put it. The practices of alien “FAITHS” have even been copied
by some Indian indigenous faiths. They have actually made Religion
political, and Politics religio-communal. HINDUTVA alone keeps politics
free from Religion and Religion free from politics. HINDUTVA alone
enshrines Freedom of Thought and liberty of every Community. It alone
avoids “MINORITISM” which has proved as banefully useful to the
mountebanks who become politicians in India and pretend to be “secular”.

For the above personal observations *I request complete anonymity* as,
to re-establish Hindutva, complete anonymity is essential. I would
respectfully suggest that only positive steps be taken to reconstruct
the Hindu Society by Schooling, Mutual Aid Groups, Hindu Scout
Movements, a la NCC, all training of Youth to help in all contingencies,
in natural or man-made disasters; the latter being the more numerous and
the more noxious. A strong cadre of SEVAKS, including youth of both
sexes, is India’s most urgent need. Good English-cum-Sanskrit Schools
must be given priority. As for those communities which do not care for
HINDUTVA, the most telling blow is to ignore them openly and steadily to
undermine their foundations by education and the organisation of cadres
therefore.  
 

**XIII.  N. C. Singhvi**

Received a pamphlet - Time For Stock Taking: A Swayamsevak Speaks. And
he has spoken rightly. Perhaps we are searching short-cuts to the
problem. There are no short-cuts to the problem. There are no short-cuts
better than the RSS. The RSS and RSS alone can solve all the problems
provided we all Swayamsevaks work earnestly.

Muslims came to India not to be assimilated but to assimilate. They
cannot be assimilated unless our country is declared Hindu Rashtra. Once
it is so declared, they will do the rest. We need not bother about them.
Let us bother about ourselves. We have given them undue importance
unnecessarily. It shows our weakness, nothing else.  
 

**XIV. T. Suryanarayana**

I happened to read your pamphlet pertaining to the efforts of Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh to form “Sarvapanth Samãdar Manch” to accommodate
Muslims and Christians. It is a naked truth that Muslims and Christians
do not accept Sangh theology. Only Hindu Organisations put forth this
concept to appease the minorities to ascend to the Delhi throne.

It is obvious that Hindus are not in a position to realise their
decadent position even though many noble souls tried to awaken them from
the stupor. They are prepared to accept Jesus Christ and Prophet
Mohammed as incarnations of the Almighty.

Hindu Organisations have now degenerated to float the idea. It is the
misfortune of Hindus that they are being betrayed by their political,
social and spiritual leaders. Since last so many centuries, they have
been humiliated and yet they are not in a position to reckon and take
proper recourse of action. Thousands of temples were desecrated since
their invasion by Muslims. Lakhs of Hindu were murdered and women were
molested.

I understand your anguish and concur with you. I assert that Vedic
philosophy is the only philosophy which covers the whole of humanity --
logical, scientific and rational. Islam and Christianity, the Semitic
religion, are unscientific, illogical and irrational. They breed only
hatred not only for other religions but also among the different sects
of their own religions.  
 

**XV. B. M. Thapar**

Please refer to *V of I* pamphlet titled “Time for Stock Taking: A
Swayamsevak Speaks.” Dr. Godbole’s views are clearly expressed and I
find myself in total agreement.  
 

**XVI. B. G. Thattey**

I fully agree with the views expressed by Dr. Godbole in the two
documents received from you as well as your comments under “Time for
Stock Taking”.

It is high time we all realize that the HINDU NATION OWES NOTHING TO THE
MUSLIMS. However, some political leaders who are Hindu by religion but
are sham practitioners of various issues like Communism, Congressism,
Socialism, appeasementism, pseudo-Secularism etc., are being allowed by
the Hindu masses to speak for them. These leaders are behaving as if
Hindus owe something to Muslims. That is how V.P. Singh reportedly gave
Rs. 50 lakhs of Government money to Bukhari and his mosque.

I hope your organisation will help in eradicating this self-defeating
idea from the Hindu minds.  
 

**Footnotes:**

I. The writer lives in Town Hall village in North 24 Parganas District
in West Bengal.

II\. The writer is a retired Principal now settled at Ajmer in
Rajasthan.

III\. The writer is a retired IAS officer now living in Ahmedabad in
Gujarat.

IV\. The writer lives in Jammu Tawi in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

V. The writer is an Advocate who has been legal adviser to several
Government organisation and who now practises law in Delhi.

VI\. The writer lives in Mumbai. His response did not reach us in time.

VII\. The writer lives at Panvel in District Raigarh of Maharashtra.

VIII\. The writer lives in Gurgaon in Haryana and says that he is in no
way connected with the Sangh Parivar.

IX\. The writer is a well known author of several books on several
subjects and is known as K. N. Iengar of Mysore in Karnataka.

X. The writer is a retired diplomat with a brilliant mind. He is settled
in New Delhi. His response did not reach us in time.

XI\. The writer is a Vaidya practising at Porbandar in Gujarat.

XII\. The writer has given us his true name and address but wants to
remain unnamed. We have given him our own name.

XIII\. The writer lives at Nagpur in Maharashtra.

XIV\. The writer is a Freedom Fighter and the editor of Vaidic Kranthi
Patham, a monthly published in English and Telegu from Secuderabad in
Andhra Pradesh. His English monthly reproduced our brochure in full.

XV\. The writer is an industrialist and a devotee of Sathya Sai Baba. He
lives in New Delhi.

XVI\. The writer lives in Mumbai.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


