+++
title = "73 "

+++
<div align="right">

*The Hindustan Times*  
New Delhi, 24 August 1995  
**14. Advani woos Indian expatriates**  
**in London, assails Govt’s**  
**Kashmir policy**  
By L.K. Sharma

</div>

LONDON, August 23 - Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) president L.K. Advani
criticised the Rao government’s Kashmir policy, promised a tougher
approach if his party came to power and urged the Indian community in
Britain to counter the lobbying by the Pakistanis.

He sought to mobilise the Indian community at a meeting organised by the
“Overseas Friends of the BJP” and said that there could be no dialogue
with terrorists. A BJP government would “scrap Kashmir’s constitutional
status and recover the third of the state’s territory under illegal
Pakistani occupation.”

In his two-hour long address at a packed Brent town hall, Mr. Advani
objected to British media’s description of BJP as a “right-wing Hindu
fundamentalist party” and argued at length that his party was no such
thing. He said the BJP was ahead of everyone in the race for the next
parliamentary elections.

Mr. Advani’s statements gave a preview of the BJP’s election strategy
which will focus on criminalisation of politics, corruption and the need
to emulate Japanese economic nationalism. His description of the ghastly
“tandoor murder” evoked considerable laughter.

The BJP leader returned to the theme of the “liberal Hindu tradition”
for the second day in an attempt to remove the misgivings of the
minorities as well as of secular and devout Hindus who had rebelled
against the lumpenisation of the Hindu psyche at the time of the
demolition of the Ayodhya mosque. The latter harbour reservations about
guided conservatism and any centralised control of the Hindu way of life
that may be attempted by a cadre-based party. Mr. Advani’s statements
indicated that the BJP will seek to attract new followers by projecting
a gentler face of the main organisation while the front organisations
continue to consolidate the Hindu vote through religious rabble-rousing.

Mr. Advani shunned stridency and traced the source of his own temple
activism to such Congress veterans as Sardar Patel and K.M. Munshi who
wrote “Jai Somnath”, The BJP leader underpinned the party’s cultural
nationalism and political nationalism with his admiration for Swami
Vivekanand, Sardar Patel and Shamaldas Gandhi, recording his admiration
for a strand of his Congress.

Mr. Advani’s message was directed at those who want to “malign” the BJP
but on occasions, the friends of the BJP president in Britain were
caught in momentary confusion. Mr. Advani declared that when Pakistan
became a theocratic state, no country in the world would have minded had
India followed the same path. The audience interrupted the speaker with
an applause, mistaking his intent. Mr. Advani resumed with a “but” and
went on to say that he, as a “thinker”, would not have liked India to
become a theocratic state because theocracy was alien to India’s
tradition, its legacy and its culture. Having now given the message
right, the audience gave a fresh and louder applause to supersede the
earlier ill-timed gesture.

Mr. Advani recalled that he had disapproved of the slogan raised in the
party: *Jo Hindu hit ki bat karega, wohi desh pe raj karega*. The BJP
government would be for all and not for just the Hindu majority, he
said.\*

Mr. Advani said he had challenged the BBC to show anything in the BJP
manifesto that validated their description of the BJP as a “right-wing
Hindu fundamentalist patty”. In European terms, it was Mr. Manmohan
Singh who was the most right-wing finance minister, he said. He said the
BJP was a secular party but it was against pseudo-secularists. “I have
been telling our Muslim friends, do not see us through the tinted
glasses of our critics. Judge, us by our track record,” he said. The BJP
governments in states took all administrative steps to prevent riots.
They offered security and justice to every citizen without any
discrimination.  
 

**Footnotes:**

\* An year earlier, Mr. Advani had rebuked a Hindu audience in India for
raising the same slogan. He had advised them to say instead, *‘Jo sab ke
hit ki bat karega, wohi desh par raj karega.’* This substitute slogan
had been noticed by Abhas Chatterjee, and provided the theme of his
lecture, *Hindû Rãshtra Kî AvadhãraNã*, delivered in Calcutta on 31 July
1994. This lecture was translated by him into English and published by
Voice of India in 1995 under the title, *The Concept of Hindu Nation*.
The original lecture in Hindi has also been published in 1997. This
business of treating Hindus as merely a majority community and as less
than the nation itself, had been started by Sir Syed Ahmed Khan in 1886,
and has now been bought by the BJP.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


