+++
title = "01 Preface"

+++
**Preface**

The movement for the restoration of the Ramajanmabhumi Temple at Ayodhya
has brought to the fore a suppressed chapter of India’s history, namely,
the large-scale destruction of Hindu temples^([1](#1)) by the Islamised
invaders.  This chapter is by no means closed.  The Appendix to this
book provides details of many temples destroyed by Muslims all over
Bangladesh as recently as October-November 1989.  Currently, temples, or
whatever had remained of them, are meeting a similar fate in the Kashmir
valley.

This chapter, however, though significant, was only a part of the Muslim
behaviour-pattern as recorded by Muslim historians of medieval India. 
The other parts were: 1) mass slaughter of people not only during war
but also after the armies of Islam had emerged victorious; 2) capture of
large numbers of non-combatant men, women and children as booty and
their sale as slaves all over the Islamic world; 3) forcible conversion
to Islam of people who were in no position to resist; 4) reduction to
the status of zimmis or non-citizens of all those who could not be
converted and imposition of inhuman disabilities on them; 5)
emasculation of the zimmis by preventing them from possessing arms; 6)
impoverishment of the zimmis through heavy discriminatory taxes and
misappropriation of a major part of what the peasants produced; 7)
ruination of the native and national culture of the zimmis by
suppressing and holding in contempt all its institutions and
expressions.

Nor is this behaviour pattern a thing of the past.  It persisted even
after the Muslim rule was over.  The Muslim revivalist movements in the
nineteenth century, particularly in Bengal, tried to repeat, as far as
they could, the performance of the medieval Muslim swordsmen and
sultans.  More recently, after the Islamic state of Pakistan was carved
out, Hindus have been forced to leave their ancestral homes, en masse
from its western wing and in a continuous stream of refugees from its
eastern wing, now an independent Islamic state of Bangladesh that came
into being with the help of India.  Hindu temples and other cultural
institutions have more or less disappeared from Pakistan, while they
continue to be under constant attack in Bangladesh.

How to understand this behaviour pattern so persistently followed over a
thousand years under very different conditions and so consistent in its
expression? What is its deeper ideological source?

It is rooted in Islam’s religious teachings, its theology and its
religious laws; it derives from its peculiar conception of momins and
kafirs, from its doctrines of Jihad, Daru’l-Islam and Daru’l-harb, and
from what it regards as the duty of a Muslim state.  Hindu India is
called upon to make a deeper study of Islam than it has hitherto done. 
It can neglect this task at its own peril.

The present volume makes no pretence of presenting such a study, but by
choice restricts itself mainly to the study of Hindu temples destroyed
and desecrated and converted into mosques and khanqahs without
overlooking Muslims’ ideology of iconoclasm; here and there, it also
mentions other theological props and concomitants of the iconoclastic
ideology.  In the book Ayodhya retain its importance, but it does not
occupy the centre of discussion.  In dealing with its subject, it
exercises complete fidelity to truth; unlike secularist and Marxist
writers, it does not believe in re-writing and fabricating history.  Its
aim is to raise the informational level of our people and to make them
better aware of the more persistent ideological forces at work.

Mahavira Jayanti.  
April 7, 1990

<div align="right">

Publisher

</div>

  

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) “Hindu Temples” in the present context include temples
belonging to all sects of Sanatana Dharma - Brahmanical, Buddhist, Jain
and the rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
