+++
title = "03 CHAPTER TWO THE STORY OF RUDRAMAHÃLAYA"

+++
**CHAPTER TWO**

**THE STORY OF RUDRAMAHÃLAYA**

In order to understand fully the meaning of what was exposed at Sidhpur
and the strife it caused, we have to know what the Rudramahãlaya was,
how it came to be built at Sidhpur and how a Jãmi‘ Masjid was raised on
its site and from its debris. The Report of the Minorities’ Commission
provides some historical background. So does the Note from the
Government of Gujarat. But the information is meagre and leaves a lot to
be told. Both of them were dealing with a “communal problem” and were
not expected to give a detailed history of Sidhpur, the Rudramahãlaya
and the Jãmi‘ Masjid.  
 

**Sidhpur**

The Note from the Government of Gujarat gives no information about the
historical or religious importance of Sidhpur. The Report of the
Minorities’ Commission says that “Sidhpur is a historical town” and that
“it was ruled successively by Hindu Rajas and Muslim Sultans.”^([1](#1))
There is no reference to the religious importance of Sidhpur as a place
of Hindu pilgrimage. The article by B.L. Nagarch brings out that point
when it says that “as the obsequial offerings to the paternal ancestors
must be made at Gaya, so corresponding offerings to the maternal
ancestors have to be performed at Sidhpur.” Nagarch tells us also that
“the ancient name of Sidhpur appears to have been Šrîsthala or
Šrîsthalaka” and that “the name of Sidhapur was given to this place in
honour of Siddharãja JayasiMha who completed the Temple of
Rudra-Mahãdeva in the twelfth century here.”^([2](#2))

The PurãNas regard Šrîsthala as the most sacred spot in the
Sãrasvata-maNDala of Gujarat. The *Bhãgvata PurãNa* associates it with
Kardama *rishi*, who had his hermitage here, and also with Kapila
*muni*, who was born in this place on the bank of the sacred Sarasvati
river. It was also known as Vindusara.^([3](#3)) It is said that
ANahillapãTaka or ANahillapaTTaNa, the capital of medieval Gujarat
before Ahmadabad came up in the first quarter of the fifteenth century,
was founded where it was because of its nearness to Šrîsthala.

ANahillapaTTaNa, now known as Patan, was built in AD 745 by Vanarãja,
the founder of the ChãvoTkaTa or Chãpã or Chãvdã dynasty. It reached its
greatest glory, however, in the reign of JayasiMha (AD 1094-1143), the
most illustrious ruler of the Chaulukya or Solãñkî dynasty of Gujarat. 
Jayasimha was very much devoted to Šrîsthala and visited it often in
order to keep the company of sages and saints living at this place.
There is a popular legend that JayasiMha defeated and captured Barbara,
a demon who was molesting the holy men at Šrîsthala. Barbara, we are
told, became his obedient servant and performed many superhuman deeds
for him. That is how JayasiMha earned the sobriquet of Siddharãja. He
built at Šrîsthala a temple dedicated to Rudra Mahãkãla which became
known as Rudramahãlaya or simply Rudramãla. Because of its close
association with Siddharãja, Šrîsthala became known as Siddhapura which
name was corrupted to Sidhpur in course of time.

The spiritual fame of Sidhpur, however, proved to be its misfortune when
Gujarat passed under a long spell of Muslim rule towards the close of
the thirteenth century. Thereafter it attracted the attention of every
Islamic iconoclast. Its temples were reduced to ruins and its holy men
were either killed or scared away. Its spiritual importance had become
greatly reduced when MuNhata NaiNasî, the famous historian of Rajasthan,
visited it in Samvat 1717 (AD 1660). NaiNasî was at that time the Dîwãn
of Mahãrãja Jaswant Singh of Jodhpur who had been appointed the Governor
of Gujarat by Aurangzeb in AD 1658. He has left for us a brief
description, historical and topographical, of Sidhpur as he saw it.
“Sidhpur,” writes NaiNasî “is a pleasant city. It was founded by
Sidharão after his own name. He invited from the East one thousand
Udîchya BrãhmaNas who were well-versed in the Vedas and gave them seven
hundred villages around Sidhpur… He had built a big temple named
Rudramãla. That was razed to the ground by Sultãn Alãuddîn. Even so,
several temples survive today. Beyond the city, towards the east, there
is the river Sarasvarî. A temple dedicated to Mãdhava had been built on
its bank. A *ghãTa* \[flight of steps leading to the river\] has also
been constructed. The temple was destroyed by the Mughals but the
*ghãTa* can still be seen… A Turk has built his bungalow on the
*ghãTa*.”^([4](#4))

Sidhpur was liberated from the Muslim stranglehold by the Marathas in
the first quarter of the eighteenth century. By the first quarter of the
nineteenth, the Marathas lost to the British and in the settlement that
followed Sidhpur was included in the princely state of Baroda along with
Patan. The Marathas made no attempt to revive Sidhpur as a centre of
Hindu pilgrimage. Nor did they try to restore Patan as the seat of a
Hindu government. Neither the spiritual nor the political capital of
Gujarat at one time has retained anything of a great past except wistful
memories.  
 

**Rudramahãlaya**

The Note from the Government of Gujarat says that the Rudramahãlaya was
“built by Siddharaja Jayasimha in the 12th century” and that “it had
eleven shrines dedicated to *Akadasa Rudras*.”^([5](#5)) The Report of
the Minorities’ Commission repeats this description with the elucidation
that “in the centre of this complex was situated the temple and in and
around the courtyard were 11 other shrines dedicated to the
Rudras…”^([6](#6)) Both of them say that the temple was profusely
sculptured and ornamented. But none of them mentions what has survived
of the central temple or the surrounding shrines.

B.L. Nagarch gives greater details in his aforementioned article. He
writes:

“In about AD 944 Mûlarãja had founded the Rudra Mahãlaya, but as he had
to remain busy in invasions and other engagements he could not complete
it. This temple fell into ruins during the following centuries. 
Siddharãja JayasiMha took up the work of reconstruction of this temple
on a scale greater than that originally conceived and could not finish
the work till his death in AD 1143.

“Rudramahãlaya is the grandest and the most imposing conception of a
temple dedicated to Šiva. Only a few fragments of the mighty shrine now
survive, namely, four pillars in the north and five in the eastern side,
porches of the three storeyed *maNDapa*. Four pillars in the back of it,
a *toraNa* and a cell at the back remain *in situ* after being
dismantled in the 13th century AD. With its adjacent shrines, possibly
eleven, part of which was converted into Jami mosque later in the Mughal
period, it must have formed part of a grand conception dedicated to
Ekãdaša Rudras.

“Originally it covered an area of 100 x 66 mtrs. The central building
itself occupies an area of about 50 x 33 mtrs. The mighty pillars of
this temple are the tallest so far known in Gujarat.”^([7](#7))

It is difficult to visualize what the Rudramahãlaya looked like when it
stood intact and in all its majesty. No other edifice of a similar
conception has survived. We have only some legendary accounts, one of
which is from NaiNasî who tells us how the Rudramahãlaya was conceived
and constructed. We give below a summary of what he has written at
length.

Sidharão, says NaiNasî, saw the Earth in a dream, appearing in the form
of a damsel and demanding that she be decorated with a choice ornament.
The king consulted the learned men who could divine dreams and they told
him that the ornament for the Earth could mean only a magnificent
temple. So the king invited architects from every land and they
presented to him models of what they could conceive to be the best. But
no model satisfied Sidharão and he became despondent. At that time there
were two notorious thieves in his kingdom, Khãprã and Kãlã. As they
started gambling on the Dîvãlî day, Khãprã wagered that he would give
KoDidhaja, the renowned steed of Sidharão, if he lost the game. He lost
and promised to the winner that he would procure the steed by the time
of the next Dîvãlî day. He wormed himself into the confidence of
Sidharão, first as a sweeper in the royal stable and then as a syce of
KoDidhaja. The king who visited the stable everyday was very much
pleased with Khãprã’s services and spent some time talking to him. One
day the king confided to Khãprã his (the king’s) disappointment in the
matter of a suitable temple. Soon after, the thief ran away with the
horse and stopped for rest only when he reached the valley of Mount Abu.
All of a sudden he saw the earth split and a temple came out. Gods and
Goddesses staged a play in the temple as Khãprã watched sitting in a
window of the divine edifice. He was reminded of Sidharão’s despondence
and thought that this was the temple which would meet the king's
expectations. He found out from the, Gods that the same miracle would be
enacted again on the night of the day after next and rushed back to
PãTaNa where he gave a graphic account to the king. The king came to the
same spot and saw the temple which fully satisfied him. The Gods told
him how to find the master architect who would build a similar temple
for him. It took sixteen years to be completed, even though thousands of
artisans were employed.^([8](#8))

NaiNasî has included in his chapter on the Rudramãla a poem written in
its praise by Lalla BhaTTa.^([9](#9)) The first two stanzas which
describe the architecture and sculptures of the temple are as follows:

Fourteen storeys rise above the earth and seven thousand pillars,   
In row after row, while eighteen hundred statues studded with emeralds
adorn it.  
It is endowed with thirty thousand flagstaffs with stems carved and
leaves of gold.  
Seven thousand sculptured elephants and horses stand in attendance on
Rudra.  
Seeing it all, Gods and men get struck with wonder and are greatly
charmed,  
JayasiMha has built a temple which excites the envy of emperors. The
sculptured elephants and lions trumpet and roar, all around, again and
again,  
The golden *kalašas* glitter on the *maNDapa* upheld by numerous
pillars.  
The statues sing and dance and roll their eyes,  
So that even the Gods jump with joy and blow their conches.  
The ecstatic dance of Gods is watched by Gods and men who crowd
around,  
That is why the Bull,^([10](#10)) O Sidha! O King of Kings! is feeling
frightened.

A modern expert on medieval Hindu architecture has speculated about the
Rudramahãlaya on the basis of what has survived. “The Solãñkî tradition
maintains,” writes Dr. S.K. Saraswati, “a rich and prolific output in
the twelfth century AD which saw two eminent royal patrons of building
art in Siddharãja JayasiMha and Kumãrapãla. With the former is
associated the completion of an imposing conception, the Rudra Mãlã or
Rudra Mahãlaya, at Siddhapur (Gujarãt). Unfortunately it is now
completely in ruins but a picture of its former splendour seems to have
survived in a Gujarãtî ballad which speaks of the temple as covered with
gold, adorned with sixteen hundred columns, veiled by carved screens and
pierced lattices, festooned with pearls, inlaid with gems over the
doorways and glistening with rubies and diamonds. Much of this is, no
doubt, exaggeration full of rhetoric; but the impressive character of
the conception is evidenced by the scanty, though co-lossal, remains.
They consist of groups of columns of the pillared *maNDapa*, which seems
to have been in more than one storey, and had three enterance porticos
on three sides. The surviving foundations suggest that the conception
with the usual appurtenances occupied a space nearly 300 feet by 230
feet. In front there stood a *kîrti-toraNa* of which one column still
remains. From the dimensions the Rudra Mãlã seems to have been one of
the largest architectural conceptions in this area. The rich character
of its design is fully evident in the few fragments that
remain.”^([11](#11))  
 

**The Jãmi‘ Masjid**

The Note from the Government of Gujarat says that “the temple was
destroyed and three shrines in the eastern flank of the temple were
converted into a mosque but there is no evidence as to the date of
conversion.”^([12](#12)) The Report of the Minorities’ Commission gives
more details about the destruction and conversion of the temple. “This
temple,” says the Report, “seems to have been destroyed partly by Ulugh
Khan in AD 1297-98 and partly by Ahmadshah in AD 1415. Some of the
cubicles and a number of pillars on the Western side of the temple, it
would appear were later converted into a mosque. The prayer hall of the
mosque so converted has three domes. In the Western (Qaba) waft of the
mosque Mimbar and Mehrabs were provided by using the doors of the
shrines which were then filled with debris. The exact date of conversion
of this part of Rudramahalaya complex is not known. However, according
to inscriptions at the entrance it appears that the mosque known as Jama
Masjid, was constructed during the reign of Aurangzeb in
1645.”^([13](#13))

B.L. Nagarch, on the other hand, writes that “the inscription fixed in
the modern entrance gate to the mosque mentions the construction of
shops by Ali Askari in Adil Ganj and there is no reference to the
mosque.”^([14](#14)) Moreover, Aurangzeb was not the ruling Mughal
monarch in 1645, having ascended the throne thirteen years later in
1658. The “temple remains” discovered inside the mosque also go to show
that at least that part of the structure was built not long after the
Rudramahãlaya was demolished. The Minorities’ Commission, it seems, has
relied upon some local tradition about Aurangzeb having built the
mosque. Aurangzeb did live in Gujarat in 1645 when he was appointed
Governor of that province by Shãh Jahãn. He also destroyed Hindu temples
in Gujarat as is evident from his *firmãn* dated November 20, 1665 which
says that “In Ahmadabad and other parganas of Gujarat in the days before
my accession (many) temples were destroyed by my order.”^([15](#15)) It
seems that somewhere along the line several stories have got mixed up
and Aurangzeb has been credited with a pious deed he did not perform at
Sidhpur, not at least in respect of the Jãmi‘ Masjid built on the site
and from the debris of the Rudramahãlaya. What might have happened is
that some major repairs to the Jãmi‘ Masjid were carried out while he
was the Governor of Gujarat and at his behest. The subject needs
examination with reference to records, if any.

Nor do we find a specific mention of Sidhpur or the Rudramahãlaya in the
available accounts of Ulugh Khãn’s invasion of Gujarat. The Minorities’
Commission has made a mistake in giving the date of the invasion as AD
1297-98. The correct date is 1299.

There is, however, no doubt that Ahmad Shãh I (AD 1411- 43), the Sultãn
of Gujarat, destroyed the Rudramahãlaya and raised a mosque on the site.
“Soon after his return to Ahmadabad,” writes S.A.I. Tirmizi, “Ahmad
marched to Sidhpur, which was one of the most ancient pilgrim centres in
north Gujarat. It was studded with beautiful temples, some of which were
laid low.”^([16](#16)) A.K. Majumdar is more specific. “Ahmad Shãh like
his grandfather,” he says, “was a bigot and seized every opportunity to
demolish Hindu temples. In 1414, he appointed one Tãj-ul-Mulk to destroy
all temples and to establish Muslim authority throughout
Gujarat. According to Firishta, the task was ‘executed with such
diligence that the names of Mawass and Girass (i.e. Hindu *zamindãrs*)
were hereafter unheard of in the whole kingdom.’ Next year Ahmad
attacked the celebrated city of Sidhpur in north Gujarat where he broke
the images in the famous Rudramahalaya temple and converted it into a
mosque.”^([17](#17))

A poetic account of what Ahmad Shãh did at Sidhpur is available in
*Mirãt-i-Sikandarî*, the history of Gujarat, written by Sikandar
ibn-i-Muhammad alias Manjhû ibn-i-Akbar in the first quarter of the
sixteenth century. “He marched on Saiyidpur,”^([18](#18)) writes the
historian, “on Jamãd-ul-Awwal in AH 818 (July/August, AD 1415) in order
to destroy the temples which housed idols of gold and silver.  
 

**Verse**

> He marched under divine inspiration,  
> For the destruction of temples at Saiyidpur,  
> Which was a home of the infidels,  
> And the native place of accursed fire-worshippers.^([19](#19))  
> There they dwelt, day and night,  
> The thread-wearing idolaters.^([20](#20))  
> It had always remained a place for idols and idol-worshippers,  
> It had received no injury whatsoever from any quarter.  
> It was a populous place, well-known in the world,  
> This native place of the accursed infidels.  
> Its foundations were laid firmly in stone,  
> It was decorated with designs as if drawn from high heaven.  
> It had doors made of sandal and *ûd*.^([21](#21))  
> It was studded with rings of gold,  
> Its floors were laid with marble,  
> Which shone like mirrors.  
> *Ûd* was burnt in it like fuel,  
> Candles of camphor in large numbers were lighted in it.  
> It had arches in every corner,  
> And every arch had golden chandeliers hanging in it.  
> There were idols of silver set up inside,  
> Which put to shame the idols of China and Khotãn.  
> Such was this famous ancient temple,  
> It was famous all over the world.  
> By the effort of Ahmad, it was freed from the idols,  
> The hearts of idol-worshippers were shattered with grief.  
> He got mosques constructed, and *mimbars* placed in them,  
> From where the Law of Muhammad came into force.  
> In place of idols, idol-makers and idol-worshippers,  
> Imãms and callers to prayers and *khatîbs* were appointed.  
> Ahmad’s good grace rendered such help,  
> That an idol-house became an abode of Allãh.

  

“When the Sultãn was free from Saiyidpur, he marched on Dhãr in AH 819
(AD 1416-17).”^([22](#22))  
 

**Siddharãja JayasiMha**

The destruction of Hindu temples and their conversion into mosques was,
as we shall see, a normal occupation for most of the Muslim rulers in
medieval India. What adds a touch of pathos to the destruction and
conversion of the Rudramahãlaya is that its builder, Siddharãja
JayasiMha, had become known to the Muslims as a protector of their
places of worship in Gujarat. Many other Hindu rulers provided the same
protection to their Muslim subjects, as is evident from the presence of
Muslim populations and religious establishments in all leading towns of
western, southwestern and northern India long before these towns were
sacked and occupied by Islamic invaders. K.A. Nizami has devoted a long
essay to this subject and named Lahore, Benares, Bahraich, Ajmer,
Badaun, Kanauj, Bilgram, Gopamau and Koil (Aligarh), etc., in this
context.^([23](#23)) Other sources point to Muslim presence in the towns
of Bengal, Bihar, Rajasthan, Gujarat and Maharashtra. The doings of
Siddharãja JayasiMha have, however, found place in a Muslim history.
*Jami’u-l Hikãyãt*, written by Muhammad ‘Ufî who lived at Delhi in the
reign of Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish (AD 1210-36). The writer was a great
collector of anecdotes regarding persons, places and events. He wrote:

“Muhammad ‘Ufî, the compiler of this work, observes that he never heard
a story to be compared with this.  He had once been to Kambãyat
(Cambay), a city situated on the sea-shore, in which, a number of
Sunnîs, who were religious, faithful, and charitable lived. In this
city, which belonged to the chiefs of Guzerãt and Nahrwãla,^([24](#24))
was a body of Fire-worshippers^([25](#25)) as well as the congregation
of Musulmãns. In the reign of a king named Jai Singh, there was a mosque
and a minaret from which the summons to prayers were cried.  The
Fire-worshippers instigated the infidels to attack the Musulmãns and the
minaret was destroyed, the mosque burnt, and eight Musulmãns were
killed.

“A certain Muhammadan, a Khatîb, or reader of the Khutba by name Khatîb
‘Ali, escaped and fled to Nahrwãla. None of the courtiers of the Rãî
paid any attention to him, or rendered him any assistance, each one
being desirous to screen those of his own persuasion. At last, having
learnt that the Rãî was going out to hunt, Khatîb ‘Ali sat down behind a
tree in the forest and awaited the Rãî’s coming. When the Rãî had
reached the spot, Khatîb ‘Ali stood up, and implored him to stop the
elephant and listen to his complaint. He then placed in his hand a
kaîsda, which he had composed in Hindi verse, stating the whole case.
The Rãî having heard the case placed Khatîb ‘Ali under charge of a
servant, ordering him to take the greatest care of him, and produce him
in court when required to do so. The Rãî then returned, and having
called his minister, made over temporary charge of the Government to
him, stating that he intended to seclude himself for three days from
public business in his harem, during which seclusion he desired to be
left unmolested. That night, Rãî Jai Singh, having mounted a dromedary
started from Nahrwãla for Kambãyat and accomplished the distance, forty
parasangs, in one night and one day. Having disguised himself by putting
on a tradesman’s dress, he entered the city, and stayed a short time in
different places in the market place, making inquiries as to the truth
of Khatîb ‘Ali’s complaint. He then learnt that the Muhammadans were
oppressed and slain without any grounds for such tyranny. Having thus
learnt the truth of the case, he filled a vessel with sea-water and
returned to Nahrwãla, which he entered on the third night from his
departure. The next day he held his court, and summonning all
complainants he directed the Khatîb to relate his grievance. When he had
stated his case, a body of the infidels wanted to intimidate him and
falsify his statements. On this the Rãî ordered his water-carrier to
give the water pot to them that they may drink from it. The Rãî then
told them that he had felt unable to put implicit confidence in any one
because a difference of religion was involved in the case; he had
himself therefore gone to Kambãyat, and having made personal enquires as
to the truth, had learnt that the Muhammadans were victims of tryanny
and oppression. He said that it was his duty to see that all his
subjects were afforded such protection as would enable them to live in
peace. He then gave orders that two leading men from each class of
Infidels, Brahmans, Fire-worshippers and others should be punished. He
then gave a lac of Balotras^([26](#26)) to enable them to build their
mosque and minarets. He also granted to Khatîb four articles of dress.
These are preserved to this day, but are exposed to view on high
festival days. The mosque and minaret were standing until a few days
ago.”^([27](#27))  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) The Fourth Annual Report, p. 130.

[²](#2a) B.L Nagarch, op cit., p. 395.

[³](#3a) Nundo Lal Day, The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and
Medieval India, third edition, New Delhi, 1971, p. 38.

[⁴](#4a) Muñhatã NaiNasîrî Khyãta, Jodhpur, 1984, Vol. 1, pp. 261-62.
The passage quoted has been Translate from The original in MãravãRî
language.

[⁵](#5a) The Fourth Annual Report, p. 141.

[⁶](#6a) Ibid., p. 130.

[⁷](#7a) B.L Nagarch, op.cit., p. 395.

[⁸](#8a) Muñhatã NaiNasî, op.cit., pp. 258-61.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., pp. 262-63.

[¹⁰](#10a) The reference is to the Bull who according to Hindu mythology
supports the Earth on his horns.

[¹¹](#11a) R.C. Majumdar (ed.), The History and Culture of the Indian
People, Vol. V, The Struggle For Empire, Third Edition, Bombay, 1976,
pp. 595-96.

[¹²](#12a) The Fourth Annual Report, p. 141.

[¹³](#13a) Ibid., p. 130.

[¹⁴](#14a) B.L Nagarch, op. cit., p. 395.

[¹⁵](#15a) Quoted by Jadunath Sarkar, History of Aurangzeb, Vol. III,
Calcutta, 1972 Impression. p. 285.

[¹⁶](#16a) Mohammad Habib (ed.), A Comprehensive History of India, Vol.
V, The Delhi Sultanat, First Reprint, New Delhi, 1982, p. 853.

[¹⁷](#17a) R.C. Majumdar (ed.), op. cit., Vol. VI, The Delhi Sultanate,
Bombay, 1960, p. 158.

[¹⁸](#18a) The Islamic name of Sidhpur, unless it is a mispronunciation
on the part of the historian. As we shall see in this study. Muslim
rulers had Islamicized practically every important place-name in India.

[¹⁹](#19a) Applied to Zoroastrians of Iran to start with, the term
‘fire-worshippers’ mars later of, used for idol-worshippers in India.

[²⁰](#20a) The BrãhmaNas wearing the sacred thread.

[²¹](#21a) A kind of costly wood.

[²²](#22a) Translated from the Hindi rendering in S.A.A. Rizvi’s Uttara
Taimûra Kãlîna Bhãrata, Aligarh, 1959, Vol. II, pp. 268-69. Strangely
enough, this poem has been omitted Iron the English translation by
Fazlullah Lutfullah Faridi published from Dharampur and recently
reprinted (Gurgaon.1990). The English translation says, “In AH 818 (AD
1416), the Sultãn attacked Sidhpur and broke the idols and images in the
big temple at that place and turned the temple into a mosque” (p. 14).

[²³](#23a) Mohammad Habib, op. cit., pp. 137-42.

[²⁴](#24a) The Muslim pronunciation of ANahilwãDa.

[²⁵](#25a) “The word in the original is Mugh which has been generally
accepted to indicate the Zoroastrians or fire-worshippers, but Prof.
S.H. Hodiwala, Studies in Indo-Muslim History (Bombay, 1939) pp. 72-73,
thinks it may refer to Jains” (Epigraphia Indica-Arabic and Persian
Supplement, 1961, p. 5n).

[²⁶](#26a) Unit of a silver currency at that time.

[²⁷](#27a) Elliot and Dowson, History of India as told by its own
Historians, Vol. II, pp. 162-64. ‘Ufî expresses surprise at the Hindu
King’s behaviour because such behaviour was inconceivable for a Muslim. 
According to the Islamic norm, a king is expected to destroy rather than
restore other people’s places of worship.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
