+++
title = "07 CHAPTER SIX THE EPIGRAPHIC EVIDENCE"

+++
**CHAPTER SIX**

**THE EPIGRAPHIC EVIDENCE**

Commenting on the history of Central Asia, Heinrich Zimmer writes:
“During the sixth and early seventh centuries AD the whole tract was
controlled by Turkish rulers, but in the course of the seventh, with
increasing strength of the T’ang Emperors, China gained
control. Finally, however, under the onslaught of Islam, from the eighth
century to the tenth, both Buddhist and Manichaean as well as the
Nestorian Christian culture and monuments of the region were
destroyed.”^([1](#1))

Coming to North India, he continues: “In the north very little survives
of the ancient edifices that were there prior to the Muslim conquest:
only a few mutilated religious sites remain^([2](#2))… It is clear from
Indian literature that both temples and images must have existed in the
second century BC and perhaps earlier. Very little architectural
evidence remains, however, antedating the epoch of the Gupta dynasty (C.
AD 320-650), for it was precisely in the Ganges Valley, the central and
chief area of the Gupta empire, that the Muslim empire flourished a
millennium later and most of the monuments above ground were destroyed
by the sectarian zeal of Islam. The oldest stone ruins that have been
found represent not the beginnings of a style, but fully developed
forms.”^([3](#3))

He is specific about the destruction of Buddhism in India. “Since the
earliest important body of Indian art surviving to us,” he says, “ stems
from the century of Ašoka, it is predominantly Buddhist. During
subsequent periods, however, Buddhist and Hindu (Brahmanical) themes
alternate in rich profusion. The two traditions flourished side by side,
even sharing colleges and monasteries, for nearly two millenniums, until
about the height of the Muslim conquest (C. AD 1200), Buddhism
disappeared from the land of its birth.”^([4](#4))

By now there are hundreds of publications which provide detailed studies
of the architecture and sculpture of many Hindu monuments from all over
India. But only a few of them, mostly written by foreigners, state
clearly that what have been studied are heaps of ruins dug out by
archaeologists from under tell-tale mounds. Hindu writers, by and large,
leave the impression as if they have studied monuments which stand
intact and in all their original majesty. It is only when we come to the
plates that the truth dawns upon us. What we find there staring us in
the face are mostly ruins with architectural fragments and mutilated
sculptures lying scattered on the surface or brought up from underneath.

The travels of Buddhist pilgrims from China and the pre-Islamic
epigraphic records on stones and copper plates tell us how many temples
and monasteries stood at what place and at what time. Histories written
by medieval Muslim historians inform us as to who made these monuments
disappear and when. The two sources, taken together, present a total
picture which historians have so far studied in separate parts.

Hindus are famous (or notorious) for their poor sense of history as
Christians, Muslims and the modern Westerners understand it. Hindus of
medieval India were no exception. They have left no record of what
happened to their places of worship and pilgrimage at the hands of
Islamic iconoclasm. We do come across descriptions of the Muslim
behaviour pattern in the Hindu literature from that period. An
invariable ingredient of that pattern is the destruction of temples and
the desecration of idols. Accounts relating to destruction of particular
temples at particular dates and places are very rare. That sort of
detailed evidence comes almost entirely from medieval Muslim sources,
literary and epigraphic. Archaeological explorations and excavations in
modern times have only confirmed and supplemented that evidence.

Times have changed and so also some moral standards of mankind.
Religious tolerance is a value which is cherished today universally by
the dominant intellectual elite of the world. Muslim theologians,
scholars and politicians in present-day India, therefore, want us to
believe that Islam stands for religious tolerance and that there was
never a time when it interfered by means of force with the religious
beliefs or practices of other people. They resent any reference
whatsoever to the destruction of Hindu temples by Muslim invaders and
rulers in medieval India. Leftist professors and politicians who
subscribe to what they describe as Secularism, dismiss this significant
chapter in medieval India's history as a canard spread by “Hindu
communalists”. As most of these worthies happen to be Hindus by accident
of birth, they add considerable weight to Muslim assertions.

There was, however, a time not so long ago when Muslim theologians
prescribed and Muslim swordsmen practised destruction of Hindu
temples^([5](#5)) on a large scale. Hundreds of Muslim historians have
credited their heroes with what they rightly regarded as a pious
performance according to the principal tenets of Islam. Most of these
histories, written in India as well as elsewhere in the Islamic world,
have been printed and translated in one or more of the modern languages.
They are on the shelves of public and private libraries all over the
world. Then there are inscriptions in Arabic and Persian which proclaim
the destruction of Hindu temples or their conversion into mosques with
considerable pride. These, too, have been deciphered, translated and
published by archaeological surveys covering India, Central Asia,
Eastern Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh. They leave us in no
doubt about one of the favourite pastimes of pious Muslim princes in all
these countries which constituted at one time the vast cradle of Hindu
culture.

In this and the following chapter we shall present evidence of temple
destruction from Islamic sources which we have been able to reach within
limits of our resources. Many sources have remained untapped. It is
hoped that future scholars will fill the gaps in what is a very
important subject in the domain of religious studies. Destroying places
of worship of the conquered people has been an important aspect of
Christianity and Islam. But religious studies in the West have so far
neglected this aspect because of their Christian bias. Religious studies
in India have failed to take it up partly because we follow the Western
patterns of research but mostly because we subscribe to a mistaken
notion of Secularism. Secularism arose in the modern West as a revolt
against the closed theology of Christianity which had acquired a
stranglehold on the State; in India, unfortunately, Secularism has
become the biggest single protector of closed theologies promoted by
Christianity and Islam.

There will be frequent references to Muslim kings and dynasties in this
narrative. Appendix 1 can be consulted for placing every reference in
its proper historical context. At a later stage in this study we shall
follow the trail of Islamic invasions as they advanced towards different
parts of the Hindu homeland and worked havoc all along their path. That
will facilitate an understanding of the evidence from modern
archaeological explorations and excavations which we shall present
subsequently.

There are many Muslim monuments all over India which provide
unmistakable evidence that materials from demolished Hindu temples have
been used in their construction. Most of them carry inscriptions in
Arabic or Persian stating when they were built and by whom. Some of
these inscriptions, installed in mosques, proclaim that the mosques
occupy the sites of Hindu temples which were destroyed. Others say that
temple materials were used in the construction of the mosques. Similar
inscriptions on stone slabs lying loose or not in situ have been
discovered in many places; it is difficult to determine as to on what
mosques or other Muslim monuments they were installed. It is a safe bet
that many more inscriptions which refer to destruction of Hindu temples
and construction of mosques etc., remain undiscovered or undeciphered or
unpublished. Epigraphists in secular India do not seem to be keen or
scrupulous in searching and publishing evidence which compromises the
picture of this country as a “haven of communal amity and peace before
the advent of the British.”

We give below some instances of inscriptions discovered and copied quite
some time ago but not published so far:

> 1\. An Arabic inscription was discovered in the Jãmi‘ Masjid at
> Srikakulam in Andhra Pradesh in 1953-54. It says that the idol was
> broken and the mosque constructed by Sher Muhammad Khãn Ghãzî in AH
> 1051 (AD 1641-42). Another inscription in the same place says that
> this Sher Muhammad Khãn was given the title of Fîrûz Jang by Sultãn
> Abdullãh Qutb Shãh of Golconda in AH 1055 (AD 1645-46).^([6](#6)) The
> inscription has not been published so far.
>
> 2\. A Persian inscription on the entrance gateway of a mosque at Nuh
> in the Gurgaon District of Haryana states that the foundation of this
> mosque was laid by Bahãdur Khãn Nãhar in the reign of Muhammad Shãh,
> son of Fîrûz Shãh (Tughlaq), from the materials of a Hindu temple in
> village Sainthali where Hindus used to assemble in large numbers every
> year. The qãzî of Nauganwa made a representation to Bahãdur Khãn Nãhar
> who destroyed the temple and completed the mosque in AH 803 (AD
> 1400).^([7](#7)) This inscription has yet to be published though it
> was discovered in 1963-64.
>
> 3\. Another Persian inscription discovered in the Jãmi‘ Masjid at
> Ritpur in the Amraoti District of Maharashtra proclaims that the
> mosque which was originally built by Aurangzeb on the site of a Hindu
> temple, having become desolate through passage of time, was
> reconstructed in AH 1295 (AD 1878) with the help of contributions
> raised by the local Muslims.^([8](#8)) This inscription discovered in
> 1964-65 has not been published so far.
>
> 4\. An inscription discovered in 1978-79 on the facade of the Jãmi‘
> Masjid in Mahalla Sunhat at Balasore in Orissa states die in AH 1079
> (AD 1668-69) a mob of Muslim mendicants (*faqîrs*) led by Tãlib
> stormed and set fire to the temple of Šrî ChaNdî which was being
> resorted to by the Hindus. Five years later, the local *faujdãr* built
> the mosque on the same site.^([9](#9)) This inscription, too, remains
> unpublished.
>
> 5. An inscription in the Jãmi‘ Masjid at Tadpatri in Andhra Pradesh
> records that the mosque was constructed on the site of a temple by
> Mahmûd for offering prayers to Allãh. The inscription dated AH 1107
> (AD 1695) was discovered in 1980-81.^([10](#10)) It is not yet
> published. We do not know anything about Mahmûd who performed this
> pious deed in the reign of Aurangzeb.

Similar inscriptions are known to exist in some mosques which are still
in use. But they cannot be copied because they have been covered with
plaster. Years ago, Dr. Bloch had seen an inscription in the
*Patthar-kî-Masjid* at Patna, the capital of Bihar, stating that the
materials for the mosque were obtained from a Hindu temple at Majhauli
(now in the Gorakhpur District of Uttar Pradesh).^([11](#11)) The temple
was demolished in AH 1036 (AD 1626) by Prince Parwiz, a son of the
Mughal emperor Jahãngîr. “I made the car stop,” writes Syed Hasan
Askari, “and took my friends to the upper part of the historic
*Patthar-ki-Masjid*. One of my American friends was an Arabist, but
there was nothing for him to read, for the demoralised custodians had
the inscription plastered with cement, considering that it contained
provocative references.”^([12](#12)) Some friends of this author who
visited the Jãmi‘ Masjid at Sambhal in the Moradabad District of Uttar
Pradesh had the same experience when they expressed a desire to have a
look at the inscriptions. This mosque was built in AD 1526 by an officer
of Bãbur on the site and from the materials of the local Hari Mandir.

It may also be mentioned that similar inscriptions which have been
published by the archaeological surveys in countries outside the
present-day precincts of India have remained beyond our reach because of
the paucity of our means.

The inscriptions that we present below have been deciphered for the most
part by learned Muslim epigraphists and placed in their proper
historical context. The Archaeological Survey of India has published
their fascimilies in its learned journals. They are being presented in a
chronological order with reference to the dates they carry and not in
the order in which they were discovered or published.  
 

**1. Delhi**

This inscription can be seen over the inner eastern gateway of the
Quwwat al-Islãm Masjid near the Qutb Mînãr. It is *in situ*. Its
language is Persian. It states:

“This fort was conquered and this Jãmi‘ Masjid built in the months of
the year 587 by the Amîr, the great, the glorious commander of the Army,
Qutb-ud-daula wad-dîn, the Amîr-ul-umarã Aibeg, the slave of the Sultãn,
may God strengthen his helpers! The materials (?) of 27 idol temples, on
each of which 2,000,000 Deliwãl had been spent were used in the
(construction of) this mosque. God the Great and Glorious may have mercy
on that slave, every one who is in favour of the good (?) builder prays
for this faith.”^([13](#13))

The Amîr mentioned in the inscription was Qutbu’d-Dîn Aibak, a slave of
Shihabu’d-Dîn or Muizzu’d-Dîn Muhammad bin Sãm popularly known as
Muhammad Ghûrî. Aibak died at Lahore in 1210. He had crowned himself at
the same place in 1206 and is counted as the first sultãn of the Slave
or Mamlûk Dynasty.

The date AH 587 mentioned in the inscription presents a problem. It
corresponds to AD 1191 while it is indisputable according to all sources
that Delhi came under Muslim occupation for the first time in 1192,
after the second battle of Tarain. Moreover, Delhi like Ajmer, was left
at that time in the hands of a Hindu prince who was to rule as a
tributary of the Ghurid empire. Soon after, Delhi was besieged by a
Hindu army under the leadership of Jhat Rai, a Chauhan general.
Qutbu’d-Dîn Aibak whom Muhammad Ghûrî had left in charge of his Indian
conquests had to rush back from Meerut which he had captured in the
meanwhile. He was able to reoccupy Delhi and drive away the Hindu only
in 1193. It is difficult to say whether the destruction of the Hindu
temples and construction of the mosque mentioned in the inscription took
place during the first occupation in 1192 or the second occupation in
1193. It is surmised that it could not have happened while Delhi was in
charge of a Hindu prince, though it is not a very strong argument the
Hindu prince must have been a helpless witness of what the conquerors
did. The only thing that is certain is that the mosque could not have
been built in 1191 when Delhi was still in the hands of an unconquered
Hindu king.

The epigraphist has tried to solve the puzzle. “This inscription,” he
writes, “exhibits the titles which he had assumed in 602 when he
received his manumission from the ruler of Ghaznî. Before that date, as
long as his master was alive, there was nothing to prevent him from
inscribing his own name on any building he liked, but he could have done
so only if he included the name of his overlord in the record. Now in
our inscription Shihabuddîn’s name is not mentioned, nor does Qutbuddîn
appear in it as anything higher than the Amîr-ul-Umarã. This leads us to
the conclusion that the inscription was put up after Qutbuddîn’s death
by order of some ruler, who wished Qutbuddîn’s memory to be preserved as
the conqueror of Delhi, but who had no interest in having it stated that
Shihabuddîn was his sovereign at that time. Had Qutbuddîn’s descendants
ruled at Delhi, they might have preferred to assign to him the titles he
assumed as an independent ruler; but his successors were not of his
lineage… How long after Qutbuddîn’s death it was put up, it is difficult
to say. But a *terminus ante quem* is furnished by Ibn Battûtã who read
it when at Delhi during the reign of Muhammad Tughlaq Shãh.”^([14](#14))
It is surmised that the inscription was installed in the reign of
Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish (AD 1210-1236) and the date on it was somehow
bungled.

There is thus no doubt that the inscription is very old. Ibn Battûta had
reached Delhi in AD 1334 and seen the mosque immediately afar his
arrival. “On the site of this mosque,” he writes, “there was a
*budkhãna*, that is an idol-house. After the conquest of Delhi it was
turned into a mosque.”^([15](#15)) He also makes a mistake about the
date of the conquest which he says was given to him by the Sadr-i-Jahãn,
chief justice of Hind and Sind. But he confirms that “I read that date
in an inscription on the arch of the great congregational mosque
there.”^([16](#16))  
 

**2. Vijapur**

This town is the headquarters of a Taluka in the Mehsana District of
Gujarat. The ManSûrî Masjid in the town has been “entirely reconstructed
in the past decade or so, but the inscribed tablet from the old mosque
has been retained and fixed above the central *miHrãb*.”^([17](#17)) The
Persian inscription reads as follows:

“The Blessed and Exalted Allãh says, ‘And verily, mosques are for Allãh
only; hence invoke not anyone else with Allãh.’ This edifice was
(originally) built by the infidels. After the advent (lit. time) of
Islãm, it was converted into (lit. became) a mosque. Sermon was
(delivered here) for sixty-seven years. Due to the sedition of the
infidels, it was again destroyed. When during the reign of the Sultãn of
the time, AHmad, the affairs of each *Iqtã* attained magnificence,
Babãdur, the Sarkhail, once again carried out repairs. Through the
generosity of Divine munificence, it became like new.”^([18](#18))

The inscription does not mention the date when the Hindu temple was
destroyed and a mosque built on its site, nor the date when the mosque
was repaired after the restoration of Muslim authority. “"The
reconstruction,” comments the epigraphist, “must have obviously taken
place at a time when Sultãn Ahmad Shãh had established his unquestioned
sway over that region, that is to say, in about 1428. Again, it is not
easy to determine when the Hindu building was first used as a mosque. It
is reasonable to think that after the conquest of Gujarãt, and the
consolidation of Muslim rule in the province, by ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî, the
building might have been used as a place of Muslim worship and it was
used as such till the time when, about three quarters of a century
later, sometime towards the end of the fourteenth century synchronising
with the defiance of central authority by the Gujarãt governor Malik
Mufarrîh, the mosque was desecrated or destroyed.”^([19](#19))

The reference to sermon being delivered in the mosque indicates that it
was a Jãmi‘ Masjid. The Hindu temple, too, it means must have been a
major temple. Muslim iconoclasts generally used the sites of the most
important Hindu temples for raising Jãmi‘ Masjids.  
 

**3. Chittaurgarh**

At present this place is the headquarters of a District of the same name
in Rajasthan. But in medieval times it had become famous on account of
its very strong fort with which was associated the glory of Mewar. It
was occupied by Muslims for the first time in AD 1303 after a seize of
eight months by ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1310), the second sultãn of
the Khaljî dynasty of Delhi.

At a distance of about one mile outside the Delhi Gate of the fort there
is a tomb known as that of Ghaibî Pîr. Opposite to the tomb is a Muslim
graveyard in which there is a small one-wall mosque. The prayer niche of
the mosque carries a Persian inscription of which only a small portion
has survived. The learned epigraphist has read it as follows after
restoring some words by conjecture: “He constructed the congregational
mosque. There was temple lying in ruins.”^([20](#20))

The inscription is not *in situ* as it belongs to a Jãmi‘ Masjid which
this small mosque is not. The epigraphist thinks that the tablet bearing
the inscription seems to be a fragment of another tablet fixed in the
west wall of the tomb of Ghaibî Pîr. The second tablet bears another
inscription which mentions the name Bu’l Muzaffar, the second Sikandar,
that is, ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî, and the year AD 1310.^([21](#21)) “If this
guess is correct,” the epigraphist concludes, “it would mean that
‘Alãu’d-Dîn had ordered the construction in Chitor, of a congregational
mosque, which was completed on the day of Sacrifice, the 10th of
Dhi’l-Hijja of the year AH 709 (11 May AD 1310). Needless to say, no
trace remains of any old mosque in Chitor today.”^([22](#22))

There is another conclusion drawn by the epigraphist after his
conjectural restoration of the first inscription. “It is also
interesting to note,” he writes, “provided of course I am not wrong in
my conjectural reading of the second hemistich, that the said Jãmi‘
mosque was constructed at the site of a temple which was then lying in
ruins… This is particularly important as showing that, not always as is
generally supposed, the Hindu buildings were pulled down to provide
materials for mosques and other similar monuments.”^([23](#23)) We find
it difficult to agree. The conjectural reading, “lying in ruins,” is not
the only possible reading. It can as well be read as “made into ruins”,
which is the standard expression used in many other inscriptions.  
 

**4. Manvi**

It is the headquarters of a Taluka of the same name in the Raichur
District of Karnataka. A mosque in this place has a Persian inscription
fixed above its door.  It reads as follows:

“He (Allãh) is Omniscient. Praise be to Allãh that by the decree of the
Nourisher, a mosque has been converted out of a temple as a sign of
religion, in the reign of the world-conquering emperor, the king who is
asylum of the Faith and possessor of the crown, whose kingdom is young
(i.e. flourishing), viz. Fîrûz Shãh Bahmanî, who is the cause of
exuberant spring in the garden of religion, Abu’l-Fath the king who
conquered (lit. on horseback). After the victory of the emperor, the
chief of chiefs, Safdar (lit. the valiant commander) of the age,
received (the charge of) the fort. The builder of this noble place of
prayer is Muhammad ZaHîr Aqchî, the pivot of the Faith. He constructed
in the year eight hundred and nine from the Migration of the Chosen
(prophet Muhammad) this Ka‘ba like memento.”^([24](#24))

The year AH 809 corresponds to AD 1406-07.  Fîrûz Shãh Bahmanî (AD
1397-1422) was the eighth ruler of this independent Muslim dynasty
established by ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Bahmanî in AD 1347. The capital of Fîrûz Shãh
was at Gulbarga. It was shifted to Bidar by his son, Ahmad Shãh Bahmanî,
some time about AD 1425.  
 

**5. Dhar**

This is a famous town in the Malwa region of Madhya Pradesh, and
head-quarters of a distinct of the same name. It was the capital of the
renowned Bhoja Parmãra who ruled between AD 1000 and 1055. It has a
mausoleum known to be that of Shykh ‘Abdullãh Shãh Changãl, now in
ruins. The doorway of the entrance to the mausoleum has a long
inscription in Persian which, after singing fulsome praises of the
Shykh, says:

“This centre became Muhammadan first by him (and) all the banners of
religion were spread… This lion-man came from the centre of religion to
this old temple with a large force. He broke the images of the false
deities, and turned the idol temple into a mosque. When Rãi Bhoj saw
this, through wisdom he embraced Islãm with the family of his brave
warriors. This quarter became illuminated by the light of the Muhammadan
law, and the customs of the infidels became obsolete and abolished. Now
this tomb since those days has become the famous pilgrimage-place of the
world. Graves from their oldness became levelled (to the ground), (and)
there remained no mound on any grave. There was \[no place\] also for
the retirement, wherein the distressed *dervish* could take rest… The
Khaljî king MaHmûd Shãh who is such that by his justice the world has
become adorned like paradise; he built afresh this old structure, and
this house with its enclosure again became new…  From the *hijra* it was
859 (AD 1455) that its (the building’s) date was written
anew…”^([25](#25))

The inscription was put up by Mahmûd Shah Khaljî of Malwa, who overthrew
the independent Ghurî dynasty of that province in AD 1436 and ruled as
the founder of the independent Khaljî dynasty of Malwa till 1469.
Nothing is known about ‘Abdullãh Shãh Changãl except that he hailed from
Medina and was one of the earliest crusaders of Islam in Malwa. G.
Yazdani who has published and translated this inscription speculates
that “Abdullãh belonged to the army of Mahmûd of Ghaznî who fought with
Rãjã Bhoja” and though he “might have converted only a few Hindus to
Islãm, after a period of four hundred years, can easily have been
believed to have converted Rãjã Bhoja with all his family and others to
Islãm.”^([26](#26)) It is, however, more probable, as some other
scholars have surmised, that the Hindu king was Bhoja II who ascended
the throne at Dhar in AD 1283 and during whose reign Jalãlu’d-Dîn Khaljî
(AD 1290-1296) of Delhi is known to have invaded Malwa.  In that case
Abdullãh Shãh Changãl seems to have been a Muslim missionary who
accompanied the army of Islam from Delhi, destroyed a Hindu temple,
built a mosque in its place, and forced the Hindu king to profess the
faith of the victor.  
 

**6. Malan**

This is now a small village in the Palanpur Taluka of the Banaskantha
District of Gujarat. But in the reign of Mahmûd Shãh I, also known as
Mahmûd BegDhã (AD 1458-1511), of Gujarat, it was the seat of a Thana and
had a Fort. That is why the place has a Jãmi‘ Masjid. A Persian
inscription, fixed on the central *mihràb* of the mosque, reads as
follows:

“I seek refuge in Allãh from (the mischief of) the accursed Satan (and
begin) in the name of Allãh, the Beneficent, the Merciful. Praise be to
Allãh! Allãh the Blessed and Exalted says, ‘And verily the mosques are
for Allãh only; hence, invoke not anyone else with Allãh.’^([27](#27))
(The prophet), on him be peace, says ‘He who builds a mosque in the
world, the Exalted Allãh builds for him a palace in Paradise.’ In the
auspicious time of the government and peaceful time of Mahmûd Shãh, son
of Muhammad Shãh, the sultãn, the Jãmi‘, mosque was constructed on the
hill of the fort of Mãlûn (or Mãlwan) by Khãn-i-A‘zam Ulugh Khãn, may
Allãh prolong his life for justice, generosity and benevolence, at the
request of the thãnadãr Kabîr, (son of Diyã), the building was
constructed by a servant of Ulugh Khãn (who is) magnanimous, just,
generous, brave (and who) suppressed the wretched infidels. He
eradicated the idol-houses and mine of infidelity, along with the idols
in the enemy’s country with the blow of the sword, and made ready this
abode with different kinds of stone, marble and *marim* (?). He made its
walls and doors out of the stone of the idols; the back of every stone
became the place for prostration of the believers… the date was
Thursday, fifth of the month of Rajab of the year eight hundred and
sixty at the time (5th April, AD 1462).”^([28](#28))

At the end of the inscription, we find a verse from the Qur’ãn (73.20).
It says, “And whatever of good you send on beforehand for yourselves,
you will find it with Allãh - that is the best and greatest in reward.
And ask forgiveness of Allãh. Surely, Allãh is Forgiving, Merciful.”

Khãn-i-A‘zam Ulugh Khãn was the title conferred upon ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Suhrãb,
the Governor of Sultanpur, by Qutbu’d-Dîn Ahmad Shãh or Ahmad Shãh II
(AD 1451-1458) of Gujarat. He “is last heard of as being sent to fetch
Prince Fath Khãn to be crowned as Mahmûd Shãh I in AH 862 or
863,”^([29](#29)) that is, AD 1457 or 1458.  
 

**7. Amod**

It is the headquarters of a Taluka of the same name in the Bharuch
District of Gujarat. Above the central *mihrãb* of its Jãmi‘ Masjid
there is a Persian inscription providing particulars of its
construction. It reads as follows:

“Allãh and His grace. When divine favour was bestowed on Khalîl Shãh, he
constructed the Jãmi‘ Masjid for the decoration of Islãm; he ruined the
idol-house and temple of the polytheists, (and) completed the Masjid and
pulpit in its place. Without doubt, his building was accepted by Allãh.
*What a pleasing edifice* became the calculation of its
year.”^([30](#30))

The italicised portion of the last line is a chronogram which yields the
year AH 911 corresponding to AD 1505-06.  Khalîl Shãh was the third son
of Sultãn Mahmûd BegDhã of Gujarat. At the time he constructed the Jãmi‘
Masjid at Amod, he was the Governor of Baroda. He succeeded BegDhã in AD
1511 as Muzaffar Shãh II and ruled till 1526.   
 

**8. Narwar**

It is a town in the Shivpuri District of Madhya Pradesh. Inside its fort
there is a Muslim place of pilgrimage known as the shrine of Shãh Madãr.
An inscription from this shrine was removed to the Archaeological Museum
at Gwalior. Written partly in Arabic and partly in Persian, it reads:

“Dilãwar Khãn, the chief among the king’s viceroys, caused this mosque
to be built which is like a place of shelter for the favourites.
Infidelity has been subdued, and Islãm has triumphed because of him. The
idols have bowed (to him) and the temples have been laid waste on
account of him. The temples have been razed to the ground along with
their foundations, and mosques and worship houses are flowing with
riches.”^([31](#31))

The mosque to which the inscription refers was built in AH 960 (AD 1552)
when Islãm Shãh, the second king of the Sûr dynasty founded by Sher Shãh
in 1538, was the reigning sultãn. He was the son of Sher Shãh and ruled
from AD 1545 to 1554. The inscription was composed by Sayyid Ahmad and
written by Nazîr Shattãrî. Both of them belonged to the Shattãrî sect of
Sufism. An outstanding Sufi of this sect, Shykh Muhammad Ghaus, had
settled down at Gwalior before the invasion of Bãbur and helped the
latter to seize the fort of Gwalior in AD 1527. His services have been
recognized by Bãbur in his memoirs.^([32](#32)) The Shykh’s shrine
inside the fort is reported to have replaced a Hindu temple. He had
received great favours from Bãbur (AD 1526-1530) and Humãyûn (AD
1530-1538 and 1555-1556). Akbar (AD 1556-1605) “revered the Shykh
(Muhammad Ghaus) and afterwards became his disciple.”^([33](#33)) Shãh
Madãr belonged to the same Sufi sect.  
 

**9. Jaunpur**

It is the headquarters of a District of the same name in Uttar Pradesh.
Its Hammãm-Darwãza Masjid has three inscriptions which are complimentary
to each other. The first inscription which is over the central mihrãb of
the mosque says that it was built in the reign of “Abu’l-Muzaffar
Jalãlu’d-Dîn Muhammad Akbar Bãdshãh Ghãzi (AD 1556-1605).” The second
inscription is built into the wall above the right mihrãb. It reads as
follows:

“Thanks that by the guidance of the Everlasting and Living (Allãh), this
house of infidelity became the niche of prayer (i.e. mosque). As a
reward for that, the generous Lord, constructed an abode for its builder
in paradise: The Pen of Reason wrote (the words): *the mosque of Nawwãb
Muhsin Khãn* for the date of its construction.”^([34](#34))

The italicised words in the last line form a chronogram and yield the
year AH 975 (AD 1567-68), which is the same as in the third inscription
fixed above the right *mihrãb* of the mosque. The builder of the mosque
was Nawwãb Muhsin Khãn. Muhammad Fasîhu’d-Dîn writes in *The Sharqi
Monuments of Jaunpur* (Allahabad, 1922) that the materials of the mosque
were “taken from those of the temple of Lachman Das, Diwan of
Khan-i-Zaman Ali Quli Khan… Akbar made over an the property of the Diwan
to Nawab Mohsin Khan.”^([35](#35))

“It is surprising,” writes the learned epigraphists, W.H. Siddiqi and
Z.A. Desai, “that practically nothing is known about Nawwãb Muhsin Khãn,
the builder of this mosque and several other edifices, from contemporary
or later records. The tide Nawwãb prefixed to his name clearly suggests
that he was a man of high status in the reign, probably holding *jãgîr*
or a high post in the *sarkãr* of Jaunpur, which was included in Akbar’s
time in the *sûba* of Allãhãbãd.”^([36](#36)) Abu’l Fazl mentions a
Muhsin Khãn in *Akbar Nãma* in the annals of the year 1571. He was a
brother of the “celebrated Shihãbu’d-Dîn Ahmad Khãn” who belonged to “a
Sayyid family of Nishãpur in Iran.” This Muhsin Khãn is probably the
same as the Muhsin Khãn who, according to Abu’l Fazl again, “in AH 982
participated in the Bengal expedition led by Khãn-i-Khãnãn Munîm
Khãn.”^([37](#37))  
 

**10. Ghoda**

It is now a village in the Khed Taluka of Poona District in Maharashtra.
The old Jãmi‘ Masjid of this place is known for two Persian inscription
on two of its pillars. Joined together, the inscriptions read as
follows:

“Oh Allãh!  Oh Muhammad!  O ‘Alî!  Mir Muhammad Zamãn made up his mind,
he opened the door of prosperity on himself with his own hand. He
demolished thirty-three idol-temples (and) by divine grace, laid the
foundation of a building in this abode of perdition. That the mosques
are Allãh’s, therefore call not upon any one with Allãh (Qur’ãn LXXII,
18). He opened the arms of magnanimity with goodness and scattered gold,
(and) laid the foundation of a mosque like the palace of paradise. I
went in contemplation and sought its date from Wisdom. Wisdom was
astonished and said, he *built this blessed building*.”^([38](#38))

The chronogram contained in the italicised words yields the year AH 994
(AD 1586). The Poona region at that time was in the Nizãm Shãhî kingdom
of Ahmadnagar. The ruler was Murtazã Nizãm Shãh I (1565-1588) during
whose reign the kingdom reached its greatest territorial extent. The
epigraphists do not tell us anything about Mîr Muhammad Zamãn, the
builder of the mosque. But one thing is clear from the mention of Imãm
‘Alî in the inscription, namely, that Mîr Muhammad Zamãn was a Shi‘ah.  
 

**11. Poonamalle**

This is a town in the Sriperumbudur Taluka of Chingleput District in
Tamil Nadu. It has a mosque which has two inscriptions, one in Persian
and the other in Telugu. The Persian inscription states that the mosque
was built in AH 1063 (AD 1653) in the reign of Sultãn ‘Abdullãh Qutb
Shãh (AD 1626-1672) of the Qutb Shãhî dynasty of Golconda when Mîr Jumlã
was the governor of the Carnatic province. The builder was Rustam ibn
Zul-Fiqãr of Istarabad in Iran. “In the margin of the tablet,” writes
the epigraphist, G. Yazdani, “two Persian couplets are carved, the
letters of which have been abraded by the effect of weather. The
following words, however, can be deciphered: ‘Destroyed the house of
idols… and built a mosque, demolished… infidels… built’.”^([39](#39))

The Telugu version, engraved below the Persian inscription, mentions
Rustam, the builder, as “*Havaludãrû* of the fort at Pûnamalli” and Mîr
Jumla as “Hajarati Navãbu-Sãhebulugãru, the agent of Hajarati Ãlampanna
Sultãnu Abdullã Kutupu Šabãrãjugãru, the lord of Golconda throne.” The
mosque, it says, is “to last as long as the Moon and Sun,” and “those
that cause obstruction (to it) will incur the sin of killing cow at Kãši
\[Varanasi\].” The epigraphist adds, “The superstructure of the mosque
is built of brick and mortar, the base being of stone, which may have
originally formed part of a Hindu temple.”^([40](#40))

Mîr Jumla whose name was Muhammad Sayyid was “an adventurer from
Ardistãn in Persia.” He rose in the service of the Sultãn of Golconda as
whose general he invaded the Carnatic and became Governor of the
conquered territories. “By plundering Hindu temples,” writes J.N.
Chaudhuri, “and searching out hidden treasures, Mir Jumla accumulated a
vast fortune, and according to Thevnot, he had twenty maunds of diamonds
in his possession. His *jãgîr* in Carnatic was like a kingdom… He was
almost an independent ruler and absented himself from the court of
Golconda. Alarmed at the growing power of the Wazir, the Sultãn
attempted to bring him under his control but Mîr Jumla entered into
intrigues with Bijãpur and Persia.”^([41](#41)) Later on, he deserted
his first employer and entered the service of the Mughals under
Aurangzeb. He destroyed many Hindu temples while operating as a Mughal
general in Kuch Bihar.  
 

**12. Udayagiri**

It is the headquarters of a Taluka of the same name in the Nellore
District of Andhra Pradesh. It is famous for its fort which was held by
the Vijayanagara kings before it fell to the Qutb Shãhî rulers of
Golconda. The big mosque on the Udayagiri Hill has a Persian inscription
which reads as follows:

“Ghãzî ‘Alî, lord of the age, victor in war… with the help and support
of the victorious king, pivot (*Kutb*) of the world, king (*Shãh*) of
the throne of the Dakhan, from one end to the other, he (Ghãzî ‘Alî)
burnt away the sweepings of idolatry… with the fire of his sword (he)
burnt in one moment the idol of the idol-worshippers; he killed all,
that breaker-through (annihilator) of the army; when he captured the
fort of Udayagiri, the world became full of Jessamine; (he) began to
construct the mosque and the date was, *‘Founder of the mosque - (Ghãzî)
‘Alî the iconoclast’*.”^([42](#42))

The chronogram yields the year AD 1642-43. Ghãzî ‘Alî was presumably a
general of Abdullãh Qutb Shãh (AD 1626-1672) of Golconda. Nothing more
is known about him.

The small mosque on the same Hill carries another Persian inscription
which reads as follows:

“During the days of Abdulla Kutb Shãh, the pride of kings, Husain Khãn
secured the blessings of God in that he constructed a new mosque and
embellished it. May God accept it for the purpose of prayers. A thousand
and sixty and ten and one elapsed from Hijra (AD 1660-61). He destroyed
a temple and constructed the House of God.”^([43](#43))

Husain also was most probably another general of the same Sultãn of
Golconda. Histories of the reign or period do not supply information
about his status or role.  
 

**13. Bodhan**

It is the headquarters of a Taluka of the same name in the Nizamabad
District of Andhra Pradesh. “The place,” writes G. Yazdani, “is strewn
with sculptures of Jaina and Brahmanical professions of
faith… Contemporary history does not mention Bodhan; but the array of
antiquities and the discovery of both Hindu and Muslim inscriptions in
recent times establish the fact that the town possessed considerable
religious and strategic importance in early days.”^([44](#44))

The town has a mosque known as Deval Masjid. It carries two inscriptions
which state that it was built in the reign of Muhammad Tughlaq (AD
1325-1351). “The Deval Masjid,” comments G. Yazdani, “as its name
signifies, was originally a Hindu temple, and converted into a mosque by
Muhammad Tughlaq at the time of his conquest of the Deccan. The plan of
the building is star-shaped; it has undergone little alteration at the
hands of Moslems excepting the removal of the shrine-chamber and the
setting up of a pulpit. The original arrangement of the pillars remains
undisturbed and the figures of *tirthankaras* may be noticed on some of
them to this day.”^([45](#45)) The date of the conversion of this temple
into a mosque is not mentioned in the inscriptions. The building of the
temple is assigned by experts to 9-10th century AD.

The eastern part of the same town has a small mosque known as the
‘Ãlamgîrî Masjid. One of the two inscriptions on this mosque reads as
under:

“In obedience to the commandment of the Almighty God, the Lord of both
the worlds; and in love of… the exalted Prophet: During the reign of
Shãhjahãn, the king of the seven climes, the viceregent of God (lit.
Truth), the master of the necks of people… the benevolent and generous
Prince Aurangzeb, whose existence is a blessing of the Merciful God on
people: He built a house for worship with (all) the qualities of heaven:
after the site has been previously occupied by the temple of
infidels…” ^([46](#46))

The chronogram, *“Most blessed House”*, given at the end of the
inscription yields the year AH 1065 (AD 1655) “which tallies with the
period of Aurangzeb’s governorship of the Deccan, shortly before his
marching upon Delhi against his imperial father.”^([47](#47))  
 

**14.  Mathura**

The Jãmi‘ Masjid in the heart of this Hindu city has a Persian
inscription which reads as follows:

“In the reign of Shãh ‘Ãlamgîr Muhîu’ddin Walmillah, the king of the
world, Aurangzeb, who is adorned with justice, the lustre of Islãm shone
forth to the glory of God; for ‘Abd-un-Nabi Khãn built this beautiful
mosque. This second ‘Holy Temple’ caused the idols to bow down in
worship. You will see the true meaning of the text, “Truth came and
error vanished.’^([48](#48)) Whilst I search for a *tãrikh*, a voice
came from blissful Truth ordering me to say ‘Abd-un-Nabi Khãn is the
builder of this beautiful mosque.’ May this Jãma Masjid of majestic
structure shine forth for ever like the hearts of the pious! Its roof is
high like aspirations of love; its court-yard is wide like the arena of
thought.”^([49](#49))

The chronogram which contains the name of the builder, ‘Abdu’n-Nabî
Khãn, yields the year AH 1470 corresponding to AD 1660-1661.
‘Abdu’n-Nabî Khãn had risen high in the service of Shãh Jahãn. He fought
on the side of Dãrã Shukoh in the decisive Battle of Samugadh in 1658.
After the defeat and flight of Dãrã Shukoh, he joined service under
Aurangzeb who appointed him *faujdãr* in various places. “Abdun Nabi
Khãn,” says *Mã’sîr-‘Ãlamgîrî*, “after removal from his post in Fathpur
Jhunjhnu, was created a 2-*hazari* and appointed faujdãr of
Mathurã.”^([50](#50)) Jadunath Sarkar adds, “Aurangzeb chose him as
faujdãr of Mathurã probably because he, being ‘a religious man’ (as the
Court history calls him), was expected to enter heartily into the
Emperor’s policy of 'rooting out idolatry.’ Soon after joining this post
Abdun Nabi built a Jama’ Masjid in the heart of the city of Mathurã
(1661-1662) on the ruins of a Hindu temple. Later, in 1669, he forcibly
removed the carved stone railing presented by Dara Shukoh to Keshav
Rai’s temple.  When in 1669, the Jat peasantry rose under the leadership
of Gokla, the zamindar of Tilpat, Abdun Nabi marched out to attack them
in the village of Bashara, but was shot dead during the encounter (about
10th May).”^([51](#51))  
 

**15. Gwalior**

There is a small mosque on the right hand side of the GaNeša Gate in the
fort at Gwalior, headquarters of a District in Madhya Pradesh. It has a
Persian inscription which reads as follows:

> In the reign of the great Prince Ãlamgîr,  
> Like the full shining moon,  
> The enlightener of the world,  
> Praise be to God that this happy place,  
> Was by Motamid Khãn completed as an alms.  
> It was the idol temple of the vile Gwãlî,  
> He made it a mosque, like a mansion of paradise.  
> The Khãn of enlightened heart,  
> Nay light itself from head to foot,  
> Displayed the divine light, like that of mid-day,  
> He closed the idol temple:  
> Exclamations rose from earth to heaven,  
> When the light put far away the abode of darkness,  
> Hatif said “light be blessed.”^([52](#52))

“Gwãlî” mentioned in the inscription refers to the famous Siddha
Gawãlîpã after whom Gwalior is supposed to have been named. Whatever be
the truth of the legend, a temple dedicated to Gawãlîpã did exist at the
site now occupied by the mosque. A small temple dedicated to the Siddha
exists even now in the vicinity of the mosque. It seems to have been
built after the fort was freed from Muslim occupation.

Mu‘tmad Khãn who destroyed the original temple and built the mosque on
its site was the Governor of Gwalior under Aurangzeb. The chronogram in
the inscription gives AH 1075 (AD 1664) as the date when the mosque was
completed.  
 

**16. Akot**

It is the headquarters of a Taluka of the same name in the Akola
District of Maharashtra. The central *mihrãb* of its Jãmi‘ Masjid
carries a Persian inscription which reads as follows:

“In the name of Allãh, the Beneficent, the Merciful. There is no god
except Allãh. Muhammad is His Prophet, verily. In the just reign of
‘Ãlamgîr, the king who is the asylum of Faith (and) whose universal
generosity makes the sea and mine shame-stricken, one of his devoted
servants, Muhammad Ashraf of god faith, saw a place where there was a
temple. Like Khalîl (Prophet Abraham), he broke the temple at the
command of God, and arranged for the construction of a very steadfast
mosque. Year (AH) one thousand and seventy-eight” (AH 1078 = AD
1667).^([53](#53))

Nothing is known from history about Muhammad Ashraf who constructed this
Jãmi‘ Masjid, though it ran be surmised that he was some official of the
Mughal empire under Aurangzeb (AD 1658-1707).  
 

**17. Bidar**

It is the headquarters of a District of the same name in the State of
Karnataka. It was the capital of the Bahmanî Empire from AD 1422 to 1569
when it became the seat of the Barîd Shãhî kingdom, one of the five
Muslim states which arose on the eclipse of the Bahmanî dynasty. There
is a small mosque on the slope of a mountain, some two miles to the
south-east of Bidar. It has an inscription in Persian which says:

“God there is none but He and we worship not anyone except Him. (He)
built a mosque in place of the temple, and wrote over its door the
(*Qur’ãnic*) verse-‘Verily, We conquered.’^([54](#54)) When the exalted
mind of the Khedive, the refuge of Religion, supported by Divine Grace,
Abu’z-Zafar MuHi-ud-dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb Bahãdur ‘Ãlamgîr, the
victorious, was inclined to, and occupied in, destroying the base of
infidelity and darkness and to strengthen the foundation of Islamic
religion, the humblest servant Mukhtãr Khãn al-Husaini as-Sabzwãrî, the
governor of the province of Zafarãbãd, demolished the temple and built a
mosque and laid out a garden which by the Grace of the Omniscient God
were completed on the 25th of Rabi’-ul-Awwal in the 14th year of the
auspicious reign (AH 1082) corresponding with the date contained in this
hemistich-*By the Grace of God this temple became a
mosque*…”^([55](#55))

The corresponding year of the Christian era was 1670. Aurangzeb was the
Mughal emperor from AD 1658-1707. Mukhtãr Khãn was his local officer. It
may be noticed that Bidar is described as Zafarãbãd in this inscription.
This is only one instance of many attempts to Islamicise the names of
Indian cities, towns and even villages. Many of these Islamic
place-names have become current so that the original names have to be
excavated from ancient records. Others did not stick and are found only
in Muslim histories.  
 

**18. Siruguppa **

This is now a small town in the Bellary Taluka of the Bellary District
of Karnataka. The name means “pile of wealth” which is justified by its
location in a rich wet land as compared to the dry land around it. Its
Lãd Khãn’s Masjid has a Persian inscription regarding the construction
of the mosque. “The present building of the mosque,” writes G. Yazdani,
“is of modest dimensions and does not seem to be very old, but it is not
unlikely that it stands upon the site of an older mosque.”^([56](#56))
The inscription reads as follows:

“In Eternity when the Founder of the Fort of ‘blue firmament’ opened the
gates of grace and benevolence and mercy into the face of mankind, since
then a ball of ‘religion’ and ‘state’, justice and benevolence, was
thrown in the pologround and arena of the world. Each of the rulers,
monarchs and sovereigns came (into this world) in turn, and manifested
majesty according to his ‘star’; (each) gallopped the horse of ambition,
but could not bear away the ball, hence (each) threw down the ball of
his head on the *chaughãn* of ‘prostration’. Now when the turn of Mas‘ûd
Khãn came, he bore away the ball with the *chaughãn* of courage. Know
him of pure faith and belief, and of mature fortune and glory; his
justice has been praised by Naushîrwãn and his generosity (applauded) by
Hãtim. The court of his (kingly) grace is (resplendent) like the Moon;
but in the battle-field his awe destroys heads, his wrath and grace in
respect of infidelity and faith add darkness and light (to each).
Destroyed temples and idols and built mosques and *Mihrãbs*, levelled
the mountains in several places and raised walls touching the
sky…”^([57](#57))

The inscription goes on to credit Mas‘ûd Khãn with the construction of a
gate at Adoni and another at Sirkopa (Siruguppa) in the year AH 1086,
corresponding to AD 1674. “Mas‘ûd Khãn’s name,” comments G. Yazdani, “is
given by Khãfî Khãn in connection with the conquest of the fortress of
Ãdoni by the Mughal army under Firoz Jang in AH 1098-99 (AD
1687-88). Mas‘ûd Khãn defended the fort gallantly on behalf of the
Bijapur king, but being unsuccessful in repulsing the Imperial troops,
he ultimately made over to them the key of the Fortress and asked for
the safety of his life.”^([58](#58)) His bragging about his own prowess
was of no avail when he was faced with superior military might.  
 

**19. Cuddapah**

It is the headquarters of a District of the same name in the State of
Andhra Pradesh. “*Kadapa* means a ‘gate’ in Telegu and the name is said
to be derived from the fact that Cuddapah town is the gate to the holy
places at Tirupati.”^([59](#59)) The District was a part of the Chola
Empire of Tanjore from the eleventh to the thirteenth century. In the
fourteenth century it became a part of the Vijayanagara Empire. The Qutb
Shãhî Sultãns of Golconda seized it after the defeat of Vijayanagara in
1565 and renamed it Neknãmãbãd. It passed under Mughal rule in 1688.

A mosque in Cuddapah town carries an inscription which reads as follows:

“In the name of God, the most Merciful and Compassionate. Praise be to
God, the Lord of all worlds, and blessing and peace be upon Muhammad,
the apostle of God, and upon all his descendants and companions. O God,
help Islãm and the Muslims by preserving the kingdom of Abu’z-.Zafar
Muhîu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb Bahãdur ‘Ãlamgîr, the victorious king.
Blessed be the ruler of the world, the refuge of the universe; whose
name effaces the existence of sin. Since the time of Tîmur who conquered
the kingdom of Romans, there has been no ruler just like the present
king (Aurangzeb). The bow which he has stretched by his powerful arms,
is such that the echo of its twing has reached the (distant) seas. By
the sword, which the powerful king has wielded, panic has sprung (even)
in the ocean. Although the king of the time is not a prophet, yet there
is no doubt in his being a friend of God. He built the mosque and broke
the idols (at a time) when 1103 years had passed from the flight (of the
Prophet).”^([60](#60))

The year AH 1103 corresponds to AD 1692. The first two lines of the
inscription are in Arabic and eight hemistiches that follow are in
Persian. Aurangzeb needs no introduction.  
 

**20. Surat**

It is a large town and the headquarters of a District of the same name
in the State of Gujarat. A prosperous port on the West Coast of India
since ancient times, it passed under Muslim rule at the end of the 13th
century. As a gateway to Mecca, it became *Bandar Mubãrak*, the blessed
port.

The walls of a stepped well known as Gopî Talão have two Persian
inscriptions. The first one in which several lines are lost reads as
follows: “…The dust of whose feet is the crown of all. Farrukh Siyar the
king, by the fame of whose justice, the creation and the world are in
the cradle of repose. The sky of beneficence, Haidar Qulî Khãn during
whose reign tyranny has become extinct… By the grace of God he completed
it… He laid waste several idol temples, in order to make this strong
building firm…”^([61](#61))

The second inscription is intact and reads as follows: “\[During\] the
period of the second ‘Ãlamgîr, king of the faith, Farrukh Siyar, whose
sword became the guardian of the realm of Islãm. The hand of his justice
struck a blow on the head of Naushîrwãn (i.e., surpassed him in
justice), the country and the nation everywhere secured tranquility by
his justice. Mîr ‘Ãlam, sincere friend of Haidar Qulî Khãn, a reservoir
of water constructed in Sûrat, which became life-giving to the high and
the low. *Salsabîl* (a fountain of Paradise) of the *Ka‘ba of heart,
this reservoir of the water of life*. The inspirer communicated this
chronogram and showed eloquence. As its bricks were taken from an idol
temple, one rose and said, *Mîr ‘Ãlam became the founder of this
reservoir by revelation 1130*.”^([62](#62))

The chronogram also yields AH 1130 which corresponds to AD 1718. Haidar
Qulî Khãn mentioned in the two inscriptions was the Mughal officer in
charge of Surat in the reign of the Mughal emperor Farrukh Siyyar (AD
1713-1719) who got Bandã Bairagî tortured and killed and who himself
died a dog’s death at the hands of the Sayyid Brothers. We have a
locality in old Delhi which is known as Havelî Haidar Qulî.  
 

**21. Cumbum**

It is the headquarters of a Taluka of the same name in the Kurnool
District of Andhra Pradesh. The central *mihrãb* of its Gachînãlã Masjid
carries a Persian inscription which reads as follows:

“He is Allãh, may He be glorified, the Most Exalted. During the august
rule of the emperor, king of the world, Muhammad Shãh, there was a
well-established idol-house in Kuhmum which was strengthened and
fortified by a small fortress. The Khãn of lofty dignity (and) of high
position, the source of generosity and mine of beneficence, the Khan who
is the master of (high) position, (namely), Muhammad Sãlih, who prospers
in the rectitude of the affairs of Faith, son of Hãjî Muhammad Kãzim was
the ruler of Kuhmum. He is one of the select grandees of the city of
Tabrîz which place is celebrated for producing great persons. (He) razed
to the ground the edifice of the idol-house, and also broke the idols in
a manly fashion. (He) constructed on the site a suitable mosque,
towering above the buildings of all. The Angel of the Unseen
communicated the date of its construction in the words: *A mosque
pleasant in appearance, well founded, and elegant*. The year of the
migration of the Prophet, may peace (of God) be upon him, was forty-two,
one hundred and one thousand. Year AH 1142.”^([63](#63))

The chronogram also yields AH 1142 which corresponds to AD 1729-30.
Muhammad Sãlih was the Governor and Nãzim of Cumbum in that year under
the Mughal emperor, Muhammad Shãh (AD 1719-48).  
 

**Conclusions**

Three conclusions can be safely drawn from a study of these 21
inscriptions. Firstly, the destruction of Hindu temples continued
throughout the Muslim rule, from the date of its first establishment at
Delhi in AD 1192 to its downfall with the death of the Mughal emperor
Muhammad Shah in 1748. Secondly, the destruction took place all over
India and was undertaken by rulers belonging to all Muslim dynasties,
imperial as well as provincial. Thirdly, the destruction had no economic
or political motive as has been proposed by Marxist scholars and Muslim
apologists; it was inspired by religious zeal and regarded as a pious
performance by Muslim kings and commanders, all of whom took
considerable pride in it and sought blessing from Allãh and the Prophet.
The iconoclasts, it may be added, have been idolised all along as
paragons of faith, virtue, justice and generosity. These conclusions
become clearer still when we come to evidence from Islamic literary
sources.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Heinrich Zimmer, *Art of Indian Asia*, Princeton, Paperback
Edition, 1983, Vol. I, p. 201.

[²](#2a) Ibid., p. 246.

[³](#3a) Ibid., p. 270.

[⁴](#4a) Ibid., p. 5n.

[⁵](#5a) The word “Hindu” has been used throughout this book to denote
all schools of *Sanãtana Dharma* - Brahmanical, Buddhist, and Jain. See
Appendix 3 for how the words “Hindu” and “Hinduism” have been made to
mean what they never meant.

[⁶](#6a) *Annual Report of Indian Epigraphy* 1953-54, C-70 and C-71.

[⁷](#7a) Ibid., 1963-M, D-286.

[⁸](#8a) Ibid., 1964-65, D-123. The date is significant. As late as AD
1878, Muslims in Maharashtra took pride in proclaiming that a Jãmi‘
Masjid occupied the site of a demolished Hindu temple.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., 1978-79, C-56.

[¹⁰](#10a) Ibid., 1980-81, C-14.

[¹¹](#11a) Archaeological Survey of India, *Annual Report* 1906-07, p.
196.

[¹²](#12a) Qeyamuddin Ahmad (c-d.), *Patna through the Ages*, New Delhi,
1988, p. 64.

[¹³](#13a) *Epigraphia Indo Moslemica*, 1911-12, p. 13.

[¹⁴](#14a) Ibid., p. 14.

[¹⁵](#15a) *The Rehalã of Ibn Battûta*, translated into English by Mahdi
Hussain, Baroda. 1976, p. 27.

[¹⁶](#16a) Ibid., p. 32

[¹⁷](#17a) *Epigraphia Indica-Arabic and Persian Supplement*, 1974, p.
10.

[¹⁸](#18a) Ibid., p. 11.

[¹⁹](#19a) Ibid., p. 12.

[²⁰](#20a) *Epigraphia Indica - Arabic and Persian Supplement*, 1959-60,
p. 73.

[²¹](#21a) Ibid., p. 72.

[²²](#22a) Ibid., p. 73.

[²³](#23a) Ibid., p. 72.

[²⁴](#24a) *Epigraphia Indica - Arabic and Persian Supplement*, 1962, p.
58.

[²⁵](#25a) *Epigraphia Indo - Moslemica*, 1909-10, pp. 4-5.

[²⁶](#26a) Ibid., p. 1.

[²⁷](#27a) Qur’ãn, 72.18.

[²⁸](#28a) *Epigraphia Indica - Arabic and Persian Supplement*, 1963,
pp. 28-29.

[²⁹](#29a) Ibid., p. 27.

[³⁰](#30a) *Epigraphia Indo - Moslemica*, 1933-34, p. 36.

[³¹](#31a) *Indian Antiquary*, June. 1927, pp. 101-04.

[³²](#32a) *Bãbur-Nãma*, translated into English by A.S. Beveridge, New
Delhi Reprint, 1979, Vol. II, pp. 539-40.

[³³](#33a) Majumdar, R.C. (ed.), op. cit, Vol. VII, *The Mughal Empire*,
Bombay, 1974, p. 106.

[³⁴](#34a) *Epigraphia Indica -Arabic and Persian Supplement*, 1969, p.
69.

[³⁵](#35a) Quoted in Ibid., footnote 2.

[³⁶](#36a) Ibid., p. 70.

[³⁷](#37a) Ibid., p. 71.

[³⁸](#38a) *Epigraphia Indo-Mostemica*, 1933-34. p. 24.

[³⁹](#39a) *Epigraphia Indo-Moslemica*, 1937-38, p. 53, footnote 2.

[⁴⁰](#40a) Ibid., pp. 53-54.

[⁴¹](#41a) Majumdar R.C., (ed.), op. cit., Vol. VII, *The Mughal
Empire*. pp. 475-76.

[⁴²](#42a) Allen Buterworth and V. Venugopaul Chetty, *Copper-plate and
Stone Inscriptions of South India*, Delhi Reprint, 1989, pp. 385-86.

[⁴³](#43a) Ibid., pp. 381-82.

[⁴⁴](#44a) *Epigraphia Indo-Moslemica*, 1919-1920, p. 16.

[⁴⁵](#45a) Ibid.

[⁴⁶](#46a) Ibid., p. 18.

[⁴⁷](#47a) Ibid., p. 17.

[⁴⁸](#48a) Qur’ãn, 17.83. This ãyat was recited first by Muhammad when
he destroyed the idols of pagan Arabs in the Ka’ba at Mecca.

[⁴⁹](#49a) The inscription has been reproduced and translated into
English by F.S. Growse in his *Mathura: A District Memoir*, third
edition (1883) reprinted from Ahmadabad in 1978, pp. 150-51.

[⁵⁰](#50a) *Mãã’sir-i-‘Ãlamgiri*, translated into English by Sir
Jadu-Nath Sarkar, Calcutta, 1947, pp. 47-48.

[⁵¹](#51a) Jadunath Sarkar, op. cit., Vol. III, pp. 194-95.

[⁵²](#52a) Archaeological Survey of India, *Four Reports Made During the
Years 1862-63-64-65* by Alexander Cunningham, Varanasi Reprint, 1972. p.
335.

[⁵³](#53a) *Epigraphia Indica - Arabic and Persian Supplement*, 1963, p.
54.

[⁵⁴](#54a) Qur’ãn, 48.1.

[⁵⁵](#55a) *Epigraphia Indo - Moslemica*, 1927-28, p. 33.

[⁵⁶](#56a) *Epigraphia Indo - Moslemica*, 1921-22, p. 8.

[⁵⁷](#57a) Ibid., pp. 11-12.

[⁵⁸](#58a) Ibid., p. 10.

[⁵⁹](#59a) *Imperial Gazetteer of India, Provincial Series, Madras*, New
Delhi Reprint. 1985, Vol. I, p. 370.

[⁶⁰](#60a) *Epigraphia Indo - Moslemica*, 1937-38, p. 55.

[⁶¹](#61a) *Epigraphia Indo - Moslemica*. 1933-34, p. 42.

[⁶²](#62a) Ibid., p. 41.

[⁶³](#63a) *Epigraphia Indica - Arabic and Persian Supplement*, 1959,
pp. 65-66.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


