+++
title = "03 THE KING'S FOOT"

+++

The invention of a barbarous age, to set off wretched matter with lame meter. 

-JOHN MILTON 

IN THE mid-nineteenth century one Charles Gille wrote a carpenter's song, "My Plane," whose last verse alluded to the metric system that the Revolution had introduced:1 

Challenging routine and hatred, Taking its stand on useful things, The measure of the Republic Has overthrown the foot of kings. 

Actually kings proved easier to overthrow than the measures associated with them. A law of 1837 had made the metric system the only legal measure of the land, effective January I, 1840' But its fate, like that of the franc germinal introduced in 18°3, remained uncertain for several generations. Public archives and private transactions alike bear witness that ancient measures survived and thrived into the twentieth century, above all in the poorest and most isolated areas, where life and work were slow to enter the broader national market.2 

There, as in the old regime, people proved reluctant to abandon measures based on familiar experience for abstract ones with universal pretensions. Land measures mostly related to the day's work (journal or morgen) or to the kind of labor (hommee, bechee, fauchee). The journal and the hommee represented the amount of land a man could work in a day, and were thus sometimes equivalent to the size of the average field. These workday units varied according to regional differences in ground, tools, and methods of cultivation. In Lorraine the jour or journal was 20.44 ares, or IQ omees (hommees) of 2.04 ares each; in the Bassigny region of Haute-Marne many rectangular fields averaged 25.85 ares, and that was what the old journal was there. In Sarthe, the hommee was 33 ares and the journal 44; and in the Landes, where on the eve of the First World War the journal was still the standard measure, it was 

The King' s Foot 31 equivalent to 42 ares in poor land but only 35 in good land. Other systems of weights and measures were based on kinds of harnesses (ateelee, bOllee, jouguee); quantities of grain (boisseiee, from boisseau, or bushel, seteree from setier); or familiar objects, such as the cord and the rod.s All naturally varied from place to place; the rod, for instance, was much longer in northern than in southern France."" In lower Vivarais, where in the days of President Grevy (1879-87) wine was still measured by the setier, eight setiers made a muleload.4 Similarly, the donkey-load (saumade) became a local unit of measurement in places where the roads, uncertain at best, could only be negotiated by donkeys in winter. 

The enormous diversity of measures and of systems of measurement isless striking than the persistence, indeed the insistence, with which the state officialdom ignored their existence-except in its effort to stamp them out. The difficulty of converting one set of measures to another argued in favor of a single system that would replace them all. So did the variance in weights and measures of the same name, which meant that buyers were easily cheated. Suggestively, the number of trials for the unlawful possession of false weights and measures dropped markedly in the 1860'S. But the old measures were deeprooted, and though "all of the peoples of Europe admired and envied" the French system of weights and measures, at least nine-tenths of the French people still ignored it, grumbled a teacher in 1861.11 

The official agricultural survey of r866-67 emphasized the awkwardness of the great variety of local measures and concluded with a list of priorities that reflected how much remained to be done: (1) to rigorously impose the use of legal measures; (2) to standardize the weights and measures used in markets; (3) to establish official weighers, measurers, and gaugers in the countryside.6 Homogenization crept on at a snail's pace, and partly for the reason that an army officer reconnoitering the Isere in 1843 had given for its backwardness: commercial relations were limited to one city (Grenoble) and its immediate surroundings; beyond, they were almost nonexistent. Homogenization went fastest where the proximity of a city encouraged trade, as at Luynes near Tours, whose peasants soon learned to consult the mercuriales (market price-bul- 

• Archives de la Guerre, MR 1212 (Isere, 1843), gives a long list of measures in current use in Isere, including ;ournal, seteree, fosseree, bicheree, le faucheur, l'hommee, la quarteree, la coupe, la couperee, and la pugniere. Some equivalents are provided as well, which further indicate their variety: 

le pied de France de 12 I'aune de tisserand a 

pouces .3248 meters Mens 1.486 meters I'aune de Paris 1. 188" la toise de Paris 1.949 l'aune de tisserand a le boisseau 12.70 liters Grenoble 1.307" le quartal a Grenoble 18.33" l'aune de tisserand a le bichet a Voiron 19.21" Voiron 1.345" la bichette a Bourgoin 22.96" It also remarks in passing: "Les habitants de la campagne se servent encore dans leurs trafics des chiffres romains," 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

letins) and set their prices by them. oil: In the Pas-de-Calais, between Boulogne and Calais, though some of the older usages survived, the metric system was in fairly general use by 1874. In the center, west, southwest, and south, by contrast, measures and coins remained what they had always been to the end of the century. In Tarn in 1893 Henri Baudrillart found the decimal system in its infancy, the hectare unknown, and measures varying even from one parish to another. A few years later a priest could aver that the metric system was nonexistent in nearby Correze.7 

Passive resistance scotched official initiatives. The prefects of Ardeche constantly complained that they could not get the new weights and measures adopted in the county seat, Privas, and the village mayors excused their own inaction on the inaction of Privas. When a prefect pushed local police into nabbing violators in the markets at Privas, the peasants took their produce to Aubenas, where surveillance was not so tight; the merchants of Privas promptly co~plained, and the prefect then turned his attention to Aubenas, which showed little inclination to comply with his orders. So fathom and foot, ell and bushel, quart, pound, and ounce, poids de marc and poids de table persisted into the twentieth century. In the early 1900'S in Bourbonnais, though the hectare was "half-heartedly employed at the notaire's by force of law," people still went by rod and acre, ell and boisseh~e. Milestones showed kilometers, but the countryside knew only leagues; iron sold by the inch and the line. The king's foot that Gille had spurned was still in general use, and ironmongers, who were bound by law to use official units, hid measuring sticks in the back of their shops that showed the pouce, ligne, and pied their clients would recognize. In 1895 Father Gorse lamented that in his "bas pays de Limosin" the peasant counted by pistola, louis, and escu; measured land in eminade, sesteirada, and quarterounada, and canvas in auna and miechauna; sold wood ei ciclhe, pigs ei quintau, drinks in mie-quart and pinta. "The roads have crossed almost all our villages, our villagers have passed through military service and our children through school, but the metric system hasn't passed into custom yet. In a century perhaps."8 Gorse was wrong; it had taken a century to come about, but the peasant's integration into the modern world was forcing him to learn and use its terms. 

In 1884 J. A. Barral noted that in the Limousin sharecroppers were adopting the metric system because they had to settle with the owners, whose schooling had led them to adopt it.9 The growing number of notarized papers, bills of lading, and legal or business formalities were making the exceptional familiar. In the early twentieth century Bourbonnais wines still went by the poinfon (which varied from 2181iters near the Loire to 200 liters around Saulcet). But the liter had displaced the demi-setier and the ch opine, perhaps because pubs were closely supervised by the police. A host of disparate forces 

.. Archives de la Guerre, MR 2262 (1873). Even there, though, wood was sold not by the stere or the corde, but by a local measure, the cent de cotrets, a bundle 1.10 m around. 

The King' s Foot 33 worked against the old measures. They had reigned through the nineteenth century. By the twentieth they were hard put to survive. 

The same was true of coins and currency. The law of 7 Germinal, year II of the Republic (March 28,1803) was a crucial act, creating the stable currency on which the French economy and French savings throve for the next 120 years. But the franc it created had to compete with earlier currencies almost to the time of its first devaluation in the 1920'S. A big landowner in the Pasde-Calais-a notable of his district and mayor of his village-kept his accounts in eeus until 1837, in sols until 1849 (as a substitute for the centime, not as a term for the five-centime piece), and in livres and francs interchangeably, as if they were one and the same thing, all the way to 1877.10 

In 1830 Bretons touchy about their backwardness thought that the lowdenomination Hard appropriate to poor regions was to be found only in their lands. But liards (once worth about three centimes, then generally one) circulated freely in Burgundy, Aisne, and Allier, and no doubt elsewhere at least until their official demonetization in the middle of the 1850's. In the Moulinois the farmers of Y zeure found thousands of Roman bronze coins in their fields, cleaned them, and used them variously as one liard, two liards, one sou, and double sous. Tradesmen accepted them, as they did the silver Roman coins found there, which were used as so-centime or one-franc pieces. This practice too waned in the mid-1850's with the passing of copper coinage. Around Laon the appearance of shiny new one-, two-, and five-centime pieces bearing the effigy of Napoleon III confused a lot of people, who took them for fiveand ten-franc gold pieces.ll Clearly the old denominations were still holding their own. 

The new Emperor was firmly in the saddle when the mayor of a village in Aunis drew up a document dividing his capital among his children and keeping for himself an income that included "une rente de 25 livres tournois au capital de 500 livres aussi tournois."12 In the 1860's we find schoolteachers in Savoy reckoning in liards, and peddlers in the southwest making change in pistales (five-franc silver pieces). And in the Breton's vocabulary we find 14thcentury blanes, obsolete crowns (eeus), and reaux, a survival from the Spanish occupation of the dim past. The people of Lower Brittany, we are told, always figured amounts up to five francs in reals and spoke of 12 five-franc pieces as 20 ecus. As late as 1917 around Quimper one said four reaux for a franc and asked 60 ecus for a cow worth 180 francs. That is, if one was not using the Breton language, which had its own denominations and terms :13 

12 diners (deniers) = 1 gwenneg (sou) = 5 centimes 

5 gwenneg = 1 real = 25 centimes 4 reaux = llur (livre) = 1 franc 31ur = 1 skoet (ecu) = 3 francs 

Novelists recognized the persistence of such terms. The Three Musketeers were not the only ones to count in ecus and pi stoles. Jules Simon's L'Outlriere,34 THE WAY THINGS WERE published in 1863 and reissued through the 1890's, uses these terms for servants' wages. In 1880 a knowledgeable if sentimental chronicler of rural life had a farmer marrying a girl who brought him a herd and 500 pistoles. In 1893 an English traveler through Upper Quercy found peasants and dealers at the Figeac fair transacting their business in pistoles and ecus. And in Correze Father Gorse still insisted in 1895 that lIO francs was ounze pistolas.14 

To further complicate matters, the kinds of coins that were accepted as ecus or pistoles varied according to local practice. When cash was scarce, one took what came to hand, as with the Roman coins of Allier. In addition, their value differed appreciably from place to place: the pistole was sometimes worth five francs, sometimes ten; the ecu was sometimes worth five francs, sometimes three. The pistole of eighteenth-century Brittany had been equivalent to the gold louis. But after the appearance of the 20-franc gold napoleon in 1803, the louis sometimes referred to the napoleon and sometimes (as in Sologne Bour· bonnaise) to 24 francs. All this was little felt in an old-fashioned subsistence economy with a multitude of isolated local markets. But once money and goods began to circulate more widely, it made for dire confusion. 

The use of unofficial currencies was repeatedly prohibited. In 1896 the police superintendent of Brassac reported lots of foreign sous circulating in his corner of the Puy-de-Dome. But people in Haute-Loire, nearby, would not accept them any more. As strange coins ceased to be a medium of exchange, shops and markets experienced a temporary shortage of coins, and there was a brief currency crisis. But within a few months the sub-prefect of Riom felt the trouble was over, except for the parish priests, who were finding masses of the worthless coins in their poor-boxes and offertories. This must have been the real turning point. At the end of the century Cantal cheese prices were still quoted in pistoles, reals were still bandied about the marketplaces of Finistere and Morbihan, and six liards continued to make one and a half sous in the Bourbonnais countryside. Even on the eve of the war a farm laborer in Vendee could still be found hiring out for anything from 30 pistoles to 150 ecus. But even in the remotest places the franc had become solidly established -perhaps because, at last, there were more francs around. As Pierre Bourdieu remarks of the Bearnais village he studied, where in 1962 many still remembered how rare cash was before 1914: "People aren't richer, but money circulates more."15 

It is obvious that the persistence of the old coins reflected a scarcity of the new. And not of the new alone, but of currency in general. For a long time money itself was relatively rare and unfamiliar. While traveling through Ariege in 1836, Paul de Musset had given a ragged child some copper coins and noted the amazement with which. the waif looked at them, as if he had never seen coins before. As late as 1861 a minister confirmed that in Ariege the rural populations very rarely handled money, which was extremely scarce. "Penurie de numeraire," reported the general prosecutor of Limoges in 1848. 

The King's Foot 3S "The first and foremost thing lacking" in the V osges, commented an observer in 1866, was cash. These were the times when a sou was really a sou. "For a sharecropper who gets.paid for his labor in kind," Armand Audiganne wrote of Perigord in 1867, "who sells nothing or almost nothing, a sou is really something." Criminal records show how little cash people had on them, like the man knifed near Landerneau in June 1870 and left for dead, who though he carried a watch had only one franc and some coppers in his wallet. "On paye le docteur quand les cochons se vendent bien," observed a Comminges teacher in 1886. And only then. If then.16 Cash was scarce, precious; every bit of it counted; even a few centimes unexpectedly added to the budget could cause anxious concern. The inability of peasant households to meet their cash needs is reflected in the vast numbers of official arrangements that were never carried out: the pension promised to old parents that was never paid, or the nominal sum an unmarried son was supposed to get for contributing his share to the family farm that he never got. Passing through Vic-sur-Cere in the 1890's, a small spa only a few miles from Aurillac, Jean Ajalbert found the servants at the inn "little used to tips," knotting into their handkerchiefs any small coins a visitor might leave them.17 

All this was but one indication of an enduring autarky in the countryside-a self-sufficient life in which until around 1870 many peasants bought only iron and salt, paid for all else in kind and were paid the same way, husbanded their money for taxes or hoarded it to acquire land. In the southwest in 1853 observers noted that since few bought grain for consumption, its price mattered little. In Brie, as we can see from a local vintner's ledger, the winegrowers were self-sufficient to the end of the Second Empire and beyond. Pepper, salt, a little salted cod, and a few pairs of clogs were the sum total of their cash purchases. In Bresse at the close of the century, money came out of hiding in the autumn at Saint Martin's day (November II), when the family bought basic stocks like sugar and salt and paid the taxes and the rent it owed. The rest of the time "money was almost unknown in the hamlets." Barter continued to play a significant role. Near Saint-Gaudens, in Haute-Garonne, the peasants brought their highland wheat to the markets of the plain and exchanged one measure of wheat for two measures of corn. The muleteers of Gevaudan carried on an active trade between the grainlands of Velay and the Vivarais wine country, exchanging wheat, beans, peas, barley, and the famous lentils of the Puy for goatskins of Ardeche wine. As roads replaced trails, wagons took over from mules, but the scale of this trade diminished only in the 1880'S, when the lowland vineyards were devastated by the deadly Phylloxera. In 1902 in impoverished Correze the women of the Monedieres still came down to the markets and fairs of T reignac to exchange their hair for "cloth or other articles." All over the Limousin at that time, and until the war at least, most village artisans accepted payment in services or in kind (potatoes, chestnuts, sometimes even the raw materials they needed) .18 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

Andre Armengaud has noted, as Audiganne has of Perigord, that the agri~ cultural workers of nineteenth-century Aquitaine were seldom paid in cash. Similarly, in Henri Bachelin's Limousin a miller's servant got two doubles of grain, a dress, an apron, and one pair of clogs a year. In Lower Dauphine migrant harvesters were paid in kind until 1910 or so. So were shepherds in Aubrac. In some regions, like Bresse, the farmer seldom hired any help at all. When extra hands were needed, as at harvest or haymaking time, neighbors relied on one another. In other regions, like the Landes, where currency was scarce until the First World War, sharecroppers continued to be paid and to make their purchases in kind. In most places, though, wages were paid in both cash and kind in varying proportions, as in Brittany, where a farmhand might receive 50 skoed, six ells of linen, and three pairs of clogs a year.ID 

Perhaps, as Rene Nelli suggests, payment in kind was considered more honorable than a cash "salary" as a sort of symbolic participation in property. Thus, in Roussillon and Languedoc, where for a long time landowners paid for work and services in kind, the crews and masters of coastal fishing boats shared in the catch but paid extra hands in cash as if they were mere town workingmen, and accordingly despised. A simpler explanation might be that in a system where barter was king, cash could be hard to use, and the most basic of consumer goods difficult to buy. This could be why, in 1856, landowners in Agenais were unable to persuade their servants to accept salaries. As the market economy spread and necessities could be purchased in cash, this changed. In the Minervois, until the turn of the century, the pay of hired hands was based on a share of the harvest. A farmworker's yearly wage might typically have consisted of 300 to 550 francs in cash, 500 liters of wine, 800 liters of wheat, 10 liters of oil, 20 liters of beans, and between 200 and 400 bundles of vine-shoots to keep his fire burning. But a 1906 study on vineyard workers noted that more and more frequently the employer "instead of furnishing goods, which he no longer produced," paid his employees in cash-except, significantly, for wine.20 

Until this came to pass, money continued to be in short supply. Its scarcity helps explain the references found in so many sources to the peasants' meanness, stinginess, and avarice. "Love of lucre ... blind absolute passion for money." "Money is their idoL To it they sacrifice everything ... and live more miserably than slaves in the colonies." "This great anti-social lie, thrift, has led to avarice."2I Both thrift and avarice were natural reactions to a dearth of money (itself reflecting lasting backwardness), which is as inconceivable to us as it was to all these urban observers, for whom coins were quite literally the currency of everyday existence. But the peasant knew very well how rare money was and hence how much the harder to come by. As the Vivarais prov~ erb has it :22 

He who has money is content. He can pay with it. Better hang on to it. 

The King's Foot 37 Venality, rapacity, are natural to men-arising out of need, as the impulse to gorge arises out of want. Limousin peasant stories attribute a sense of justice to birds, cunning to animals (among which the fox is master), and greed to men-above all a vast love of gold. Peasants were seldom heroes of the tales they told, which were mostly about castles and palaces, princes and kings, with little attention paid to the humble life. But when the peasant showed himself, what he most revealed was an incredible lust for riches, for silver and gold--essentially for cash.23 

Cash needs reflected aspects of life that went far beyond salt and taxes. There was first of all the hunger for land, sharpened by the fact that social standing was measured by the size of the family holding. Noneconomic considerations -duty, pride, prestige-presided over the desire to preserve and increase one's patrimony; over the dowry without which few girls could find a husband and no clans an alliance; over the practice in certain regions of settling on one heir for the family holding (faire un aine), which required the chosen one to compensate or buy out the other heirs. All this made important calls on capital, and often as not-as we shall see-resulted in properties encumbered with mortgages and usurious 10ans.24 

L' argent-money--or rather the lack of it, reigned over the countryside as much as or even more than it ruled in the towns. Usurers, notaries, the village bloodsuckers Balzac has painted, were part of a landscape all peasants knew well. There were few peasant families that did not drag along, like fetters, generations-old debts they could not cast off. Since credit was scarce, usury was rampant. This stemmed in part from archaic banking structures and credit institutions ill-adapted to local situations. The peasants' hunger for land has come under heavy fire. But what could be done with savings besides buying land? So long as money remained scarce, opportunities for investing what there was of it, or even of saving profitably, remained scarce as well. 

The famous woolen sock had few alternatives. The first ordinary savings bank had been founded in Paris in 1818. Its successors were few until the 1830's and, of course, were restricted to the towns. In the mid-nineteenth century most savings depositors seem to have been soldiers and domestics. In 1874 French urban savers had access to only 1,142 savings offices compared with 5,000 in England at that date, and even then they were open only one or two days a week. In the countryside, county seats and the chef-lieux d'arrondissement were served, but 1,775 towns had no facilities at all. There were a mere 16 savings banks and 164 branches to serve the residents of 34,039 rural communes. To take one rural department as an example, in the Tarn the first two savings banks were founded in 1835, followed by two in 1857, three in 1861-62, one in 1868, and one in 1879. But the real rise in deposits came only after 1870' In 1860 depositors numbered 4,102, and deposits amounted to 1.5 million francs. By 1870 the figures had risen to 17,469 depositors with savings of more than six million francs. The figures doubled again by 1880 and once more by 1900. 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

The proportion of depositors in the total population was negligible until about 1866. The ratio rose steeply in 1875-80, and then climbed almost as fast in the last quarter of the century: 52.8 : 1,000 in 1875; 103.5 : 1,000 in 1880; 184.7 : 1,000 in 1900.25 

In 1881 the Caisse Nationale d'Epargne was founded. Essentially a postal savings bank, its facilities contributed mightily to the shift from mattresses and woolen socks to interest-bearing bank books. Between 1882 and 1890 deposits soared ninefold, and by the end of 1897 they had increased almost as much again.26 Whatever else all this suggests, it clearly shows that both investment and credit structures remained primitive and archaic until the last quarter of the century. And the awkward effects of the money shortage were most strongly felt in poorer regions like the Limousin. It is not that the problem went unrecognized. In a poem that was probably written in 1848, a winegrower from Deux-Scvres, Claude Durand, had spelled it out for all to hear:2'1 

N' ecoute plus cette aristocratie Qui convertit tes sueurs en ecu; Quand tu voudras, usure et tyrannie Dans un seul jour tout aura disparu. 

Dans tout ham eau des banques agricoles Existeront pour toi, bon paysan, Gratis aussi on aura des ecoles, Et de l'argent a deux pour cent. 

But money at 2 percent was even more utopian than free schools. And agricultural banks took their time in appearing, and longer by far in serving the interests of the good peasant. 

The Credit Foncier, founded in 1852, was "ill-adapted to small and middling properties" and could not help the rural public. It accepted only first mortgages and insisted on complicated formalities and paperwork that were bound to be discouraging to simple applicants. In any case, many peasants had no title deeds for property they might offer as collateral, or at least none acceptable to official institutions. Additionally and hardly surprisingly, the Credit Foncier was stoutly opposed by the usurers, notaries, and small loansharks who dominated the local situation. By the 1860'S its operations focused largely on urban real estate. Its offspring, the Credit Agricole, was little better. In 1909 we find the prefect of Haute-Vienne lamenting that peasants made so little use of it: "They know only imperfectly the remarkable instrument of liberation at their disposal." That was true, but was it at their disposal? Or was it, like its predecessor, largely a source of loans to towns and to the minority of prosperous and knowledgeable farmers in a position to use its services?28 

The chief source of credit remained the usurer. "When resources fail," the sub-prefect of Brive-Ia-Gaillarde (a prosperous town in a prosperous district) 

The King' s Foot 39 wrote in 1852, "the farmer begs and the owner has recourse to usury." What begging was for the poorest classes, usury was for the less poor, who might well end up destitute in turn. Most historians of earlyand mid-nineteenth century France insist on the crucial role of the peasants' burden of debt. Contemporary accounts do too. "Usury is the malady that undermines the countryside," noted an army officer in Haute-Vienne (1845). "Far from all supervision, cut off from the outside," explained the prefect of Basses-Alpes in 1856, "most of the people of our district are the prey of petty tyrants who make money out of everything." Usury, the plague of poor regions, was one of the calamities of the Lauragais, declared M. F. Pariset in 1867.29 Nineteenth-century economists were less concerned about the evils of usurious credit than local officials or notables: "To give credit is to give time," explained Frederic Bastiat. "To give up time to another is to give up a precious thing to him." The conclusion is obvious. Balzac's CCrizet lends 10 francs on Tuesday and expects 12 back on Sunday morning; at 20 percent a week, he doubles his investment in five weeks. 

The usurer gained power as well as money. His hold on his debtors was immense. It could be, and was, used for political ends."" But more often creditors demanded all sorts of extras, forcing their victims to pay for drinks, meals, and legal costs, subjecting them to various kinds of exploitation and humiliation the more maddening for people to whom every cent, every piece of bread or jug of milk counted. Many have denounced the evils of usury, the accumulating payments that could easily drive the interest rate to 25 and 30 percent. But no one has made a study of the psychological strain that rural moneylenders, most often peasants themselves, imposed on their debtors. 

Clearly, the revolt against usury was one of the great themes of 1848-52. It may also have done its share to spread anti-Semitism in the rural areas. Certainly, the strong identification of the Jew and the usurer was a significant feature of the nationalist politics of the Third Republic. Yet, apart from the cities, where the equivalence seems to have been firmly established in workingclass myth, and Alsace and Lorraine, where Jews were hated even more than forest guards,so I have not found any reference to Jewish usury.t Most lenders 

• For example, in 1850 the tax collector of Ariege processed a request for tax relief from a villager-by his account a rentier and a man of considerable means who, having endowed his children, used his spare capital for usury. The man's commune, Sabarat, was alleged to be "very bad, crimson red, from mayor to garde champ~tre," thanks largely "to the intimidation he exercises with his usury on all the working class." Whether true or not, the allegations suggest real possibilities. (Archives .Departementales, Ariege 5M3, 1850.) t But the seeds of anti-Semitic sentiment were planted in rural communities where no Jews existed, let alone Jewish usurers, by the Church, whether in catechism or during the Easter services on Maundy Thursday and Good Friday. Dieudonne Dergny, Images, coutumes et croyances, I: 330-42, gives a variety of ways in which during the Tenebrae services the congregation upbraided and reviled those held responsible for the death of Jesus. At Las IIIas (probably Les Dhes, Aude) men and youths executed the Jews (Ious facous del Joueus) by striking the stalls and church pavement with sticks. Elsewhere members of the congregation set up a din with rattles and heavy stamping, extinguished candles (representing Jews), or burned Jews in effigy, in fires lit in the cemetery or (in Alsace) communal pyres. According to Charles Beauquier, in Franche-Comte at 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

were, as already suggested, local men-various notables, including landowners, well-to-do farmers, millers, innkeepers, and artisans; priests, who sometimes had a host of debtors;31 and of course the notaires who invested both their clients' money and their own-and certainly not all charged usurious rates. But whatever their social or economic position, the moneylenders-and usurycontinued to be an integral part of the rural economy and a major source of rural anxiety until the money shortage eased and interest rates fell in the 1890's. Final liberation came only from the profits peasants made during the war of 1914-18.32 

All this suggests that the shift to a money economy was telescoped in a number of regions into a fairly short period that fell roughly in the last third of the nineteenth century. The start of the process coincides roughly with the beginnings of the Third Republic. That was when, very slowly, country people learned the gestures involved in handling coins, weighing them in the hand, testing how they rang on stone, and so on, before passing on to the intricacies of paper money.33 Though little used in the countryside before the war, paper money too had seen a tremendous jump in circulation between 1887 and 1895. It had been a stranger to great parts of France at the end of the Second Empire, and by 1887 the amount in circulation had scarcely doubled. In the following eight years, however, the quantity increased sixfold. The pace slackened thereafter, and by 1913 it had taken 26 years for the volume to increase tenfold. The triumph of paper money came only after the First World War, but its advances in the preceding quarter century had been significant.34 

Whatever indicator we turn to, therefore, the 1880's and the quarter century that followed them appear as a watershed in this as in other respects. The circulation and the use of money, the accumulation and the reliance on savings, the payment of wages in cash, eventually the circulation figures of paper currency, all testify to it. The traditional economy was clearly giving way. Cash in the traditional economy was saved with great effort as a reserve and as a sort of insurance, like grain in a barn. Its uses were as limited as its quantity. Once the subsistence stage had passed-once the closed circle in which it did not matter what coins one used, and most of the time one did not use any, broke open-money became of great consequence, not only as the means of exchange, but as the means of measuring everything, a universal language that all understood and all now wanted to speak. 

How near and yet how far away the time when people said "un sou c'est un sou," and meant what they were saying! 

the end of the century the faithful went to Maundy Thursday service armed with a wooden mallet. "At a certain passage of the service, the priest throws his book to the gruund, and then everyone strikes repeated blows on the stalls and on the chairs. This is called tuer les luifs." (Traditions populaires, p. 44.) 
