+++
title = "04 ALONE WITH ONE'S FELLOWS"

+++
C'est donc à bon droit que les Anciens tenaient l'étranger à distance. C'est celui qui a d'autres mocurs, et dont on ne peut savoir ce qu'il va faire. 

-BERTRAND DE JOUVENEL 

AT THE END of the eighteenth century, when the intendant of Gascony wanted to have roads constructed so as to connect the area with neighboring provinces, the people of Auch, bourgeois and common folk alike, protested: "We have all we need to live well. Our neighbors will come to take what they lack, and we have no need of what they can offer us." This sort of attitude lasted through much of the nineteenth century. But not all of it. As a country doctor observed shortly before the First World War, "a profound moral evolution' had taken place over the past 25 years: "The race [was] becoming separated from this land it loved so much."1 

The stubborn survival of local and domestic autarky is closely linked to the survivals described in Chapter 3; and once again the watershed of change seems situated around the 1880's. In 1794 Saint-Just had shrewdly pointed to the connection between private selfishness and local isolation, linking geographical and political detachment from national affairs. Departments and parishes, he complained, lived in autarky. Everyone kept his own commodities for himself; all output and produce were shut up at home. In 1827 an officer riding through the western Puy-de-Dôme, in the area of the highway from Limoges to Clermont, noted a life-style that was largely self-sufficient, including the weaving of wool shorn from the local sheep, "whereby the inhabitants are not forced to look to neighboring towns for their garb." In a passing reference to the whole great center of France at mid-century, Adolphe Blanqui spoke of it as sui generis, separated from the rest of the country by difficulty of access and long-standing isolation, "living its own life, having an appearance apart and traits distinct from the great national physiognomy." Naturally its inhabitants "have preserved... their original character in face of the general movement toward assimilation that civilization generates throughout the rest of France." Commenting on the effect of the grain shortages troubling many places in the hard winter of 1847, the prefect of Yonne, much 

[[42]]

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

closer to Paris and to civilization, remarked that since everyone there grew his own supplies and journeymen were generally paid in grain, no one really noticed the state of the market. As long as communications remained primitive and few, no market other than the local one mattered. Peasants grew what they needed or learned to need only what they could grow, kept what they could store, and sold what they could as best they could. Economists inveighed against "the narrow spirit that makes every family, every locality, every pays, live on its own resources asking nothing of trade." But the farms and villages of areas like the Savoy of 1864 and the still-isolated Lauragais of 1867, remained wholly self-sufficient-each “a sort of oasis.”3 

Only decent roads and railroads could alter this, and as we shall see, much of France had neither till after 1880.\* Until then, villages and hamlets in Savoy or Lot remained "inaccessible... turned in upon themselves," and the mentality this created survived well beyond the fact.\* Toward 1905 the old women of the lower Limousin kept on spinning the local wool even though sartorial self-sufficiency had by this time been abandoned. Yet the ideal farm (even in villages near urban Brive) continued to grow all its own provisions. Even after the First World War peasants tried to buy as little as possible and “faire de tout pour que ça marche.” Predictably enough, the mentality and the practices it bred survived longest in areas whose isolation was slowest to be disturbed: the west, the center, the southwest, and the Pyrenees." 

Material self-sufficiency has always been a model rather than a reality. And the more significant aspects of self-sufficiency in the peasants' universe were psychological rather than material. Paul Bois has shown that involvement in the market in pre-Revolutionary Sarthe did not necessarily mean integration in the urban world. Even in the wild vastnesses of the Puy-de-Dôme, some communities made coarse linen for sale at Clermont or Riom, and bought the flax they needed in the markets there. Where such economic and human interchanges occurred, and especially when they involved temporary migrations, new ways trickled in a whit faster than elsewhere; but even then their adoption was slow and highly selective. Indeed, all societies at all times have adopted new techniques, or practices, or tastes. The question is, in what degree, at what rate, and how long did they remain the masters of what to leave or take. A society can apparently maintain its cultural isolation even if it has regular economic relations with other societies. Guatemalan peasant traders of the 1930's spent a good part of their lives buying and selling in a wide circle of markets, yet seem to have remained insulated from the influences of the 

• Inspector Pujos, "Recueil des monographies" (St.-Caprain, Francoulès). In Haute-Savoie only the very end of the nineteenth century would break the isolation of places like Contamines and the Montjoye valley, which the railway reached in 1898 (Jean Chardonnet, Annales de géographie, 1938, p. 632). See also Archives Nationales, F179265 (Loire-Inf., May 4, 1880), which refers to the natures primitives of the inhabitants; long deprived of means of communication, they knew only the nearest bourg. On the sea coast of the department, and especially in the north (arrondissements of Châteaubriant and St.-Nazaire), "poverty, illiteracy, and isolation go hand in hand." 

many 

Alone with One's Fellows 

43 local cultures through which they passed their commercial life separate from their local culture. This applies to a fair number of local cultures, none in a position to overpower others. But the peasant can hold his own even against the strong culture of the city, as long as conditions force or enable his community to do so. Thus, we are told that, before the didactic campaigns of the Communist regime, Bulgarian peasants who bought and sold in cities carried few or no changes back into their villages. Tacit consent kept rural and city worlds apart. Even in town, peasants talked mostly to other peasants, not participants in urban life but spectators of it." 

pass- 

This sharp division is easier to conceive of if one remembers the immense cultural distance between the peasants' universe and that of the city dwellers. Draft boards in Dordogne just before the July Revolution found many young recruits who did not know their surnames and could only mutter their parents' Christian names. Quérigut in Ariège had not seen a prelate in 120 years when the Bishop of Pamiers and the departmental prefect decided to visit it in 1847. The inhabitants worked for days rolling stones to make a trail able for "the intrepid travelers," and the exceptional event was marked by 1,200 confirmations. The same utter isolation characterized Nièvre, Allier, and Vendée in the 1840's. In 1843, when an army battalion halted at Beaulieu (Corrèze), it found a population to whom soldiers were as strange as little Dorothy was to the city folk of Oz. "Military uniform, ways, and character [were] absolutely unknown," so that all turned out to marvel as at a circus (probably also unknown), and one local notable mistook the impressive-looking drum major for the colonel of the regiment. Officers were amazed that the populace of Lozère and Aveyron had "no idea of the outside world"—no more than the woman of Oléron off the Atlantic coast, who asked a sergeant major what people in the interior could find to eat when the sea was so far away. 

Isolation made for ignorance, indifference, for rumors that spread like wildfire in contrast to the stubbornly slow assimilation of current events.\* It also 

• When, in August 1914, the people of Champeaux and the Millevaches plateau of Corrèze heard the church bells sounded to announce the declaration of war, they were wholly perplexed since no storm appeared to be brewing. The news of war was greeted with depression and talk of the possibility of hiding in the woods to avoid mobilization (René Bonnet, Enfance limousine, pp. 27-29). Similarly, at Malleval (Drôme) mobilization in 1914 came as a "profound surprise." Yet though no one seemed to have the time to read the papers (it was haymaking season), the order to have horses ready for requisition by July 31 had "begun to affect opinion" (J. J. Becker, "L'Appel de guerre en Dauphiné, Mouvement social, 1964, especially p. 34). The fact is, the peasant took his news selectively, paying attention solely to what affected him--and drawing his own conclusions. Thus in 1830 and 1848 the political news was quick enough to penetrate upland Ariège, but what the people seized on was the possibility this seemingly offered of reclaiming some of the grazing, hunting, and wood-gathering rights that local landowners had been steadily closing off. For them, political revolution meant an opportunity to return to traditional ways. The indifference to national events is nowhere more strikingly illustrated than in Maurice Barrès, Oeuvre, 6: 228. Observing how little impact the German occupation had on the Lorraine countryside in 1908, he wrote: "Dans ces communes placées en dehors du chemin de fer et qui n'ont pas de douaniers ni d'employés de gare, c'est absolument comme si l'annexion n'existait pas."44 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

made for local solidarity, which was reinforced by mutual aid-a practice that may have arisen out of sheer necessity in the absence of other alternatives but that had generally become ritualized by tradition. Villages accepted their local madmen and beggars, but those foreign to the parts were feared and rejected. Both local wisdom and local vocabulary stressed the importance of mutual aid and disapproved of those who refused to live up to the traditional demandsas in the pejorative Provençal attribute gouste soulet (goûte seul), meaning a lone eater, one who does not share.9 

Sharing might go a long way, as in the solitary settlements of the resin workers of the Landes where, noted a visitor in 1911, "life was carried on almost in common," even to sharing any letter a neighbor might receive—or any visitor. This of course applied to all places where letters and visitors were things to wonder at, events among the few that broke the monotony of everyday routine. As a gendarme at Lourdes explained in 1858, “anything out of the ordinary is rare and causes interest when it occurs.... Curiosity suddenly urged from its fast feeds a long time [on the occurrence], since its menu rarely varies." This is exactly what Emile Guillaumin would say about life in his Bourbonnais half a century later, and J. H. Ricard about the people of the lonely Landes he visited about the same time. It explains the interest a stranger aroused, the hospitality he (at times) enjoyed and also the suspicion he invariably encountered.10 

On this score the evidence, particularly rich, reflects the shock and incomprehension of travelers unable to see why a countryman-their countryman as a rule-should react so negatively to what seemed to them natural activities or requests. A staff captain reconnoitering the road from Nantes to Vannes in 1822 regretted that he could report no positive information, having been unable to elicit any from the inhabitants "because of their suspicion of those who ask them questions, if [the questioners] are unknown to them." Under the Second Empire we hear the same song in Lot ("jaloux des étrangers"), and we are told things were even worse across the Lot River, in Aveyron. In 1877 at Plélan (Ille-et-Vilaine) the people were "ignorant and suspicious." And on the eve of war, still, the Périgourdin appeared "suspicious and close with strangers." 

"11 

But the clue comes very early, if one is willing to pick it up: the peasants of the Puy-de-Dôme, said an officer in 1827, were unwilling to furnish information for fear it would be used against them.12 In Aveyron the natives either refused to provide any information at all or gave misleading answers because they inevitably took a questing stranger for a fiscal agent or some other gov. ernment representative.\* Their suspicion was such, complained an 1836 report 

Similarly, in a notorious court case in Ardèche in 1842 all witnesses swore, despite convincing evidence to the contrary, that they had seen nothing. Their testimony gave rise to the saying "Sous dé Lonas, ei rèn vis" (I'm from Lonas, and I've seen naught), later applied also to the village of Lussas, whose inhabitants reenacted the comedy some years later (Pierre Charrié, Folklore du Bas-Vivarais, p. 248). 

Alone with One's Fellows 

[[45]]

on Lozère and Aveyron, that often you could not even get anything at an inn. In 1840 an officer described the inhabitants of the area around Clamecy as stupid, for they could never give him a straight answer when he asked where the roads led. In the Mézenc area near Saint-Agrève any stranger in city clothes could only be there to serve a writ or collect taxes. "The peasant is extremely suspicious, a stranger can expect no help from him even for money, and the most insignificant questions seldom receive an answer." The writer of this particular report was taken for a sorcerer when he drew a plan of Castelnau in Lot-et-Garonne, was arrested by a group of armed men, and was released only after a deal of tribulations. Did the hostile yokels really take him for a sorcerer? Half a century later an artist sketching near Sarlat would be asked by an anxious peasant why he should take an interest in his house: "Is it for the Revenue you are working?”13 

In Brittany the natives, as they were still described until the Third Republic, appeared amenable enough but unforthcoming. "They do not speak French, and do not want to speak French, and you cannot get any information out of them," reported one officer from Morbihan in 1873. Even in the Dinan countryside of Côtes-du-Nord, where only French was spoken, the natives "greet strangers with suspicion and nearly always refuse to give them whatever information they may need" (1877). As late as the 1890's an English traveler in the Tarn valley was repeatedly taken for some sort of spy and asked for his papers. He found people between Albi and Saint-Affrique and especially between Arthès and Millau exceedingly rude, treating all strangers with suspicion. Suspicious and closed with strangers, open and frank only with his peers, was the way a local scholar described his fellow Périgourdins, yet "only speak his language and acquaintance is made." But this was easier said than done. No wonder, since the difficulties of communication were so great, that all strangers French or English remained "foreigners." 

[[14]]

"The least of our villages," wrote a local historian of the Var, "considers itself a pays in its language, legends, customs, ways. "15 The awkward and untranslatable term pays has the fundamental significance of "native land" and applies more properly to local than to national territory. It is in this sense that most Frenchmen use it, applying it to greater or to smaller regions, sometimes a province, sometimes a limited valley or plain, as well as to fellow countrymen sharing this limited fatherland. The pays may be an administrative division (but infrequently); an entire region (Périgord, Marche, or Quercy); or simply (and most often) a parish or village. Ramuz explains that the canton of Vaud is also and foremost pays de Vaud, however small, because it is a whole unto itself and if need be self-sufficient. Above all, the pays is an entity whose members have something in common-experience, language, a way of life-that makes them different from others. That may be why journeymenguilds used the term for all fellows of their societies. The notion of common belonging and fraternity, which makes the offspring of the same pays call 

[[46]]

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

each other pays as well, was transferred from the local to the professional group, so that members of the same guild were also pays within a restricted entity. The sense was clear. That was why, too, most Frenchmen for a long time did not think to describe France as their pays-until what they were taught came to coincide with experience.18 

For a long time, that experience verified differences rather than similarities. "Each land its war; each pays its aspect; each village its tongue; each place its speech; each house its ways," runs a southwestern song." "Change village, change language," says a Limousin proverb.18 Two regions like Languedoc (Haute-Garonne, Ariège, Tarn, Tarn-et-Garonne) and Gascony (Gers, Lotet-Garonne, Gironde) were distinguished by rare human and commercial interchanges; by linguistic differences that made Gascon and Languedocean mutually unintelligible; by separate political tendencies, agricultural implements, even breeds of cattle. Gascony looked to Bordeaux, Languedoc to Toulouse. Distance made little difference. Auch is 77 kilometers from Toulouse, 186 from Bordeaux, but of 11 post roads radiating from Toulouse in the 1840's only one went to Gers and, even today, only one railway line runs west out of Toulouse. In Brittany the names of Léon, Cornouaille, and Trégorrois were as familiar as the departments incorporating them, and differed far more from each other than Côtes-du-Nord did from Finistère. Real hostility existed between Lower and Upper Brittany, a division based on the Celtic speech of the west and the French dialect of the east. Bretons and Gallos disliked and despised each other, insulted each other and each other's womenfolk, and stood together only in their hearty dislike of the French-notably the Normans, who returned the aversion with interest. In 1873 Breton pilgrims to Mont Saint-Michel were threatened and insulted by Normans, and fighting was only narrowly averted.19 

At Chitry (Nièvre) in 1902 Jules Renard was struck by the dislike for strangers, the reluctance to accept them, the ease with which they could be "excluded." There were people, he noted, "who pale at the idea of sleeping in the cemetery beside someone from outside the pays." Most villages had regionally valid nicknames. Most villagers had them too. But whereas those of the villagers focused on particularities inside the community, reflecting a familiarity with the background and actions they described, the nicknames given to resident strangers 

focused on the place of origin (e.g., Le Savoyard) and were usually in French, like the names of the new settlers themselves, whatever the local forms might be. A subtle but natural way of stressing strangeness. 

And it is true that pays can differ measurably from each other, sometimes over small distances (as mountain valleys very often do), in the quality of their water, the taste of their nuts, or the fineness of their sheep's-wool, as in the Campan valley of Bigorre. "When one passes from Maine-et-Loire into Loire-Inférieure," wrote a school inspector in 1880, "one finds everything changed, from the looks of the land to those of the people. Dwellings lack 

Alone with One's Fellows 

[[47]]

the air of comfort and ease they have in Anjou; the country people dress differently and with less care, look dirtier; the general impression is altogether 

poorer. 

"21 Differences such as these, or some of them, were the reflection of circumstances and changed with circumstances. The good lands of Loire-Inférieure would be developed as soon as road and rail made their exploitation profitable. The savage backwardness of inland Brittany would give way before fertilizers and prosperity. The prevalent beggary at Nîmes was considered a natural consequence of the city's southern clime, until Gard prohibited begging and eliminated it, just as Rhône had in Lyon. Elsewhere, we observe that the miners of Saint-Etienne were notoriously ill-kempt and lived in ill-kept homes, while those at Rive-de-Gier, not far away, were conspicuously clean and lived in neat, clean houses; in Saint-Etienne we hear the women worked, at Rive-de-Gier (in 1860) "never"-presumably because opportunities for employment were lacking.22 

More fundamental differences could pass away as well, like the kind of natural division the olive (or rather the range of its growth) had set between Upper and Lower Provence. Similarly, the chestnut, a vital element in the diet and life of some regions, had given those places a peculiar vocabulary, awareness, and taste that set them apart from others, until the chestnut's hold decayed. Other differences were written in physical conditions: the ravines and gorges that ripped through Auvergne and Velay, cutting up the soil, dispersing the hamlets and cottages, and making for an especially strong individualism or localism. But village particularisms seem to go beyond that sort of thing, ruling even where (outside the parish) one could look for a spouse. At Chanzeaux in Anjou, Laurence Wylie tells us, people traditionally married to the west: always into the Mauges, never in Saumurois. When you go to the veillée, advised the local wisdom in the Doubs, do not go farther than the barrier of Cerneux-Monnot—that is, where the clear air of the mountain country gives way to the lowland atmosphere. In the Ardèche-Vivarais the mountain people (Padgels) mixed with the people on the lower slopes (Royols), but never intermarried: "Fillo que mounto et vatcho que descen, touto lo vido s'en repen," says the proverb. Further to the north, on the other hand: "Femmes du Puy, hommes de Lyon, Ont toujours fait bonne maison."23 

But regional orientations were remote abstractions compared with the traditional relations between neighboring parishes. "Every valley," wrote an economist in 1837 about the central Pyrenees, "is still a little world that differs from the neighboring world as Mercury does from Uranus. Every village is a clan, a sort of state with its own patriotism." Villages hated each other from time immemorial, and all hated the gentlemen of the bourgeoisie-by definition strangers and outsiders.+++(4)+++ We have already encountered the suspicion and "repulsion" evoked by "city dogs," not least the artisans and traders of the bourg. Rare trips to town showed city folk to be contemptuous and rude.2\* So one replied in kind. The Basques despised all outsiders. In the masque- 

[[48]]

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

rades regularly put on in Basque villages, the peasant actors divided into two troupes, Reds and Blacks, differentiated by their roles and by the nature of their costumes. The Reds, who represented the natives, good and noble, wore rich local garb. The Blacks, rascals and ragamuffins, represented a variety of foreign charlatans-bohemians, tinkers, knife-grinders, doctors, apothecaries, often a stray Parisian notaire or two. The Blacks were identified by the strange clothes they wore (hats or caps instead of the native beret, shoes or boots instead of espadrilles), and spoke gibberish meant to represent Béarnais, French, or the Auvergnat dialect. Always ridiculous, they could appear dangerous as well.25 

It is not surprising the peasant looked askance on strangers, often welcomed with pitchforks as in the Couserans, when all he saw seemed either despicable (because poor and rootless) or dishonest, or like as not both. Strangeness, in any case, was disconcerting-as in the English word strange, which carries both meanings in one. Breton slang expressed the same feeling when the word fuistic, meaning alien, came to be used in the sense of funny and odd, because strangers of course are strange. Spasmodic acquaintance only increased contempt. The vocabulary of nineteenth-century Mâconnais shows an incredible variety of such nomadic strangers, most of them pejoratively described: romanichels, bohémiens, sarrasins, égyptiens (whence Mâcon's rue d'Egypte), polacres, bougres, broutchoux (traveling hemp-carders), and not least magniens, a patois term for snail, applied both to tinkers and to the mountain men of Auvergne and Bugey, who came down every winter to seek a living in fatter Burgundy. In 1876 the building of a road and bridge over the Cher, in Henri Norre's lonely Allier village, brought in many "foreign workers... nomads”—masons, stonecutters, laborers. Though the young Norre worked with them through the winter, he found them repugnant (vicious, debauched), and they in turn, eating and drinking in their own canteens, had little intercourse with the local people.26 Was it fear of vagrants or simply of foreigners that made so many set their dogs on wandering working men? One world could only with the greatest difficulty trust members of another.\* 

At the end of the nineteenth century, Father Gorse still saw each Corrèze hamlet as a small republic with its own peculiar usages. Half a century later we find the folklorist Arnold Van Gennep describing the villages of the past in close to the same terms: "Each a little citadel, morally and psychically independent." These citadels, these republics, had fought in the past over lands or privileges or pasture rights. The memory of ancient feuds lived on in traditional enmities or alliances whose sources had long since been forgotten. Thus in 1819 a tiny village in the Couserans reacted violently to a projected 

\* Emile Guillaumin, Paysans par eux-mêmes, p. 32, quotes a farmworker writing in September 1909 about the plain of Limagne where "les gens sont à demi-sauvages. Si un ouvrier se risque aux abords d'une ferme, on lâche le chien et l'on crie de loin qu'il n'y a rien à faire. 'Quonet con donc qu'l'étrangé que s'prommeno para tché?" " 

Alone with One's Fellows 

[[49]]

administrative reform: "If our parish is joined to that of Salsein, we risk being murdered, beaten, and maltreated by those of Salsein, and especially during the night."28 Isolation encouraged persistent mutual distrust. In turn, stereotypes arising out of this distrust (concerning one's own village and its neighbors) reinforced isolation, endogamy or selective exogamy, and existing orientations, that is, the rivalries and the psychic distance between one village and another. Norre recalled that in the Allier of his youth, the patron saint's day apart, "we had nothing to do with people from neighboring communes." In Sologne the people of La Marolle were known as Les Etrangers, because a man from a neighboring parish once said to his wife, "Tu m'ennuies, je m'en vont à l'étranger," and had promptly taken himself off to La Marolle; and the people of Cerdon were known as Les Retourneux, because they turned back all strangers from their village that they might return whence they had come. All this helps to explain the distrust and caution with which peasants treated not only the unfamiliar, but everyone who was not part of their community.29 

Anyone who came from beyond the familiar radius of ten or fifteen miles, said Guillaumin of the peasant as late as the 1930's, was still a "foreigner." It is a natural prejudice that proverbs reinforced: "Lying is easy when you are from far away." But they taught also that it was not safe to go too far from home: "Women and chickens get lost when they go too far." "In strange lands small cows can eat large beeves." It was unsafe above all to marry away from home. A Franc-Comtois asked his village priest to help him decide between two girls, one from his town, the other from another pays. "Ah," said the priest, "dung here, dung there, take it in your pays, you'll save on transport."+++(4)+++ More to the point, perhaps, as the Basque proverb has it, "Who goes far to marry is either fooling or fooled."+++(4)+++ The youth who married in a neighboring village married an étrangère he could not really know. So, it is said in Tarn-et-Garonne, "Prends la fille de ton voisin, Que tu vois passer chaque matin.”3° 

"Mistrust," wrote a priest at the close of the century, "is the outstanding trait of the peasants' character. The peasant does not trust anyone, not even himself." This was both true and false. It was true that rural defenses remained high and the rural mentality a distinctly separate one. But the observation reflects, too, a natural vexation at being unable to penetrate the closed world of the village society, and the kind of judgment this inevitably evoked from those condemned to watch it from the outside. 