+++
title = "09 GIVE US THIS DAY"

+++
Ce n'est pas le malheur, c'est le bonheur qui est contre nature. La condition naturelle d'un homme comme d'un animal c'est d'être assommé ou de mourir de faim. 

HIPPOLYTE TAINE 

"AS FA! mandja ta ma, garda l'aoutro per dema!" Many's the snuffling child or the pinched adult who must have heard it: "You are hungry! Eat your hand, keep the other for tomorrow!" We have already seen how hunger had its place at the peasant's board well into the nineteenth century. To pass from 

hunger to subsistence and from subsistence to a degree of sufficiency is to make the transition from the ancient to the modern world. In rural France real hunger only disappeared, or minds only adjusted to its disappearance, as the twentieth century was dawning. 

But perhaps not all minds even then, for to this day there are those in Franche-Comté who remember the older generation as being very stingy about food and as giving children as little as possible to eat. That was how they had been brought up in the last third of the nineteenth century, in a world that still recalled and feared famine. From the Pyrenees to the Vosges, old peoples' memories, sole archives of the poor, told of the calamities of the living past: the requisitions of year II of the Revolution, the dearth of 1816, the hunger of the 1840's, the years of hail and of grain rotten before it was ripe, the difficult days of spring when reserves ran out, the shortages when bread was made of barley or beans, and those when there was no bread.\* The call for one's daily bread remained an anxious prayer. 

The proverbs remembered the lean years, continually reminding countrymen, if they should need reminding, of the belly's need to be filled with anything as long as it was filled, or even half filled. Language remembered them, too, rich with locutions that meant cutting things fine, eating just enough to stay alive, giving a tailor barely the necessary cloth; and with 

\* The disettes of 1817, 1818, and 1848 and the terrible bread of the times were still discussed at Cheylade in Cantal in the 1880's (Pierre Besson, Un Pâtre du Cantal, pp. 67-69). Memories died even harder at Clessé in Mâconnais, where the famine of 1817, year of the great hailstorm when nutshells had been ground up in an attempt to make bread, was still vivid in people's minds in 1890 (Emile Violet, Clessé, pp. 114ff). 

Give Us This Day 

[[131]]

ritual phrases exhorting to economy: you've got to live hard, you've got to stretch things out, you mustn't eat everything at once. "A grasse cuisine, pauvreté voisine" and "Morceau avalé n'a plus de goût." Conclusion: better save it!2 

It was easy to remember all this for, to mid-century, everyday life carried everyday reminders of past scarcity in present need. Conditions under Louis Philippe were not terribly different from those under his older cousins. Salt, for instance, staff of the staff of life, remained scarce and dear, and was treated like something precious long after the Revolution abolished the gabelles. It was stored in special boxes or in the seat of chairs carefully kept near the fire, and was sometimes replaced by a variety of wild sorrel known as salt grass. When Lamartine abolished the salt tax in 1848 and sorrel was no longer needed as a fallback, peasants-at least in Lamartine's own Mâconnais-called it Monsieur de Lamartine's grass. Projected new taxes on salt, when they were mooted, continued to stir the strongest resentment. For a good reason, too, as we can learn from the sub-prefect of Saint-Girons in 1862, who observed: "In the countryside, where the political news never penetrates, people paid heed to [the proposed tax] immediately. It is the only expense for peasants of 

this district.' 

[[13]]

Money was scarce, we know; and money was paid out grudgingly for sustenance-for the nécessaire, as it was sometimes and revealingly called, should not exceed what was absolutely needed. And this was meager. In 1881 the Directeur des contributions directes in Haute-Loire wrote a report that echoed almost exactly the report filed by a predecessor 30 years earlier, which had estimated that 17 of 20 inhabitants were indigent or close to destitution: "The stranger could not imagine their manner of life, their black bread, their extreme deprivation of wine and meat, even pigs' meat,... their tendency to stint themselves of everything and utterly neglect their own well-being, their every moment's concern to save centime by centime. It is only in behaving thus and living close to misery each day that they can manage to escape it."\* Most people skirting misery daily sought to get by, or had to get by, with the bare minimum. This was sometimes bread or pancakes, always la soupe. The soupe, which could be gruel, porridge, any kind of hodge-podge boiled with water, or just water with salt or fat added, was the core and base of the peasant's diet. "Soupe makes the man, woman makes the soupe," declared the proverb; and making soupe was the woman's first task. To cook a meal was "faire la soupe"; "venir souper" was to come and eat; souper, of course, means the evening meal. Indeed, satiety was measured by it: "J'en ai soupé" means I've had enough. And it was sometimes even used for comparisons, as in Franche-Comté, where if you could not make anything good of something or someone, you said one could not make a good soupe of it or him. So soupe was basic, and a basic food was often the only dish: pottage of corn, millet, buckwheat, chestnuts, cabbage, turnips, or potatoes, with bread made 

[[132]]

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

of barley or rye, and water or milk for drinking. For a holiday, wine, cider, or meat was served if possible." 

In Côtes-du-Nord the peasant of means ate lard once a week and bread once a day. In Forez, where he grew up, Benoît Malon remembered that they ate rye bread soaked in salt water with a thimbleful of butter in it, morning, noon and night, with a piece of dry bread after and, on feast days, an apple or a piece of cheese. At about mid-century the peasants of Hautes-Alpes were said to be very happy just to have bread, "even hard and black, even a year old and all of rye." In Tarn, noted a traveler's guide of 1852, the poorer peasants greased their vegetable diet with a little lard in a small bag, which they plunged briefly in the cooking pot and used over and over for as long as it would last." The potato, of course, was a crucial staple; a crop failure could condemn half the population to underfeeding or worse. As the Vivarais proverb had it, when there were potatoes, the rabble could get by: "Quant de tartoflas i a, Canalha s'en sauvara." Or as in the Berrichon song: 

A Givardon, dans un'maison 

Y s'nourront mal com'des cochons Durant l'année entière, 

Eh ben! 

Y s'bourront d'pom's de terre 

Et vous m'entendez ben! 

Le p'tit qu'est dans son lit 

Qui baill', qui cri', qui fait la vie, Sa mère y dit: Veux-tu t'taire, 

Eh ben! 

En l'bourrant d'pom's de terre. 

Deux amoureux dans l'coin du feu Deux amoureux dans l'coin du feu Y'parlont d'ieux affaires, 

Eh ben! 

En s'bourrant d'pom's de terre.... 

In the Morvan, it was potatoes, beans, groats, chestnuts where they were available, and beastly bread. In Velay potatoes were the common fare, and bread a luxury not eaten every day. So it goes on. Guy Thuillier quotes a report of 1844 concerning the peasants of Nièvre, who "in winter, having repaired their gear, will take to bed and spend their days in it, pressed against each other to keep warmer and to eat less. They weaken themselves deliberately...so as to refuse their body nourishment it doesn't seem to deserve since it remains inactive." 

Army reports show that such conditions still prevailed some 20 years later. 

Give Us This Day 

[[133]]

"Great frugality": potatoes, garlic, corncakes, seldom bread, meat on rare occasion for the better-off (Haute-Garonne, 1862). Rye bread, potatoes, milk and cheese, soup with some fat, on Sundays lard (Allier, 1864). They have barely begun to eat meat (Cher, 1862). Like an earlier report on Lot, which had attributed the natives' irritability to their diet, several saw undernourishment as the cause of apathy and sloth. One officer observed, economically: "They have many children, but they raise few." Alain Plessis, who finds that the daily caloric intake improved during the Second Empire-rising from 2,480 per capita to 2,875-remarks that from this point of view and by today's criteria, the France of the late 1860's was just about to leave underdevelopment behind.\* But only just about. And it is interesting to note that human and animal foods (potatoes, chestnuts, buckwheat) remained interchangeable for quite a while, so that when food was scarce, animals simply got less of it. A spare vegetable diet facilitated transfers between beasts and men. 

The increasingly numerous references to improved conditions as the century passed attest that real progress had indeed been made. At the same time they bear equal witness to the low standards of evaluation and to how far things still were from modern expectations. Consider, for example, the improving situation in the Limousin, where the changes in the early 1870's were said to have brought "affluence and well-being"-to the point where in 1874 the production of lands improved by fertilizers "more than suffices for the needs of the inhabitants who, during most of the year, subsist almost exclusively on chestnuts and potatoes." A few years later, a traveler in Valgorge, in southwest Ardèche, noted the frugal regime-soup made of chestnuts including spoiled and moldy ones, rye bread made of unsifted flour, and whatever pittance could be dredged up to go with these, possibly potatoes, curds, or whey, or milk or, mostly, water. In the Mâconnais of the 1890's the standard diet still consisted primarily of bread rubbed with garlic, potato pancakes (to save wheat), and buckwheat wafers (black and sticky).1 

[[10]]

Yet things were certainly getting better. At Chermisey in the Vosges, where the old proverb said that you could starve even at harvest time, the farmer's weekday diet had changed very little by 1889, but Sunday would see a bit of beef simmering in the stew, and sometimes he might even manage a cup of coffee. "More perhaps than Henry IV had dreamed of," says the instituteur.1 What we hear of now is lack of variety-little or no meat, a poor selection of fruit and fresh vegetables-and boring repetition. Hunger has passed, the 

[[11]]

Plessis is cited for the point he makes rather than for his figures. The 2,480 calories per day he mentions is not a bad average. In 1965, the 90 underdeveloped nations of the world had a woefully "low nutritional level" of 2,150 calories per capita per day (René Dumont, Nous allons à la famine, Paris, 1966, p. 72). But national averages provide no more than a general indication that further stresses the disparities between urban and rural consumption, the latter of a far lower order. As Bartolomé Bennassar and Joseph Goy conclude: "La campagne nourrit mal" ("Contributions à l'histoire de la consommation alimentaire," p. 417).134 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

cereal-and-vegetable diet marches on.\* At an inn near Béage (Ardèche) in 1904 Ardouin-Dumazet watched as the innkeeper's family took their evening meal. "The children sit near the fireplace, where the potatoes are boiling; the potatoes are poured into a basket to drain them, then put on the table. The father crushes them with his fist, grinds up some salt with a bottle, and everyone selects a piece and salts it from the table. A jug of milk for each, and dinner is over."12 In 1908 day laborers in Cornouaille (who still lived “in indescribable misery") had lard only at feasts and lived off milk products, porridge, and potatoes. That same year Jules Renard described the standard peasant diet in Nièvre: bread, soup (water, salt, lard), salad, onions, radishes. Butter was too expensive; eggs could be sold, so they were not eaten; so could everything else one might be tempted to cook for a feast.18 

The last point is important, because many have wondered about such penury in the midst of plenty. The peasants seemed to live surrounded by provender. Why should they lack, when so much lay at hand? The fact is that they sold it. Frogs, snails, mushrooms, plentiful in some regions, supplemented the peasants' diet, but were more often gathered for the market.† Still, the countryside loomed rich with edible herbs and leaves: there were larch shoots to chew, and leaves like young holly to brew, plus hawthorn, the "bread and cheese" of the English Lake District. Bilberries and huckleberries were found in Ardèche: shepherds ate them for lack of better fare; mountain villagers made jam of them (good against diarrhea), and even tried to make huckleberry wine. In Basses-Alpes after mid-century beechnuts once grilled and used as coffee were mostly prized for oil, and briar no longer provided a flour substitute. But the kernels of fir-cones (pignons), the wild fruit of mountain ash or cornel tree still supplemented diet. And when the Phylloxera struck a generation later, a good few winegrowers who, in Saintonge at least, had made piquette, not wine, their staple, learned to make do with distilled essence of hawthorn berries, laurel, rosemary, or even beets.14 None of this went very far, or so we assume, for it is not part of the record. But the record we do have suggests a depressing tale. 

The peasant, judged Father Gorse, saved for himself the very scum of his products. The finest potatoes or chestnuts were set aside for sale, the pig he slaughtered for his table was always the most miserable specimen, the butter his wife churned was hardly touched, eggs were for the market, as were the hens and any fish he caught.15 Even wealthier peasants, a Tarn doctor tells us, sold their birds, rabbits, and eggs in the market and ate like the share- 

In 1900 Charles Beauquier found Easter to be the only day of the year when every peasant table in Franche-Comté saw butcher's meat and a sweet: "A Pâques courte messe et long dîner!" (Traditions populaires, p. 54.) 

+ Moreover, diet often depended less on the possibilities than on local custom. The Nièvre peasants, for example, virtually ignored such foods as honey and mushrooms until mid-century. (See Thuillier in J. J. Hémardinquer, Pour une histoire de l'alimentation, pp. 158-59, 162.) 

Give Us This Day 

[[135]]

cropper and the laborer-with a fuller plate perhaps, but that is all.\* “The fatter the kitchen, the thinner the last will." Fish and game were “rare and costly" when the century opened and, though less rare as it advanced, they could still bring a reward. Hence the Morvandiau, whose rivers were full of trout and crayfish, seldom ate his catch. What he did not sell, he used as presents for the upper classes. By Paul Sébillot's account, even the Bretons along the coast ate only the cheapest shellfish and the abundant crabs, selling all the oysters and lobsters that they could. In the Aube of the 1880's, where the vegetable diet seldom varied, the peasants not only sold every bird or fish they bagged, but also sold some of the meat whenever they butchered a pig. What fish they knew was salted or pickled herring, “and many died without ever having tasted a sardine." Only what could not be disposed of or the bare minimum of luxury the peasant permitted himself went into the soupe." 

Bread, on the other hand, was jealously guarded-where it was eaten, that is. The prefect of Ariège, for instance, advised the Minister of the Interior that bread crises did not matter in his area because the people never ate the stuff. Whether for lack of means or for reasons of taste, the Pyrenean peasant to the end of the nineteenth century ate corn and oats as gruel rather than bread. In the Couserans a man who rose above his station was said to have moved from porridge to bread; and bread, at the end of the century still kept in a locked cupboard, was reserved for feasts. Yet in most places bread was the end of labor and the very core of the household. A child who wasted something was admonished: “One can see you don't know how the bread comes.” And a young couple setting up their household "se mettent à leur pain." Unfortunately, as the proverb had it, when you were young you had teeth but no bread, when you were old you had bread but no teeth. You might lack bread in old age as well; but certainly teeth were crucial if you did have it.1 

For the most part and for a long time, the peasants' bread was miserable stuff, though not so bad as the loaves of oats and barley that Vauban described, from which the bran had not been removed and which could be lifted up by the straws still sticking out of them. Most bread was homemade, and baking was not always a success; indeed the saying went that a good batch baked was 

\* Maurice Bastié, Description... du Tarn, 2: 159-60. At mid-century, we hear that in Nièvre better-off peasants lived no differently than their poorest fellows (Adolphe de Bourgoing, "Mémoire en faveur des travailleurs," pp. 398, 401, 402). This is confirmed for a much later period by certain stories by Emile Guillaumin, notably "Le Beurre," in Dialogues bourbonnais (Moulins, 1899). Another Guillaumin story features a family dispute between the mother, who is determined to sell all she can in order to get "un p'tit d'argent," and her daughter and daughter-in-law, who complain that they raise everything and never enjoy it ("Au pays des ch'tits gas," in Frantz Brunet, Dictionnaire du parler bourbonnais, p. 56). Such sales provided cash for taxes, rents, and what had to be bought in the boutiqua: salt, pepper, matches, a bonnet, a small shawl, maybe a calico dress. It has been argued that poaching and fishing were a real resource for the peasants, but even there most evidence suggests that the bulk of their haul was eaten by the middle classes. 

[[136]]

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

cent sous gained. But a "good batch" usually meant bread that was badly leavened, badly kneaded, sour, and prone to mold. Local lore suggested consolation: moldy bread brought luck. "Whoever eats moldy bread finds pennies," they said at Sablières (Ardèche). And at Loubaresse, nearby, it was held that if your bread turned moldy you could expect to become rich within the year. The countryside would have been an opulent place had this proved true. When in 1892 Margaret Betham-Edwards visited a prosperous farmer in the Pyrenees, she tasted "the bread made of wheaten and maize flour mixed, a heavy, clammy compound," and diplomatically commented: "It is said to be very wholesome and nutritious."18 

Bread was baked in large batches to save on fuel: every two or three weeks where fuel was accessible; otherwise every six or twelve months. In the Romanche valley, between Grenoble and Briançon, Adolphe Blanqui found villages so short of fuel that they used dried cow dung to bake their bread and prepared the loaves only once a year. He himself saw in September a loaf he had helped begin in January. That sort of bread had to be cut with an axe, a hatchet, or an old sword, and you could not count yourself a man until you had the strength to cut your own bread when it was stale and hard. Sometimes, as in Saint-Véran (Hautes-Alpes) in 1854, once-yearly baking declined with the opening of a road or highway to the outside, and one shouldn't wonder. But fuel continued to be a major concern there and in other places-Maurienne, Oisans, Larzac, the coast of Brittany-and in these places children long gathered cow pies (bois de vache, bois court) that could be dried and saved for their mothers' infrequent bakings. At the end of the century Alfred de Foville found bread still being baked annually in Hautes-Alpes: stored in a dry place it could last for two or even three years. In any case, where timber stood some way away, the problem went beyond lack of fuel to the time it took to gather the cartloads of gorse or broom that went to feed the ovens— at least a whole day lost for other kinds of labor. So, where home-baking persisted, as in the Limousin through the First World War, bread was still made only every three or four weeks, to be mostly eaten past its prime and often riddled with rat holes. But then, as the proverb says, “A la faim, tout bon pain": to hunger all bread tastes good!19 

Even so, or perhaps precisely because of such circumstances, the black and indigestible bread, base of the daily diet, was an object of veneration, never cut into until the sign of the cross was carved on it with a knife; and the sharing of bread was the very essence of companionship. Up in the Cantal mountains, Pierre Besson remembered "a cult for it...no wastage... eating crusts." One man went to Murat every 15 days, brought back two sacks of round loaves baked in town, and resold them only for the sick. On meeting a neighbor on the road carrying a loaf, one asked him who was ill at home. Baker's bread was rare and delicate, a gift, a symbol of riches, as in the quignon du jour de l'an, the traditional New Year's gift that godparents at Lantenne 

Give Us This Day 

[[137]]

(Doubs) presented to their godchildren: "a nice, round loaf with a slit in it and a few sous inside."20 

Intriguingly, despite the great prestige of white and baker's bread, acquired tastes kept the old coarse black loaf in fashion. The poor had eaten gruel and rye for centuries; a change even for the better took time to swallow.21 Buckwheat, too, had advantages: it cost little to cultivate, its flowers drew bees (at a time when honey made up for lack of sugar), and surpluses could be sold as poultry feed or to distilleries. In Brittany, 120 pounds of barley cost 11 to 12 francs, and 150 pounds of wheat just 14 francs. Yet peasants ate only barley bread, explaining that though white bread would be no more expensive, they would eat it with too much pleasure and hence consume too much. It was a temptation that the poor and even the more fortunate did not want to subject themselves to. "In a good house, hard bread and dry wood," said the southern proverb.22 

If such explanations (offered as well for the rejection of baker's bread) have the whiff of sour grapes, that does not detract from what they say about the mentality of those who advanced them. Scarcity furnished arguments that only plenty would contradict.\* And reality was overtaking sour grapes. In even the poorer mountain areas of the Vosges guests were being offered good black bread by 1869. In the Limousin there were mills to sift the peasants' flour by 1888, permitting them to eat their rye free of bran. In Beaujolais, where in 1860 the rye bread was reportedly so sodden it would stick to a wall if you threw it, peasants were eating white baker's bread by 1894. In Nivernais, Thuillier tells us, from about 1880 the family oven began to give way to the baker's, partly because so many women insisted on relief from the task on their return from a life in the towns as nurses or servants, partly because lads on military service had outgrown the taste of stale bread. White bread became so common in certain parts of Brittany between the 1890's and 1914 that rye came to be despised. We hear of a baker at Pontrieux (Côtes-du-Nord) telling a customer that he did not make dogs' bread.23 

\* Even then, foodstuffs that did not conform with local beliefs about what was acceptable were rejected for some time. In Saintonge until the Phylloxera revolutionized economic life, and mentalities with it, milk and dairy products were despised. There were few cows, and their milk went only to babies and the sick. Goats, the poor man's cows elsewhere, were suspect: their milk was said to make children willful and malicious. (See Raymond Doussinet, Les Travaux, p. 62.) In Gers milk was thrown away throughout the nineteenth century (but not apparently before the Revolution, when it was used to make cheese), and butter began to be used only after the First World War. (Henri Polge, personal communication; see also Zacharie Baqué, Le Département du Gers, vol. 2; Géographie humaine, Auch, 1933, part 2, p. 39; and Baqué, En Gascogne gersoise, Paris, 1950.) But white bread gained acceptance fairly quickly, even in the southwest, where the poor had eaten corn for two centuries. Corn was a labor-intensive crop, but the poor had plenty of hands to give it the care it needed. As peasants left the land, however, the acreage planted in corn shrank. The great estates, which had paid their work forces in corn, were being broken up, and wheat culture was no longer their peculiar privilege. There was less corn, more wheat, and the consumption of cornbread fell steeply in the 1880's; pellagra, once rampant throughout southwestern France, declined as well. (See Daniel Faucher, "De quelques incidences," 

[[138]]

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

Gradually, ovens grew cold in farmhouse and village. Bakers, once called on only by those without grain or an oven and a few local notables, increasingly acquired customers, who usually paid for their wares in kind.24 By the 1880's bakers could be found in most of the accessible parts of the countryside. More isolated regions-Franche-Comté, Dordogne, much of the Pyreneesfollowed the trend as the century turned. Buying from the baker was more convenient.\* By 1919 even the high mountains had been won over. At Bêne, near Tour-de-Carol, the ruins of an unfinished oven still stood a few years ago 

where the owner of Esteva's farm began to build one in that year and left it uncompleted: mute witness to one of the great revolutions of our century. By that time only 7 or 8 percent of the family budget went for bread, against nearly 40 percent in 1800 and 20 percent as late as 1850.2 

[[25]]

The chestnut, at one time a staple as important to Corsica and great parts of the center, south center, and west as bread was to other parts of France, had experienced an even more rapid decline. In such areas chestnuts were "winter bread," base of the winter diet. They had played an even more important role until some areas had inched their way above the hunger level. Between Châ- teaubriant and Laval and in the Cévennes around Vigan, bread had become a part of the regular diet during the July Monarchy, but before that army officers had warned that troops without supplies risked being reduced to a chestnut diet, like the natives'. In the late nineteenth century Corsica, Vivarais, Cantal, Périgord, and Comminges still depended on them.26 Backward isolation amounting to autonomy, great frugality bordering on want, here were the regions that were most resistant to assimilation and unification. 

Between 1875 and 1900 the great chestnut forests began to be eaten up. While the Phylloxera ravaged the vines, great stands of chestnuts through the center were felled by disease (the so-called maladie de l'encre). The search for tannin, 

p. 121; Roger Brunet, "Les Campagnes commingeoises," p. 216; and Archives Départementales, Gers M 2799, gendarmes Seissans, July 10, 1875; and on pellagra, Daphne A. Roc, A Plague of Corn, Ithaca, N.Y., 1973, chap. 6 and especially pp. 47-49.) 

\* Quantitatively, the change came fastest where, as in Bourbonnais, many landless laborers were unable to produce their own bread and had to get it from the baker. There is evidence in the Agricultural Survey of 1867 that bakers were spreading even by that date, notably a report that the regulation of commercial baking had become an issue in Lot because many families that used to bake their own bread now bought it (Archives Nationales, Fil2725, "Enquête agricole”). At Espère (Lot, pop. 400), still without a baker or an inn in 1881, two bread depots had been set up the year before at private farms where the products of the bakers of nearby Luzech were sold (Inspector Pujos, "Recueil des monographies"). In Brie bakers were still often paid in kind until the eve of the First World War, accepting 100 kg of flour for 100 kg of bread, or a 120-kg sack for 30-32 loaves weighing three kg each (Bulletin folklorique de l'Ile-de-France, 1942, p. 30). Interestingly enough, the use of tallies (two marked planks) continued with the sale of bakers' bread (reported in Morvan in the 1920's), indicating that illiteracy must have survived in some degree (Jean Drouillet, Folklore du Nivernais et du Morvan, 2: 85). Complaints about short weights were widespread and constant, to the point where the mayor of Limoges observed, in 1875: "In the country... a kilo means 750 grams" (Archives Départementales, Haute-Vienne M 1430, maire Limoges to préfet, July 5, 1875; see also Alain Corbin, "Limousins migrants," p. 69). 

Give Us This Day 

[[139]]

extracted from the bark, also ate up trees by the thousand tons. This sometimes had beneficial effects. The small tannin-processing plants that were set up in the heart of chestnut country (Ardèche, Dordogne) depended on the existence of railroads; and the railroads that permitted easier provisioning and opened possibilities of trade also made the chestnut less vital. In area after area the arbre à pain began to be gnawed away-in Savoy after 1888, in Ardèche after 1897, even in Périgord after 1900. French chestnut production fell from 757,000 metric tons in 1886 to 333,000 in 1901. 

[[27]]

The chestnut's diminished role in the peasants' diet marked a real improvement all around: easier access to provisions, more money with which to buy goods, entry into the market economy. So did the retreat of the walnut, a vital source of cooking and lighting oil until gas lamps and commercial salad oil came along. The demand for walnut wood for furniture and rifle stocks considerably thinned the walnut groves.\* 

For all this, eating well was something to be remarked and rememberedreward for special aid, as when men lent each other a hand with building a house in exchange for a feast ("C'est pas souvent que ça leur arrivait de bien manger!") or a fête de gueule to celebrate the prosperous end of a year's enterprise. A spread of this sort was among the very few available entertainments— a voluptuousness, as one peasant called it.28 

A good meal was an event, a rising up to another level, a gent's repast ("in boin repet de mossieu": Vosges). And a good meal everywhere meant meat and wine, delicacies whose appearance glorified an occasion and made a dinner fit for a king: "Lou qui a pan, car e bî, lou Rei pot beni." The plain-living Pyrenean mountaineer, who drank only water and seldom ate meat of any sort, saw wine and butcher's meat once a year, on his local saint's day. "Pa, bî e car," with two or three families getting together to share a calf, turned such festivities into "supreme moments." Memory enshrined them. In the Pyrenees a big bear hunted down made a village feast that would be long remembered. At Aulus-les-Bains (Ariège) an event of the sort in the 1820's was still discussed 60 years later: "Those who shared in it talk about it still in the veillées and cite it as a memorable occurrence of their youth." Memories were long even in 1907, as Jules Renard's old peasant couple demonstrated: "The Philippes can enjoy one scraggy rabbit a year; but once, in 1876, it happened that they ate so well they will never forget it." Speech confirmed the exceptional nature of such occasions: Sunday clothes became meat-eating garb 

\* Railways again! In Savoy when this happened around 1914 veillées organized for the shelling of walnuts also disappeared (see "Enquête sur ... l'agriculture," Savoie, Musée des Arts et Traditions Populaires archives). In Haute-Loire the stones of local peaches had provided a primitive lighting oil used only for dinner or work, and cooking oil had come from nuts. At the end of the century several years of hard frost in the spring forced families to resort to the grocer, but otherwise the peasants had little use for retail oil for some time thereafter (O. Costérisant, La Vie rurale). 

[[140]]

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

(les habits mangeant viande), and dressing up was to get dressed for meat or stew. Of course, quantity meant more than quality: "Tout fait ventre, pourvu que ça y entre." And the richer the better: "E pu gras meu vire" (the fatter it is, the better it goes down). In any case, a glutton's knife was sure to cut well, and so much the better: strong to eat, strong to work.29 

Meat, for most, meant pork. If bread stood for plenty, bacon or lard was a symbol of wealth. The hog was the real patron saint of the countryside-Sent Pourquî in Gascony-a miraculous animal, every bit of which was good for something ("Porc penut, arré de perdut"; pig slaughtered, nothing wasted) and which almost everybody could afford to raise ("B'ei praube lou qui nou s'en pot pela û!"; poor indeed who can't skin one!). And in fact in Périgord, whose forests provided ample forage, to kill meant to kill a pig; "we have killed on such and such a day" meant that a feast would follow. Even so, there were some who could not afford to indulge themselves.\* And for those who could, a single slaughtered pig a year, and never the fattest, would surely not go far. Most of the carcass was consumed after the slaughtering, in family or communal feasts. Bacon and lard had to be stretched a very long way indeed. One might treat oneself "sometimes" on Sundays to a little bacon and "savor it," like the peasants of Bort (Corrèze) "because they like it and they rarely eat it.” As a Flemish doctor remarked of the Flemish countryside in 1859, almost all differences in living standards can be summed up in one fundamental distinction: the habitual use of lard and the habitual lack of lard.30 

In Cornouaille, where by 1908 conditions had "much improved," the better off ate lard every day. Families in more backward communes, however, managed it only twice a week and then "only in good houses"—and of course "only a very small piece." As for day laborers, they saw lard only on feasts. Even in the rich Limagne country bacon was scarcely common fare. Not when a workman, boasting of having eaten a bit of lard at his employer's board, should feel impelled to flourish the rind so his listeners would believe him. As good a piece of evidence as any of the continuing rarity of meat is a tale from the 1880's in which four Breton lads from Langneux (Côtes-du-Nord) discuss what they would like to eat if they were King. "Beans and smoked lard, big as my big toe," says the first. "A sausage long as the way from Lamballe to Saint-Brieuc," declares the second. "The sea turned into suet and me in the middle with a wooden spoon," outbids the third. The fourth is speechless: "There is nothing left for me. You took all the good things."1 

The third lad's fantasy, of a sea of suet, reminds us that the really festive meat, the ne plus ultra of a peasant's table, was butcher's meat-preferably beef. So rare was commercial meat indeed that in Lower Brittany a special traditional song was called for when it was served.32 J. A. Barral, noting that 

\* Martin Nadaud lived in Paris a full year before he could get himself to try meat, which he had never had at home. In his first months there he had always traded his meat for cheese, despite his father's advice to eat meat when he could (Mémoires de Léonard, Bourganeuf, 1895, p. 53). 

Give Us This Day 

[[141]]

between 1860 and 1875 yearly meat consumption in the Limousin had risen about 20 pounds per person, hailed this considerable progress over the time not far back when even pork was a luxury served only at great feasts. But for all that, the retail sales of meat, our only indication of the consumption of meat above and beyond pork, were pitifully low, and the butcher was long merely a part-time operator primarily engaged in slaughtering for others. In Haute- Vienne hardly any butcher's meat was to be had in a small country town in 1861 and then only poor cuts at very high prices-obviously not destined for the general public. In the Vosges in 1869, we are told, only a very few wealthy farmers ate stew on Sundays. In Aunis around 1886 butchers customarily took ten pounds of meat to market and sometimes made no sale at all. Even in the prosperous region around Langres, in Haute-Marne, where by the 1880's the farmers of some means at least ate bacon every day, the butcher who passed through every Friday to supply the rectory and the chateau was seldom approached. Ordinary people patronized him only in case of illness or when expecting an important visitor, tried to hide the meat they bought "for fear of comments," and wondered at its excessive cost-en voilà pour 27 sous!- more than one franc.33 

That the gargantuan meal we tend to associate with the nineteenth century was poles removed from what most people really ate is obvious. Less obvious, perhaps, but more significant was the difference between contemporary urban ideas of a normal diet and what was normal in the countryside. A gulf always existed between the eating habits of country folk and those of cities and larger country towns. But it may be, as Thuillier has suggested, that the gulf grew wider as the century drew on.\* 

At Bitche (Moselle) an officer filed a report in 1842 stressing the radical differences in the diet there, with the rich eating a variety of meat, fresh or smoked game, and even fish, the moderately well off dining on soup and stew, lard, and vegetables, and the poor making do "almost exclusively" with potatoes and curdled milk. Bread too was different; white was for the rich, rye for the poor. But in Paris, we are told, no one, of whatever station, would accept anything but first-quality white bread. When, in 1869, the municipal authorities distributed brown flour to local relief committees for bread for the needy, the program had to be halted because the poor took the tickets to be used for the brown bread and, reaching into their own pockets to make up the difference, used them to buy white loaves. The brown bread was left 

Aspects de l'économie nivernaise, p. 62. Yet Pierre Besson was moved to remark that the servants of the 1930's ate much better than the wealthiest bourgeois of the 1880's (Un Pâtre du Cantal, p. 62). In that connection, we may note Elicio Colin's work in picking out the first mention of various foodstuffs in the notarial records of Finistère: sugar, 1833; beer, 1851; cognac, 1866; chicory and rice, 1876; rum, 1880; tapioca, 1886; vermouth, curaçao, and kirsch, 1889; sardines in oil, 1892; absinthe, 1901 ("L'Evolution de l'économie rurale"). Obviously, this does not indicate the first local appearance of these items. But, at the other end of the scale, what would be the time lag between the first mention of these products and their use in nonaffluent quarters? 

[[142]]

[[34]]

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

to molder. Plainly, wealth was only one factor in a more complex whole: sauce for the rural goose did not satisfy the urban gander. And meat consumption makes the point. 

Official statistics show that between 1840 and 1882 French meat consumption nearly doubled. But this was city food. The peasant who ate butcher's meat was a rare figure in the 1860's and 1870's, and the fortunate few were chiefly near the cities, especially Paris. Most of the time, we are told, it was the meat of sick, or worn, or useless animals that was sold to the village butchercabaretier for local use. In Paris, meanwhile, demand for meat among the poorer classes kept on growing. (It was met with horseflesh. The first slaughterhouses exclusively for horses appeared in Paris in 1866; within six years the capital boasted 150 such establishments.) By 1882 Parisians were averaging 79.31 kg of meat a year, and their brothers in other cities were not far behind at 60.39 kg. But the yearly per-capita consumption in the countryside was a paltry 21.89 kg.35 The cities in short were carnivorous enclaves in a herbivorous land.\* 

[[86]]

In fact urban workers ate better than country ones, that is, more, but retained rural standards and even mealtimes until toward the end of the century. This began to change sometime in the mid-1880's: less bread, more meat, more wine, at meals that increasingly followed the bourgeois pattern and even, at times, included dessert.† In the countryside, the change came much more slowly. Food shops opened in big country bourgs, especially after 1870. But in 1900 the peasant still ate just a quarter of the average meat ration of a city dweller, and only a fifth of what the Parisian consumed. Indeed, the great divide between vegetarian peasants and carnivorous townsmen survived to the Second World War.87 

Still, the improvements cannot be gainsaid. In 1913 Emmanuel Labat recalled an old sharecropper in the Landes whose one wish was to see and touch a pig before he died. Now, exulted Labat, "the times have been accomplished, the old dreams realized: of land and meat. One cannot imagine how heavily this last weighed on the peasant's soul." A Breton geographer put it differently: the agricultural revolution was, above all, a revolution in diet. The coming 

"L'alimentation carnée du prolétaire agricole est, en 1852, cinq fois moindre que celle d'un citadin et égale à la moitié de celle d'un Français moyen," remarks G. Désert ("Viande et poisson," Annales: E. S. C., 1975, p. 525). Discrepancies also show up at the regional level, with Brittany in 1885 eating half as much meat (10 kg per person) as the French rural average (Elie Gautier, Dure Existence, pp. 100-101). B. Bennassar shows that in Lower Normandy, where the meat consumption of country folk had risen from 9.7 kg per person per year in 1830 to 31 kg in 1892, local townsmen consumed nearly twice as much: 54 kg (Annales: E. S. C., 1975, pp. 417-23). 

+ Using hospital and asylum statistics and toll taxes, Alain Corbin has demonstrated that dietary standards did not change significantly until the 1880's. His findings can be stated briefly as follows: 1830's undernourished; 1860's, less undernourished, increased quantities but the diet unchanged; 1880's, minimal undernourishment and much greater variety ("régime alimentaire bouleversé"), including not only eggs, cheese, noodles, sugar, jam, and coffee, but sometimes even pepper and sardines. ("Limousins migrants," pp. 82-92.) 

Give Us This Day 

[[143]]

of white bread and meat, with the First World War, marked the "decisive break" with the past. Views like these, putting aside production figures for a look at ways of life, cut closer to the bone of history. 

3.8 

All evidence seems to agree on 1880-1900 as the period when once-hard-tofind novelties entered the countryside in some quantity, and many peasants became accustomed to buying them in shops: sugar, coffee, rape-seed or olive oil, macaroni, vermicelli. Café au lait replaced morning soup, and women welcomed "city ways" that meant less work.\* Sugar, extremely rare for a long time even on wealthy farms and only used as a remedy for sickness, became more common. In Loire the best-man had traditionally carried some sugar to sweeten the wine of the girl he escorted at a village wedding. The custom, known as sucrer sa cavalière, lapsed in the mid-1880's as the sugarbowl began to be an expected table item on great occasions. But courting lads continued to carry a piece of sugar in their pockets and "gallantly offered it" to their sweethearts.39 

Coffee, too, took its time to spread. In Corrèze coffee at weddings was still seemingly a novelty representing modern progress in the last years of the century, for the fact that it was served "almost everywhere when the wedding is of some importance" was considered worthy of remark. Around 1902 the new Breton craze for coffee, especially among women, gave rise to a repertory of satirical songs and sayings that lasted into the 1920's, when coffee-drinking presumably came to be a matter of course. In Vivarais, until the First World War, a visitor's ritual gift was a package of coffee, a kilo of sugar, or a loaf of white bread.† All these by then were in general use, but the persistent custom showed how recently they had still been a luxury-as in the case of the ninety-six-year-old man who was buried at Saint-Etienne-de-Lolm in the Gardon valley in 1903 and who to the very last had made his every meal solely of chestnuts. Yet again we note that this was now a matter to be mentioned in the newspapers. Even in the highlands of the Gard, Raymond Belbèze's coachman was remarking, by 1911: "Les gens se font gourmands; they have to have soup, stew, potatoes." The old marveled at the change they lived through, 

Pierre Barral, Le Département de l'Isère, p. 113. Gabriel Boscary has suggested that farmwives fell into the habit of drinking coffee when their men were called to army service and they no longer had to serve cabbage soup at seven in the morning (Evolution agricole, p. 226; see also Elie Reynier, Le Pays de Vivarais, 2: 128). Evidence of the new well-being shows up in family ledgers, as Patrice Higonnet has noted. In his Pont-de-Montvert (p. 98), he cites one entry from July 1911 listing the "unusual delicacies" a farmer purchased: "a box of sugar, one tomato, 2 lbs. macaroni, and one piece of chocolate." Another farmer, in June 1913, recorded the purchase of "a box of sugar and a piece of chocolate." For all that, coffee and sugar were still rare in the Cévennes until 1914, and we hear of an eighteen-year-old girl from Corrèze, hired as a maid by a Toulouse family in 1909, who saw canned foods and pâtes for the first time (André Meynier, A travers le Massif Central, p. 370). 

+ Local monographs have noted that by 1878 sugar could be found everywhere in the upper regions of Vivarais, that in 1903 at Sécheras (Ardèche) many families drank coffee, and that in 1907 at Saint-Jean-le-Centenier the women could not do without coffee (Pierre Bozon, Histoire, p. 278; H. Labourasse, Anciens us, p. 7).144 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

that in a Nièvre village, where there had been but one butcher, 1907 could see five: "People have become carnivorous!" As for Ragotte, when the butcher's wife gives her a piece of meat, she still does not know how to cook it.1o 

Doctor Labat noted the effect of the new, rich meat diet: a rising tide of arthritis, some cases of gout, the early onset of arteriosclerosis. "The social promotion of the Gascon peasant becomes complete as his pathology becomes bourgeois." Since undernourishment goes hand in hand with diminished fertility,11 one is tempted to speculate that better food also made contraception more necessary. More food and better food might call for imitating the bourgeois in this respect as well. Meanwhile traditional dishes, abandoned by the peasants when conditions permitted, became the pasture of urban gastronomes. The rural people looked on them as symbols of the bad old days-dirty, complicated, too demanding of work and time. 

One more symbol of change remains, and that is wine. A feast would be incomplete without it; and wine, like meat, was for the peasants one of the fruits of modernization, the gift of the Third Republic. When Adolphe Blanqui made his survey in 1850, three-fifths of the population were still strangers to wine consumption. Complaints of drunkenness abound, but that state was reached with brandy (eau de vie), not wine. Cheap, locally distilled alcohol was a product of the bad transport conditions and it fell out of favor as soon as communications improved. The other source of drunkenness was lack of familiarity with liquids drunk. The Bretons, for example, soon acquired a national reputation for sottishness. But sound observers attributed their proclivity to become tipsy less to the quantities they imbibed than to inexperience. The Breton peasants, Olivier Perrin noted in 1835, almost always drank water at home; even if they had cider, they kept it mostly for sale and drank it themselves only on very special occasions. Hence a pilgrimage or a trip to town inevitably led to trouble. Maxime du Camp confirmed this observation with his complaint that the drunks at a pilgrimage he attended were not even properly drunk. In effect the evidence suggests that into the 1860's most peasants drank little or no wine. In Nièvre they drank it maybe twice a year, at Carnival and at the end of the harvest. The same in the southwest, where in the 1850's wine was a luxury, rare and "highly valued by peasants as a dainty drink." According to the available resources, the peasants drank piquette, made by pouring water over the skins of grapes after their last pressing; cider, which was usually pretty bad, especially when it was prepared with the same presses that were used for oil; perry, made of pears; drinks fermented from wild cherries or berries; and rarely beer, more of a bourgeois drink.\*2 And of 

course water. 

Heavy habitual drinking was restricted to regions that lacked transport facilities, where casks were few and had to be emptied before they could be filled with a new year's crop. As we have seen, poor communications also 

Give Us This Day 

[[145]]

accounted in large part for the production of grape or apple brandies, but even then (as with the calvados of the pays d'Auge) the "firewater" was reserved for feasts—until the end of the century, at any rate. For the same reason, much of the wine produced in some regions, such as Argenteuil (Val d'Oise) was locally consumed—and was hardly anything to write home about. But it was not that so much as the cost that put people off. As the police superintendent of Bessines (Haute-Vienne) reported in 1861: "Few customers, because drinks are dear."43 

[[44]]

Moreover, the price was made all the dearer by the taxes imposed by the authorities, who took an exceedingly dim view of drinking, especially public drinking. The village public-house, a house like every other, distinguished only by a bunch of holly or juniper or a handful of straw (the bouchon that now signifies a tavern) had a bad press in official documents. Source of moral laxity, of political cabals, of plots and pranks against neighbors and public figures, the public-house of whatever name, tavern, pothouse, wine shop, was legislated, regulated, and policed (when there were police), yet could not be kept down. Sole consolation for routine misery, escape from impossible conditions in the home, chief village meeting-place (or tryst for different clans), nothing could take its place. From indirect evidence, however, it appears that the reporting officials were concerned chiefly about conditions in the small towns, and that, for most of the century in most places, the rural population had neither the time, nor the means, nor for that matter, the stomach, for frequent tippling. They drank on holidays. The fact that most drinking songs were in French and were learned on army service suggests that there was little popular drinking locally, and that a good part of the credit for the generalization of wine should go to the establishment of universal military service in 1889. That is not to deny some credit, of course, to the liberalization of the wine trade after 1880, gift of the Third Republic to its faithful supporters.15 

Just as facilities for public drinking increased, so did those for private consumption. By 1869 many could boast of a barrel of wine in their own cellar (un tonneau en cave) to tap routinely on feast days. Railroads brought wine to regions where the price had been prohibitive. By the 1890's on the plateaus of Aveyron, once-isolated peasants were drinking wine. In other poor regions, the Limousin and the Landes, haying and harvest time now brought wine with them, and getting drunk in company was not limited to great feast days. And the same railways that carried the wine to the outlands allowed the land to be used for what it could do best—that is, specialization-which meant an end to wine so bad that the peasant claimed it took three men to get it down: the one who drank, the one who held him, and the one who made him drink.\*? 

46 