+++
title = "10 FROM 'SUBSISTANCE' TO 'HABITAT'"

+++

Oh happy, if he knew his happy State! The Swain, who, free from Business and Debate; Receives his easy Food from Nature's Hand, And just Returns of cultivated Landl 

Unvex'd with Quarrel, undisturb'd with Noise, The Country King his peaceful Realm enjoys. 

-VIRGIL 

AT THE TIME of the French Revolution the great socioeconomic issue had been subsistance-how to feed the poor. By the r840's, however, the focus of interest had begun to shift to habitat, their miserable quarters. Physical misery still flourished on all fronts, but with the food problem near solution, priorities could be readjusted in terms of relative need. 

The national trend reflected mainly conditions in urban areas. But rural observers echoed it. Not food or lack of it, but bad living conditions accounted for the poor health of the countryside, insisted a student of rural hygiene in 1849. True, the food was very bad, but since it was equally bad in most places, the real fault lay with the unhealthy dwellings and disastrous habits of life.1 Even the addition of wine as a dietary staple would be welcomed, not only as a nutrient in a deficient diet, but as a replacement for the polluted water most people had to drink. 

The peasant got his water where he could. Water from springs, rills, rivulets, brooks, rivers, or streams was only as available as proximity made it. More often the peasant relied on a pond or well whose stagnant waters were used by the whole community for bathing, for laundry, and for steeping hemp, and where communal sewage generally oozed in when it did not flow. In 18S6 at Saint-Ours (Puy-de-Dome) 2,336 people had to draw all their water from IS wells "fed more by the seepage from kitchen waste and manure than from neighboring lands, which in any case are covered with stagnant pools full of stinking vegetable matter." An army report in 1860 remarked on the difference between those who lived along the banks of the Allier River and used its clean waters and those who lived on the plateau between the Loire and the Allier, with only stagnant water to drink, a difference that was reflected in the physique of the recruits and the number of men rejected as unfit from the two regions. Henri Baudrillart spotted a similar disparity in Vendee in the 1880'S, stressing the plight of the northern fenlands, where any kind of fresh water had to be fetched from three and even six kilometers away, and 

From'Subsistance' to ' Habitat' 147 

people consequently drank mostly muddy ditchwater. Sources befouled with worms and putrid matter, the absence of ducts and sewers, and the lack of clean water were a leitmotif of rural documentation-when observers thought to mention it, that is.2 

Another was bad air. Piles of manure stood guard outside the doorways. "Stagnant waters contaminate the air," complained a staff captain in the Limousin in 1874' Not really surprising to find ague so common an ill among country people, "all of whom breathe in foul surroundings, live on putrid exhalations, amid the heaps of dung surrounding their abode." Hamlets and villages were wrapped in suffocating stinks, their streets turned into cesspools by great rills of foul stuff fed by liquid manure from stables, in which one had to flounder and be mired. S 

One is tempted to relate the shortage of fresh water and the difficulty in obtaining it, so that in even the best of places fetching it was a laborious, time-consuming job, to the peasant's general unconcern with personal cleanliness. Certainly washing and cleanliness had no place in proverbs and folk sayings, except in negative forms like the saw advising that the broom and duster brought no gain: 

Lai r'messe et le torchon, ne raipotant ren ai lai mason! 

All they did was take up time. So did laundering; and the time had to be fit into a schedule of periods when doing the wash could bring the direst consequences-the Rogation Days, Holy Week, All Souls' Day, and Saint Sylvester's feastday (or rat's day, when the linen would be gnawed by rats). An enterprise calling for the most complex logistical preparations, laundering was not lightly undertaken, an occasion for women of the neighborhood to get together, to eat, drink (riquiqui, a mixture of brandy and sweet wine in Maconnais), and fritter away precious time in useless socializing. In Aunis a family's yearly laundry was done all at once; this could mean up to 60 sheets and 70 shirts to be soaked in lees and ashes and boiled, a job for seven or eight women. There were no handkerchiefs, of course. Table linen was practically nonexistent, and personal effects were severely limited: male undergarments, especially drawers, began to be worn around 1885, principally by young men back from military service; female undergarments came into use still later; nightwear was unknown, and sleepers slept in all or some of their day clothes. As for these last, often as not they were threadbare, ragged patchworks, their only airing coming in the wear. That was all right, and the conventional wisdom reinforced it: 

Dins las pilhas Soun las bellas filhas; Dins lous pilhous Qu'ei lous bous garsous. 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

Handsome lads and lasses are brought up in rags!4 All this made frugality easier, and the six or twelve months' pile of dirty linen not nearly so daunting as it would be today. By 1914 the family wash was undertaken perhaps two or four times a year in relatively advanced areas like Mayenne, still only once a year in Morbihan. Either way, washdays were few and far between, helping to explain the magnitude of linen chests and trousseaus and the lasting quality of linens so seldom washed. Also the smell of garments, beds, and people. Also certain beliefs, for instance, in the danger of giving clean linen to sick people.· 

If washing linens was rare, washing oneself was an exception too. In the Morvan, one way to protect oneself against sorcery was to wash one's hands in the morning-a rite that suggests such action was not in the ordinary course of things. Passing through the little town of Chaudesaigues near Saint-Flour, famous for its hot mineral springs, Ardouin-Dumazet was struck by the unusual cleanliness of the inhabitants. Here, he wrote, "in a region where one does not take baths, the use of ablutions is quite widespread." Chaudesaigues was clearly an exception. Even in towns, few made a habit of washing and bathing. Doctors decried the modesty that made washing particularly repugnant to women, which meant that only the immoral-cocottes of the better class-were likely to be clean. Indeed, as an old Aveyronnaise who had been hospitalized protested: "I'm over sixty-eight and never have I washed there!"5 How many times had she washed at all? Perhaps before her marriage, like the young girls of Orleans, who visited a public bathhouse just once in their lives, on their wedding eve-"une formalite unique en son genre, comme le passage a la mairie et a l'eglise."t 

Apparently, most people came to terms with this. Like the principal of a normal school who, in 1877, quite conscious of the fact that his charges bathed only in summer (and how often then?), was happy to say that "we have more or less managed to prevent all disagreeable effluvia arising from either their bodies or their clothing .... Thus we live constantly in the midst of our stu- 

• Robert Hertz, Sociologie religieuse, p. 175; Archives Departementales, Haute-Vienne M 1047 (1873), Correze M 717 (1871). One rural mayor advised: "L'air pur, les aliments sains, les bains et les ablutions frequentes, les vetements sou vent nettoyes, le linge et les habits propres." (Conseils hygieniques aux cultivateurs des campagnes, par un maire de campagne, Paris, 1850 , p. 5.) Unfortunately, such counsels of perfection could seldom be followed. t Comte Baguenault de Puchesse, Un Demi-siecle de souvenirs, 1860-1914 (Orleans, 1915), p. I2J. Hannah Lynch quotes the prospectus of the very posh College Stanislas, a boys school in Paris, which told parents their son would be expected to wash his feet once a week and his body once a month. As for girls, most were educated by nuns, who "deem it an offense against modesty to wash oneself." During her own years in a French convent, she says, "nobody, to my knowledge, had a bath of any kind." Modesty prevented girls from washing even their necks, and when they washed their feet once a fortnight, a cloth was kept over them "to avoid the sight of nakedness." (French Life in Town and Country, New York, 1905, pp. 134-35.) This was not a problem in the countryside, where bare feet were more frequent than shod ones. Even there, though, many could have echoed the old woman's boast: "Water's never risen above my knee. Not that I like dirty people." (Raymond Doussinet, Le Paysan santongeais, p. 368.) 

From 'Subsistance' to 'Habitat' 149 dents without being inconvenienced by their proximity." If this was the situation in the towns, what must it have been in regions where, as a traveler wrote on entering Lozere in 1894, all cleanliness ceased north of Ispagnac? Not very different from what so distressed Madame Romieu-that except where rivers lay nigh, everyone she knew took a perverse pride in seeing that no drop of water should ever touch the body. What was the need for washing? As they said in Saintonge: "Nous aut'pesants, jh'attrapons de bounes suees, 0 nous nettie le corps."6 

R utebeuf, the thirteenth-century poet, said that when a villein died even Hell would not have him because he smelled too bad. This remained true six centuries later. Draft boards could testify to the extraordinary filth (salete immonde) in which countrymen wallowed. Unfriendly testimony, but corroborated by a variety of sources. The slovenliness and dirt of the peasants of Forez and Vivarais so disgusted Doctor Francus in 1890 that he let his outrage come through: everyone knows that our peasants take less care of themselves than the Swiss and English do of their animals. Along the road to Monastier, a few years later: "A single compartment: men and beasts live fraternally, until the ones eat the others.m Nor was the eating always in one direction, for fleas, lice, and other parasites abounded. About to go to bed, the Saintongeois announced: "I'm going to feed the fleas.""" No wonder, with no opportunity to wash in the tiny, crowded outhouse, and little time to bathe in streams in a long workday. An old Christmas carol still sung in Auvergne in MacMahon's time rejoiced that the year's wine was so good even the women would drink too much of it and, hence, sleep so well they would not feel the fleabites in the night.s 

No nineteenth-century Le Nain has left us scenes of people scratching, or mothers delousing their children's hair, but the pests were there for all that, and in the early twentieth century, too, as many travelers noted to their sorrow. And popular wisdom, in its contrarious way, developed theories designed to accommodate their omnivorous presence. Scabies, lice, parasites on children cleansed the blood. In some places, children without lice would be endowed with them: good for their health. And in a New Year's ditty along the Rhone valley in Ardeche, one wished a neighbor, "Good day and a good year, with lice by the handful" (Bouon jour et bouono annado, Embe pesouls a pougnado). Scurf and pimples, rashes and boils, suppurating sores of every sortall let evil humors out and purified the body. Better avoid washing them. Better avoid washing altogether: "The dirtier the children, the better they grow" ("mais lous enfans soun sales, miel se fon"). At Bugeat (Correze) baths were still unknown in I913, but the schoolchildren had advanced to the point where· they washed once a week-on Sunday. Their parents cleaned 

• Raymond Doussinet, Le Paysan santongeais, p. 83. Auvergnats announced bedtime more poetically: "To bed! / The straw is cold. / The lice are hungry. / The fleas are thirsty." (Marie- Aymee Meraville, Contes poptllaires, p. 282.) The patois rhymes. 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

their hands to go to mass or to a fair, or, sometimes, before entering the stable in a ritual meant to protect their cattle's health.9 

But dirty children did not grow too well, or very healthy, whatever the proverb said. Ill-bred and ill-fed, the men and women of the first half of the nineteenth century produced offspring very much in their own sickly image, who would of course live (when they livedl) into the twentieth century. In 1830 the minimum height for army recruits was lowered to 1.540 meters (a little over 5'). An 1849 reference to "men remarkable by their height and strength," fit for elite units, makes clear that they are between 5' 6" and 5' 8" tall. A writer pointed out, in 1854, that many recruits needed a few months of solid regular feeding, including 340 grams of meat a day, before they could cope with the physical demands of service.10 And of course these were the men who had met the army's standards. Until 1863 and after, when the general fitness of conscripts began to show measurable improvement, many men who should have seen service were rejected as physically unfit.· 

Richard Cobb has found descriptions in the criminal records of the Revolution and the Ancien Regime that leave the impression of a France swarming "with a bizarre multitude of semi-cripples."ll The same might be said of the nation for a long time past the days of the Directory and the Consulate, and not only of its criminal elements. In the rural areas especially, deformities were appallingly common. Birth defects, as often as not the result of an unaided delivery; accidents in which some limb would be left unset; the aftereffects of diseases and parasitical infections; and hereditary ills all saw to that. Since most women had no choice but to work even when heavy with child, many, feeling the first birth pangs, were forced to repair to a stable or loft to manage as best they could, much as in Bethlehem. The priest, as Chaix noted in his work on Hautes-Alpes, often collected baptismal and burial fees at one and the same time. Even if the newborn survived, the mother's exertions within a couple of days of birth threatened his health as they sapped hers: "Thus there is not a woman still recognizable after three years of marriage, and there are so many conscripts unfit for service."12 Recruitment records show that in this respect as well, the toiling classes were kin to the criminal classes: ill-favored on every score. The blind and obviously crippled did not appear 

• As many as 50 percent of those refused were rejected for de/aut de taille. Consider these figures from Lot in 1830: Cahors district, 1,051 draftees, 212 r;formes, 120 for stuntedness; Gourdon district, 598 draftees, 152 reformes, 75 for stuntedness; Figeac, 687 draftees, 203 reformes, 99 for stuntedness. Similarly, in 1847, on the plateaus of Haute-Vienne, more than half the conscripts were rejected for physical causes, half of them for their height. (J.-A. Delpon, Statistique du departement du Lot, I: 192; Alain Corbin, "Limousins migrants," p. 124.) According to Emile Durkheim, the number of conscripts rejected for height dropped from 92.8 per 1,000 in 1831 to 59.4 per 1,000 in 1860 (Le Suicide, p. 64), and F. Chamla finds a rapid increase in average height between 1863 and 1881 (Bulletin de la Societe Anthropologique de Paris, 1964, pp. 201-78). The 340-gram meat ration of 1854 may seem ample, but in the 1840's, when the ration was only 295 grams, a contemporary source described it as "bones, fat, gristle, cell tissue, and sinews" (see J. J. Hemardinquer, Pour une histoire de l'aJimentation, p. 70). A lot of what passed for meat was inedible. 

From 'Subsistance' to 'Habitat' 

before the recruiting councils; but otherwise their lists chronicle a sad tale of rural ills: deafness and eye sores, tapeworm and hernia, goiter and scrofula, stunted ness, twisted limbs, weakness of constitution, and "diverse maladies." In 1860 one rural area near Grenoble had this to show to the army recruiters: goiter, 140; deaf or dumb, 13; lame, 13; myopia, 36; tapeworm, 19; scabies, I; skin maladies, 86; scrofula, 15; epilepsy, 2; general weakness, 197; hunchback, 29; bone distortion, 2. In a total of 1,000, 553 men were disqualified, only 447 found fit for service. Here in the mountains, as in the Pyrenees, goiter was a relatively common complaint. Throughout the Second Empire the high incidence of "gaiter and cretinism" prompted numerous studies and even official surveys. The quality of the water? Undernourishment? Intermarriage? The debate continued through the century. But goiter, and cretinism too, seem to have waned as roads broke down the isolation of these regions: modern ways and, in due course, outmarriage helped the biological destiny to fade away.13 

But many of the "diverse maladies" were deadly. There was smallpox, of course, and the mal de misere-pellagra. There were great epidemics that did their worst among the country poor, like cholera, which killed 11,226 in Ariege in 1854: one soul out of 23, compared with one in 123 in Seine. There was croup; and there was diphtheria, whose appearance caused panic flights from stricken villages where, a report of 1877 tells us, the bells unendingly tolled death. There were endemic "fevers" of every sort, typhoid and more important malaria, which was so prevalent in some areas that quinine became a staple like salt or pepper. Dysentery was endemic, too, cutting great swathes through lands where the water was stagnant and putrid, and through homes where dirt lay everywhere. Hunger or dearth taught that everything that could be eaten should be. "One doesn't die of eating dirty." "To live long you must eat dirty." "You don't fatten hogs with clear water." "No wolf ever choked on a goat's hair."14 

Anxiety seems to have caused a fair share of medical problems. Shortly before the First World War a doctor from Tarn-et-Garonne devoted a book to what he called peasant neurasthenia, which manifested itself in widespread insomnia and reveil anxieux, headaches, gastritis, dyspepsia, constipation (affecting about half his patients), and all sort of bilious troubles. The peasant, he said, went around constantly apprehensive, prey to diffuse or specific anxieties; but whatever the apparent concern of the moment, this anxiety had one fundamental cause-fear. Fear of the night, of thieves, of neighbors, of the dead, a deep, abiding fear that lay in wait for the peasant at every turn, and that far surpassed anything the city man might feel. Corroborative evidence is scanty. vVidespread belief in the efficacy of the magical nouement de l'aiguillette (the tying of a knot that was supposed to produce impotence) suggests an equally widespread multitude of husbands unable to consummate their marriage. There are remarks about the growing number of mad people, 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

and figures that suggest a steady rise in the suicide rate (in the three depart~ ments Alain Corbin writes about, from 43 in the year 1845 to 96 in 1880) .15 And there is this from Emile Guillaumin on his fellow peasants: "They were always afraid, they didn't know of just what they were afraid, but they were always afraid of something."'*' But sparse as the evidence is, the context of insecurity in which so many peasants lived from birth to death, the brinkmanship that was played out over an entire lifetime, suggest plenty of reasons why the doctor's assessment should be correct. Certainly it is something that deserves further investigation. 

Nervous or otherwise, ill health was a diffuse, poorly grasped concept in the countryside. Peasants often confused illness and fatigue, and popular speech today retains this point of view, describing someone who is unwell as being a little, somewhat, quite, or very tired. Complaints were lumped into vague categories: weaknesses (naujas); fevers (fevres); worms (lous vermes), which could affect stomach, teeth, and eyes; pox of every sort from smallpox to syphilitic eruptions; and even warts, which were variously attributed to the weather, the ground, the air, magic, or conspiracy.t 

Home remedies tended to the peculiar, like the prophylactic use of excrement (animal or human), and to the sympathetic, like putting a toad in bed to counter smallpox. A dose of powdered taenia was supposed to rid children of tapeworm (or, alternatively, one could lay a thread spun by a virgin across the victim's stomach). In the Jura a tallow candle boiled and melted in a quart of red wine helped to treat a bad cold. Ear wax was good against colic or, mixed with nut oil, a sovereign remedy for chilblains. In Poitou a purge or bath taken between July 24 and August 26 exposed the adventurous to catching the canicuZe, which could degenerate into jaundice, best treated by eating roots soaked in urine or, as some suggested, by taking five pills made of a she-goat's fecal matter in white wine twice a day for eight days. Remedies for fevers were particularly abundant: grass bracelets prepared on Saint John's Eve; infusions of mistletoe; dust scraped off of tombstones (matter from the tomb of Saint Eutropius at Saintes was reputed to be particularly effective), 

.. Maurice Halbwachs notes the rising suicide rate in the countryside, pointing out that whereas in 1866-69 there were almost twice as many suicides in towns (pop. 2,000+) as in the rural areas, by 1905-11 urban suicides were only 20 percent more numerous, and by 1919-20 only 14 percent. But this convergence of urban and rural suicide rates is a function of modernization, not of the anxiety that might have been characteristic of the hitherto isolated rural areas. 

t During the cholera epidemic of 1833 "red women" were seen near Brest, "breathing death over the valleys," and one beggar woman hauled into court maintained that she had spoken to them (Emile Souvestre, Les Derniers Eretons [1854 ed.], I: 15-16). In 1844, when the disease broke out again, some believed that cartouches full of cholera were being thrown into the streets, and one woman swore that she had seen a statue of the Virgin Mary cry just before the outbreak of the plague (Paul Sebillot, Le Folk-lore de France, 4: 402;. Berenger-Feraud, Superstitions, 2: 433). In the Limousin the cholera outbreaks of 1832 and 1849 were attributed to poisoned weIls, and sometimes to wine poisoned by employees of the Contributions indirectes. At Limoges "the lower classes [did] not believe in the malady" (Alain Corbin, "Limousins migrants," p. 135; Archives Departementales, Haute-Vienne M 1055). 

From ISubsistance' to IHabitat' 153 

preferably taken in white wine; eggs beaten up with chimney soot (for intermittent fever); poultices of squashed earthworms (for malaria) or of spiders crushed to powder; decoctions of snakeskin or powdered viper (the water in which a viper had been boiled was good for rheumatism and so was eating celery) ; or infusions of carrot seeds in urine. This last, taken for eight or nine days, was also good for dropsy (lzystropisie, hypocrisie).16 

Doctor Francus recorded a case in the 1890's in which a peasant suffering from pneumonia drank a concoction of pig urine in guise of an infusion and died. Vaccination had a hard row to hoe right through the century, from Napoleon's day to that of JuIes Gf(~vy, when health officers still had to resort to subterfuges in order to vaccinate children without parental consent: "antipathie funeste," "invention diabolique," "malefice," "a threat to life itself." Such prejudices were confirmed when children died, despite the haste that nurse or mother made to wash the youngster's arm with urine after vaccination.17 

A very early report on the question of vaccination quotes the familiar argument that ailments are placed by God's will on earth and that to prevent them is thus to offend God.18 In anxious people notions of this sort are calculated to increase anxiety. How far this particular argument may have affected peasant hearers is anyone's guess, but it surely reflects a general attitude. A way of life and a mentality in which nature and natural causes are paramount may well suggest that an attempt to heal-especially with the untraditional, that is unnatural, methods of medicine and science-is hubris, a form of pride that challenges the natural order of things and risks provoking nature's wrath. I am tempted to wonder whether some reason such as this may not be one factor behind the peasant's notorious reluctance to call a doctor except as a last resort. Were the fees of a village healer so much more reasonable?· 

The dictionary translates rebouteux as bonesetter, a man who heals or pretends to heal fractures and dislocations. But rebouteux was also a generic term for a swarm of healers, charmers, midwives, old wives and village gossips, sorcerers and spellbinders, toucheurs and toucheuses, panseurs and panseuses, medecins de plein tlent et charlatans de bas hage who successfully competed with physicians and, through most of the century, kept well ahead. T raveling mountebanks, impostors, and quacks, policed out of the cities, survived in the countryside, especially since rural regions had few profes- 

• Hard to say. One can speculate that more of them would be paid in kind, whereas doctors expected cash (and sometimes got it!). Doctors also prescribed remedies that had to be bought in a shop. Here is Adolphe de Bourgoing in 1844: "6 F la visite d'un medecin! puis, les remedes sont si chers, car ils leur sont vendus dix fois au-dela de leur valeur et en outre ne leur procurent aucun soulagement, car pour eux, pauvres hommes ignorants, timides et sans de£ense, ils sont falsifies ou denatures; 6 F encore, c'est quinze jours de travail! le pain de deux semaines! lis pre£erent mourir." ("Memoire en faveur des travailleurs," p. 404.) Even at the end of the century, in Aude: "On le faisait pas venir sou vent; quarante sous, on gagnait vingt sous par jour, il venait quand c'etait desespere" (Daniel Fabre and Jacques Lacroix, La Vie quotidienne, P·298).I54 THE WAY THINGS WERE sionals to call on (16 doctors and 8 midwives per 100,000 inhabitants in C8tesdu-Nord in 1893), and those they had were hard to get and slow to arrive.19 "After death, the doctorl" they said in Armagnac.* But, once again, prejudice reinforced material inhibitions. Since doctors were habitually called when sickness was past help, they were as much a symbol of death as the priest mumbling the last rites. Is it fair to cite urban evidence in this context? At Lille by 1876 nearly all parishes had bureaux de bienfaisance that provided the services of a. medecin des pauvres free, on request. But the doctors declared that the workers feared their presence.20 As an old man explains in Victor Hugo's Les Miser-abies: "Que voulez-vous, Monsieur, no us autres, ., " " pauvres gens, J nous mourrons nous-memes. Not only was the doctor seen as a messenger of death; many peasants were convinced that once they were dead he would take their corpses in charge for his own nefarious purposes. The belief that the doctor was eager to secure "Christian fat" (graisse de chretien) stemmed from the days when graverobbing was the only means of obtaining Cl body for dissection. At the end of the century, people still recalled that when a plump person died (like the priest of Gravieres, Ardeche, in the spring of 1820), armed friends and relatives took turns standing guard over his grave for some period of time.21 

Whatever the causes of the peasants' ill health or their reservations about modern healing techniques, one thing is clear: physically, the rural folk lagged behind the city dwellers. In 1844 the country child entered puberty a year or more later than his companion in the towns. The health and physique of rural recruits tended to be poorer than those of the urban recruits, despite the oft-deplored conditions in which many of the city lads lived. In the decade of 1860-69 the national average of conscripts found unfit for service was 16 percent. In that period, the figure for the Nevers district in Nievre, where one-third of the population worked in factories, ironworks, foundries, and coal and iron mines, was 18 percent, not very far from the national average, whereas 31 percent were rejected in the bucolic district of Chftteau-Chinon.22 So much for the joys of country life, a life that in time came to seem even worse the longer an area remained untouched by the outside. In 1893, for example, though the conditions of life had greatly improved in many places, an English traveler found things essentially unchanged in Upper Quercy. The peasants, he said, "are dwarfed and very often deformed. Their almost exclusively vegetable diet, their excessive toil, and the habit of drinking half-putrid rainwater from cisterns which they rarely clean may possibly explain this physical degeneration."23 

• Sometimes, after the doctor, death. Bourgoing tells us that if the doctor W<lS sent for, his fee was bound to exhaust the household's meager savings, leaving no spare cash for the drugs he prescribed ("Memoire," p. 404). But in fairness to the doctors, the remedies they prescribed were often used indiscriminately (mustard plasters might be swallowed rather than applied), and those who were persuaded that patients would ignore their advice were prone to leave them to their prejudices and their fate. 

From 'Subsistance' to (Habitat' I55 So if conditions improved, they did so haltingly, as always. A law of 1893 stated that any French citizen, ill and indigent, had the right to medical assistance at home or, if he could not be cared for there, then in the hospital. The law was seldom implemented, to be sure, but it was a promise of better days to come. At Eygurande in Corr(:ze certain maladies that had once been endemic all but disappeared precisely in this same year: intermittent fever, so common in the 1870's; smallpox, rare and then mild after the epidemic of 187<>-71, thanks to vaccine; dysentery, now turned to diarrhea. Scrofula and puerperal fever had become far less frequent, and typhoid cases cropped up only sporadically. Even skin infections had thinned out, and rabies, glanders, and anthrax were just memories.24 

The number of hospitals grew, and country people began to benefit from their existence (though in 1908 the belief was still current in Bourbonnais that the incurable poor who were sent to a hospital were dispatched at once with poisoned sugar-coated pills).'*' Terminology changed faster than basic ways. Where people had once said that garlic drove out the plague, they learned to say that it drove out microbes. But microbes were only the spirits of yore in a new guise, so that when some disease ravaged a woman's rabbit hutch, she put the pig in it "because his stink killed or discouraged microbes." People continued to be slow to call a doctor (and they are reluctant still: "He didn't ail much; he didn't need no doctor for to die.") During the 1914 war, with most doctors called up for military service, there was a recrudescence of healers and popular remedies. But the war also made great numbers of soldiers familiar with medical personnel and hospitals, hence readier to use them.25 By that time material conditions had done much to ease and accelerate what change was taking place. That was the revolution in habitat. 

A nineteenth-century traveler in Ariege expressed surprise one day when he saw a pretty young shepherdess emerge from a dirty hut that seemed "destined rather as a retreat for wild beasts." And the brothers Combes at mid-century, having mentioned a number of structures "that deserved the name of house" (though only just, to judge by their description), go on to "the sort of earthen huts" one finds only too often in the center of France, "dug in the ground and deprived of every comfort."26 

Primitive cabins became fewer, but living conditions took a long time to 

• Francis Perot, Folklore bourbonnais, p. 19. Myths plunge their roots in experience. For a long time the hospital, an urban institution, scorned the rural poor. Here is Bourgoing again: "n faut etre riche ou protege pour entrer a l'hQpital. Celui-Ia qui peut payer I F par jour, qui est appuye par un administrateur ou recommande a un medecin, et qui depose trente francs, cdui-Ia est admis a I'hopital. ..• Celui que ne paye rien et qui n'a pas de protections ira mourir a la porte de I'hopital. ... Voila ce qui est ignore par beaucoup de monde." (HMemoire," pp. 404-5.) Admittedly, this was in 1844. But such attitudes endured through at least another generation. In 1891 Emile Levasseur could stilI report that peasants regarded hospitals with profound repugnance, a feeling that hospital administrators did nothing to counteract, "quite the contrary" (La Population fran(aise, 3: 137). 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

improve. Many houses at the turn of the century were still very simple: four walls, sometimes a chimney, "rooms" if any simply plank divisions within the main structure, very few openings, and, rarely, a second story.27 Even when buildings were larger, the purpose was more functional than selfindulgent. Comfort or anything smacking of "ease" was deliberately rejected. Privation, trouble, se peiner, were recognized as virtues almost divorced from practical ends. But practical ends were obviously important: "It isn't the cage that feeds the bird," they said in western France. Poor housing and golden coins in a woolen stocking often went together. In any case, a home that looked like a hovel discouraged the landlord, if there was one, from raising the rent, the tax collector from demanding higher taxes, the neighbors from becoming jealous. For such a very long time, passing for poor had been the only way to keep from being truly poor that habits long survived their causes. Yet many were truly poor, or relatively so. A house mattered less than land, but it did matter. The peasant wanted to be "chez soi"; and in 1894, when 30 to 35 percent of the urban population owned their homes, 6g percent of the peasantry, in some regions over 80 percent, owned theirs.28 But what homes? Having put his savings into a roof and walls, the peasant had little left to equip himself with any comfort, let alone with spaciousness. First things had to come first. In the west and the western Massif Central, cattle took precedence over people; oxen are bulky, and the houses were built to accommodate them and their winter feed. Horses, pastured in open field country to graze freely, trespassed less on human quarters. Around the Mediterranean, where equipment was relatively skimpy, animals relatively few, and human labor predominated, asses, mules, sheep, and goats took up less room, required less fodder, and made fewer demands on building space. 

Houses built side by side, as in the Mediterranean villages, offered the economy of a common wall. Separate houses cost more to build; the means had to come from somewhere. Worst of all were the isolated holdings of habitat disperse, whose occupants had no inkling that things could be better, an insight they might have gained living in concentration.· Village life increases sociability, imitativeness, eventually comfort and progress. Even in the bocage, a house beside the road was likely to show more traces of comfort than a croft lost among hedges at the end of a muddy track. So, the size and the shape of housing varied from region to region, as we might expect. But for a good long time certain essentials scarcely varied. 

Most rural houses had the least possible number of openings. This is generally and quite rightly blamed on the door-and-window tax, introduced under the Directory and abolished only in 1917. But other factors help explain their absence. In building a structure every opening added to the structural 

• Fran~ois de Dainville, "Taudis ruraux," pp. 150-51, 156, 158. In 1940, when farmers from Thierache in the north took refuge in Mayenne, the local peasants were amazed to hear of their spacious dwellings, and simply at the thought that each of these northerners owned his own house. 

From {Subsistance' to {Habitat' 

TABLE 2 Taxable Structures by Number of Windows and Doors, 

1831-32,1860,1871,1893 

1831-32 1860 1871 

346,401 293,757 278,482 1,817,328 1,860,594 1,886,355 1,320,937 1,520,704 1,598,672 884,061 1,063,484 1,118,892 583,026 748,963 790,241 1,846,398 2,505,052 2,776,264 6,798,151 7,992,554 8,448,906 

157 

No. of openings 

1893 

1 190,521 2 1,724,215 3 1,629,919 4 1,207,235 5 898,792 6+ 3,583,043 

TOTAL 

9,233,725 

sou RCE: Alfred de Foville, Enquete sur les conditions de l' habitation en France (Paris, 1894), I: xli. 

complications and to the cost: three or four openings cost more to build than only one or two. Beyond that, sun, light, air, drafts, and above all cold were feared and shunned. Houses were built to keep them out. Fuel was scarce and heating a constant problem, and when so many homes were literally homemade or put together by workmen of no particular skill, everything fitted badly, so that openings (window, door, chimney) were guaranteed to admit wind and cold.29 

In the circumstances, countrymen showed little interest in talk that the window tax might be abolished, since (unlike salt) this largely affected only the better off. Most rural dwellings, remarked a Yonne report of 1852, derived virtually all their light from the doorway.3o The interesting thing is how long this situation would persist. Dwellings with one or two openings, that is, with at most one window, accounted for one-third of the taxable structures in 1831-32, for one-quarter in 1871, for better than one-fifth in 1893 (see Table 2). Though many of these houses were of ancient vintage,* we must assume that they were in use since they were taxed, and more than one in five of them as the century ended had only one window or none at all. 

Adolphe Blanqui, in his 1851 report, noted that dwellings in Hautesand Basses-Alpeslacked effective fastenings at doors and windows.31 The introduction of adequate clasps and latches is one of those infinitesimal events that have powerful effects on human comfort and, one dares say, happiness. Thus in Bresse, which is cold and misty, houses tended to face east. In Bresse a western orientation would have been preferable; but the west wind (la traverse) blows in sudden gusts that bang the shutters, blow open windows shakily fastened with a wooden bar, and fill the house with rain or wind. So, many avoided the southern or western orientation they would have pre- 

• In 1966, 65 percent of the houses in the viIlage of Chanzeaux had been built before 1871, and only 4 percent had been built since 1932 (Laurence Wylie, Chanzeatlx, a Village in Anjou, P· 104). 

IHWmi 61-82 openings per 100 population 

~ 83-99 openings per 100 population 

Map 9. Departments with fewest taxable windows and doors per 100 population, 1831. National average: 112 openings per 100 population. SOURCE: Adolphe d'Angeville, Essai sur la statistique de la population fran~aise (Paris, 1969 ed.), map 10. 

IHHHnlless than 20% of dwellings had 6 openings 

~ less than 30% of dwellings had 6 openings 

Map 10. Departments with lowest percentage of houses with six or more windows and doors, 1876. National average in the six and under class: 3.06 openings. SOURC E: Annuaire statistique de la France (Paris, 1877), p. 505. 

From (Subsistance' to (Habitat' 159 ferred, to avoid the troubles that would ensue. Then came bourgeois houses, whose windows, effectively secured by bolts and hasps, could afford to brave the traverse, and by the end of the century most of the common people were imitating them, and new buildings could face in whatever direction their owners fancied. 

Meanwhile, the peasant's house had begun to take on a different look in other respects. Jacques Fauvet and Henri Mendras pinpoint the years between 1875 and 1910 as the period when roofs changed, cellars appeared (useful for the storage of potatoes and wine), second stories were built, and many old buildings were renovated, enlarged, or replaced.32 The most dramatic change was in the roof, traditionally made of thatch or flimsy wood shingles. Thatch, which administrative regulation had not eliminated, was slowly driven out as slate and tile became available, especially mass-produced tile, which though cheaper and uglier than the traditional artisanware, was also very much lighter, and so made fewer demands on foundations and walls.s3 In the 1870's Edmond Bogros had thought the homes of the Morvandais as bad as the huts or wigwams of complete savages. But this was about to change. Even as he wrote, thatch, shingles, and wooden slats were giving way to "aristocratic slate and vividly colored tile." Improved transportation was making such novelties available; but in this instance the practical benefits of the novelties were quickly recognized. The new roofs, of course, provided greater safety, but beyond that, they left useful storage space for grain or rainwater where thatch had left none. In the "dry" country of Normandy, which has ample rainfall but not many sources of fresh water, so that people had to drink from dirty pools and ponds, this was an enormous improvement.34 

Riding along the road from Cha.tellerault to Poitiers in 1877, an officer noted that the houses were of the same general, low-lying type but were built of different materials, the older ones being made of porous tuff, the more recent of free stone. In the Morvan the windowless house of timber was likewise edged out by stone between 1875 and 1915. The older structures built of stone and some of the new ones, too, were as miserable as the wooden ones, their granite poorly held together with clay mortar. They improved notably with the increasing availability of limestone from Auxois and Nivernais and of cement, which were introduced around 1875, expenses now "permitted [at least in the Morvan] by the important gains" that local wet nurses brought by hiring themselves out. Soon, with lime, hence with mortar more easily available throughout the countryside, stronger structures might even bear a second story. A second story was a step up in the social hierarchya sign of prosperity and success even if the builder left it empty and unused, as many "Parisians" returning home to Orne, Quercy, or Nivernais did. Where families moved upstairs, however, and made the top floor into a residential unit, they had to abandon the heavy furniture formerly used, and notably the large closed beds. Too bulky to follow their owners up the stairs, 

160 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

the old lits dos gave way to open beds, less prone to dust, more open to fresh air .SII 

The hygienic gain was unsuspected, the social advance was all. "The mere idea of having built a two-story house," wrote Rene Dumont about the Mayenne of our own century, "fills with pride a peasantry that long considered beyond its reach a type of building connected in its mind with the chateau and the maison bourgeoise." And indeed progress meant access to upper-class facilities-embourgeoisement. By 1900 there were 171 lime and cement works in Nievre. Stone mullions and lime for whitewash became available to more than bourgeois homes. The use of plaster and paint, long reserved for the better-off, made great strides. In 1879 Francus saw these flourishes as a common index of the degree of comfort a family had achieved. But the plastered-andpainted home was still out of the ordinary at this time in Ardeche, at least, standing out among the surrounding dark homes and attracting beggars and tourists: "If you don't want visits in the country, don't have a white-painted house."36 By the 1890's the improvement seems general. A teacher in Vic-Ie-Comte was struck by the contrast between the houses of 1899 and the hovels of 20-25 years before; the new houses were rectangular and symmetrical, with "large and numerous openings, giving free access to air and light." The increased spaciousness of the average home also impressed Alfred de Foville, who thought it "one of the most evident tendencies" in the housing of the time. The tight quarters built to save the cost of a wall or to keep out the chill were loosening up. As more and more peasants traveled about, they learned that there were many ways of building besides the one their fathers or neighbors used. Imitation of bourgeois building styles-which were themselves turning away from local tradition toward rationalistic cubic structures-and of railway architecture, as "pretty red-and-white brick stations" began to appear here and there, altered the looks of many a bourgade, then of the countryside as well. In 1903 Ardouin-Dumazet, noting the dwindling use of timber, lath, and clay in Sologne Bourbonnaise, remarked: "What is lost in picturesqueness is gained in health."37 

Fundamental changes took place out of the sight of passing travelers, and one of the greatest concerned heat and light. These were related to total building structures, especially to the dearth of windows. A house with only one window would be too dark without the light coming through the opened door. Its inhabitants had to choose between semi-darkness, even in daylight hours, and the wind, cold, rain, or dust blowing over the threshold. In any case, the primitive fireplaces smoked heavily, and the best way out for smoke was also through the door.* 

• Local sobriquets attest to the frequency with which homes were filled with smoke. In Ardeche alone the inhabitants of several villages were known as lous fumas or lous foumous (les /umeurs; les en/times). (Pierre Charrie, Folklore du Hatlt-Vivarais, p. 34.) 

From ISubsistance' to IHabitat' 

The fireplace was the focus of the home-so much so that in houses with more than one room the room where the fire burned was called la maison (Bresse, Normandy) or was singled out with some special name such as the room or the heated room. In certain areas, notably M~connais and Bresse, central fireplaces with high chimneys raised in the roof (cheminees sarrasines), ancient in design and not very good at heating, were used through the nineteenth century. Thousands still survived in 1880, filling maison, hutau, or chambre chautJure with acrid smoke, making the winters even colder and more uncomfortable than they already were. Only gradually were the last of these supplanted by stoves, which were located either in the fireplace itself or in a small, separate chambre de poele.38 

In these areas, as elsewhere, light from the fireplace was generally the only light after the sun went down. In some places tallow candles were usedcylinders of beef or mutton grease, with a cotton wick, that were hard to light, gave only a flickering yellowish flame, smoked and smelled unpleasant, and dripped badly, leaving dirty deposits on their candlesticks. For good reason they were used sparingly, primarily for meals and for the veillee. In most of the south and the center the dubious light came from ancient oil lamps propped on a tall stand or hung from a hook, which consisted of nothing more than a wick (sometimes made from the topknot of a cotton bonnet) burning in a small pool of nut or kale or rape-seed oil. At that, these chaleux, or caleu, caleil, or chalei, themselves appeared to guzzle too much fuel ("gormand m'in chaleuil," they said in Saintonge), and so were treated as a rich man's light. Used only when the nights were long, they were stored in a cupboard from spring to fall. "In September hang up your caleu," says the southwestern proverb, "in the month of March throw it away."39 

The problem, as always, was cost. The first wax (stearin) candles appeared in northern France around 1840, but their price restricted them to middle-class households, which were already using oil lamps of modern design. The development of paraffin in 1850 paved the way for a revolution in private lighting, but the early paraffin lamps were dangerous, which inhibited their use until perfected models appeared in the 1870's and especially the middle 1880'S. Even then, their cost, though small (about ten centimes a day), was too high so long as there was a plentiful supply of hemp oil to burn. Their generalization thus waited on the gradual extinction of the hemp fields toward the end of the century: in Allier and M~connais around I88o-go, in Nievre around 1900, in Loire around 1910. By 1906 we hear that in Minervois the better-off were using a paraffin lamp in winter. But in summer the sun Was the source of light for most: "If a laborer lights himself to bed with a candle, it is because he is not wholly broke." There is no question that the peasants heartily welcomed these innovations. In Brittany soon after 1888 we hear of big farms where hanging or standing lamps had driven out resin or tallow. In 1899 Foville exulted that in Lorraine, where evenings had once been spent in stables, 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

with women doing their embroidery and men dipping hemp around a smoky lumignon-a poor, dim candle surrounded by bottles full of water to reflect its flame-the oil lamp now shone "with incomparable brilliance."4o 

Of course only in urban centers did one find the dazzling illumination that made the nineteenth century the age of the conquest of the dark. In city home and in city street there was gaslighting, then incandescent lamps with the invention of the gas mantle late in the century, and for the very rich, not long after, electricity as well. But around 1905 Daniel Halevy, visiting Y grande in Allier (pop. in 1973 just over 1,000), found the municipal council just then introducing acetylene lamps, and commented: "Rural lighting is a major problem .... If peasants move to town it is to a great extent because there they find light."41. 

"Born in a stable," says the 1848 agricultural survey of the mountain man, "he spends his childhood and half his adult life there"-because it was the only place where he could find some shelter from the cold. But the house itself, sometimes divided from the stable by only a few planks, was not all that different. "As dirty in their interiors as they are in their persons, they and their beasts inhabit the same apartment." What the officer wrote about the Bretons in 1827 could be repeated almost word for word to the end of the century, at least in the Auvergne, Vel ay, and Vivarais. In the Charentes, too, by local testimony, many homes were mardoux coume in nic de puput (filthy as a hoopoe's nest). Squat one-room houses, with the bare beaten earth for a floor, lit by a small dormer and a door, "which remain open all the time," inhabited in common by the family and the domestic animals (Cantal, 1864), a single compartment, men and beasts together (Ardeche and Haute-Loire, 1895) .42 Space was costly. It was natural for animals and men to share it. Their food and quarters were similar after all; and besides, the body heat of cattle or sheep was reason enough to prize their proximity. Less bulky beasts would wander in and out of the hut or cottage (except when winter kept them indoors too), and in Brittany, we are told, pigs often nibbled at the babies with whom they shared the floor. In the Moselle vineyard areas, farmer and family lived below ground, while animals and equipment "occupied the most salubrious and least humid quarters" (1858). In the Landes, where a book published in 19II emphasized the improvements and comforts of new housing, the stable was still divided from the kitchen, the center of family life, by a plank partition with two openings through which the oxen poked their heads in order to be fed by hand twice a day by the farmer sitting by his stove. No wonder a country mayor had noted the wide use of aromatics to purify the ;1.ir. But benzoin, juniper berries, and sugar on hot embers hid mephitic odors without dispelling them. They merely made the air thicker, heavier, and still less fit to breathe.43 

From (Subsistance' to (Habitat' 

These ill-heated, evil-smelling quarters were scantily furnished. Dark, damp, smoky, earthen-floored, humid, airless (but for the drafts), they were, said a report about the rather large parish of Saint-Ours, full of dusty rags and stinking objects. An inventory of the possessions of a seventy-nine-year-old widow who died at Jouy (Eure-et-Loir) in 1851 gives us an idea of what these rags and objects might have been: pothook; tongs and andirons; candlestick and two bad chairs; table, kneading trough, chest; three plates, three spoons, two forks, platter, pot; nine bad shirts, three corsets, three dresses; two blankets, one for bed and one for self; one feather mattress and one bolster; three sheets and one bad canvas bag.44 

Even such skimpy possessions might be crowded in the narrow quarters that stunted building and yearning for warmth imposed. In 1849 we hear of a family of eight in Deux-Sevres who lived in a single room 1.95 m high, 4.65 m wide, and 6.65 m deep, with one window measuring 85 cm by 55 cm and a door 1.87 m by 81 cm, and who shared three beds. These last were mere wooden boxes, fairly deep, equipped with a palliasse and a feather comforter and fully enclosed by a low canopy and thick curtains of green serge. Such beds were treasuries of dust and parasites, where children and old people lay together, sick or well, catching each other's ills and sharing the lice. No wonder, in this case, that three of the children were malformed.* 

Perhaps this family was exceptionally poor, but the description 40 years later of the average dwelling in Auvergne sounds suspiciously similar. The single room was larger, but the same kind of enclosed beds stood around the walls, equipped with straw pallets to which rich people added one or two feather comforters and the poor another pallet filled with beech leaves (gathered in November).t There was at best one sheet per bed, for laundry as we have seen posed its own problems. In Creuse, Dordogne, Haute-Garonne, and Lot-et-Garonne, quite frequently in Burgundy and Lyonnais as well, even in dwellings with several rooms people lived six or eight to a room and used the least possible number of beds "to have fewer sheets to wash." The other furniture consisted typically of a table and benches, a massive cabinet for the plc:.tes, one or more troughs (one to be used for kneading), a coffer for salt in the fireplace, and, for the rich, a clock. With a stone feeding basin for the dog, this was the lot. And these were not poor people, at least compared with the cowherd and his helpers who, we are told, slept in the stable, where they were warm and had no complaints.45 

• J.-Z. Amussat, Quelques considerations sur I'llygiene, p. 258. In feet, the room measured roughly IS ~ by 22 with a ceiling height of about 6 ~. Note that when offered the chance to move to more spacious Quarters, the family hesitated in fear of a raise in rent, explaining that it was better to be lodged less well and come out ahead. t This is confirmed by E. Harrison Barker's description of conditions in an Aveyron home: two beds without linen, nothing but a patchwork Quilt over big bundles of dry corn leaves. "It is thus that many of the peasants of the Aveyron sleep." ( Wandering by Southern Waters, P.294·)THE WAY THINGS WERE 

In fact a cabinet for the dishes and benches for the table were comforts of a fairly advanced kind. We do not find a single glass in the Widow Drouet's inventory given above; and except for the more prosperous households, which might have had a few glasses that would serve for all, people drank from the pot (in Bresse, for instance, until 1890-1900). Yet the widow owned forks where many had only spoons. Some households had a carved receptacle for wooden spoons hanging in the hearth or suspended from the ceiling. And in Finistere and other places richly carved spoons were ritual wedding gifts. Then there were knives, of course; but these the men carried in their pockets, the women in their pockets or hanging from their belts. In Finistere forks were rare until 1890 and did not become a routine utensil until the twentieth century, when table knives made their appearance too. Glasses, first seen under the Restoration, spread only after the Second Empire. Tableware itself was rare, consisting at most of several bowls. We are specifically told that in the Morvan and Upper Brittany people spooned their food out of the common pot until late in the century. The rest was eaten, as the French say, "sur le pouce," the thumb put to use to hold a piece of something on bread or pancake. In the Morvan, Brittany, and Franche-Comte tables sometimes had a saucershaped depression into which the gruel, porridge, or soup was directly ladled. Around Brioude (Haute-Loire), in the Laonnois, and perhaps at Orleans, however, people did not take their soup at the table at all: in winter they kept the bowl in their lap and sat as close as possible to the hearth; in summer they moved outside to eat, holding the bowl and squatting on the doorstep or just making their meal standing Up.46 

Charles Peguy remembered spooning his soup out of a little saucepan balanced on his knees. He remembered too the absence of all comfort, so that in later life, as he said to Daniel Halevy, he was never able to sit in an armchair without feeling ill at ease. Chairs were very rare, and armchairs rarer still, though little Peguy, whose mother mended chairs for a living, had a tiny one all of his own.47 In most rural households the family head traditionally enjoyed the only chair, whether with arms or not, and everyone else sat on benches, stools, or anything handy they could find. 

Students of Languedoc, the Morvan, and Maconnais have all noted how the end of the nineteenth century brought a clear progress in household inventories, less rudimentary and also cleaner.48 The rate of change varied, of course. Eugene Bougeatre puts the change in Vexin, closer to Paris, in the 1860'S. There many of the richer peasants, after seeing the Paris Exhibitions of 1867 or 1878, were moved to buy ready-made furniture and crockery, though these were still used only on great occasions. In the Morvan, its poverty relieved by the gains of its fertile wet nurses, factory-made furniture began to appear in the late 1870's, and again the evidence suggests more for show than for use. In Loire, more out of the way, traditional chests or coffers began to be replaced by cupboards after the 1870's, then by wardrobes, eventually (from the 1900- 

From (Subsistance' to (Habitat' 

1910 period on) even by wardrobes with a mirror. In Finistere, on the other hand, closed beds with straw or oats-chaff mattresses went out only in the early twentieth century. All of this of course implied the end of the village artisans who had made the old chests, cupboards, and dressers. Their services had been in ever-smaller demand since the late eighteenth century, and their output practically ceased around 1900. After 1914 almost all household furniture came out of a factory.49 

The truly revolutionary change lay less in the furniture itself than in the fact that peasants now realized that they could have homes like those of the workingmen and artisans they had seen in the bourg. It had never occurred to Henri Bachelin's typical villager that his cottage could or should be changed into a house, with round tables, varnished chairs, curtains at the windows and pictures on the walls. By the turn of the century this transformation was well under way, bringing the living patterns of country and small town a step closer.5o 

The really crucial changes happened around the hearth. The open fireplace as the only source of heat (not to say light) grew increasingly rare after 1865, replaced by stoves for heating and then for cooking as well. Dutch ovens ( cuisinieres) and spirit-stoves (rechauds) followed in time. As the kitchen hearth disappeared, the interior of the house and all it contained changed. Big cooking vessels were replaced by smaller ones; chairs and other furniture were spaced around, no longer focused on one spot in the room; the curtained bed could be dispensed with, even bedwarmers were gradually put away.51 The ritual of lighting the fire altered, too. Matches became more prevalent, partly because hemp was less of a commonplace. Until the mid-nineteenth century no house was without its tinderbox, containing a flintstone, tinder (hemp fiber), and a file. The tinder had first to be fired with flint and file, then touched to a homemade match-a short stalk of hemp waste soaked in sulfur with which the broom wood or vine branches in the fireplace could be set ablaze. Then came the ready-made match, taxed in 1871, a state monopoly after 1872, with the contraband trade that this encouraged and the special hidey-hole in the chimney wall (la poutire in Mkonnais) for the matches purchased from the chimicon.52 While matches were rare, households had always tried to keep a small pile of live embers going through the night to relight the fire in the morning. If these went out, someone took an old clog and went to appeal to neighbors for spare embers. This provided the opportunity for a chat, and Lorraine teachers remarked in 1889 that such sociability was waning because, with matches, relighting the fire no longer provided an occasion for a neighborly chat.53 . 

The next crucial change in domestic life would come with electrification, which, mostly between the wars, altered the rhythm of work and leisure. Life and labor, regulated by daylight (for oil and gas lamps were used sparingly), came to be ruled by a personal choice. The fears that dwelt in darkness and 

166 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

in the mysteries of shadow dissolved. So did much of the dirt that had never really been seen in homes obscure and full of smoke. The taste for cleanliness and comfort had spread with means, with paint, with the imitation of the bourgeois's ways.54 So the effects of electric light were, in some ways, symbolic of a whole new world that had settled in within the lifetime of those who learned to turn a switch. 
