+++
title = "Pedagogy"
+++

Source: [TW](https://x.com/i/status/2035574844264173751)

A pedagogical point that may or may not apply to everyone  (or times might have changed). In our days, scalars and vectors were introduced in secondary school, followed by a further elaboration of vector algebra and a bit of calculus in junior college. If you lasted into college at some more advanced stuff. Until probably the second year of college, one may have never encountered tensors. Independently of this, you may have been taught matrices in junior college without really connecting them seriously to the former.

IMO, a better way, which I sort of learned for myself, is to base everything on matrices. Teach vectors as a type of matrix (1 column or 1 row) and then organically show how their multiplications lead to various things. First, the dot product is the result of one direction of vector multiplication. The same multiplication in the other direction yields the outer product matrix, a tensor. So one gets directly introduced to tensors and demystifies them right away. This also allows one to understand the geometric or physical meaning of the outer product tensor and grasp how a tensor simultaneously captures the energy generated by the force as well as the torque and shear it produces. Then, in obtaining the cross product, one again first obtains the intermediate tensor. This shows that tensors are integral to basic operation of vectors like the emergence of the area defined by two vectors via the cross product.