+++
title = "17 Appendix I Jihãd and Expulsion of Non-Muslimsxa0 from Islamic Countries"

+++
**Appendix I**

***Jihãd* and Expulsion of Non-Muslims **  
**from Islamic Countries**

Is expulsion of non-Muslims from countries conquered by Islam a tenet of
*jihad*? The question is important, for a whole chapter of the Koran is
concerned with this very topic. *Sûrah* 59 of the Koran is entitled
*Hashr* which in plain English means ‘banishment’. The *sûrah* refers to
the expulsion of the Jewish tribe of Banu Nazir from Medina in early 625
AD. As mentioned earlier, the Jewish tribes of Medina were the first
victims of early Islam’s plundering expeditions. Banu Kainuka was
despoiled and banished in 624 AD. The next year (625 AD) saw the
banishment of Banu Nazir. Banu Kuraizah was exterminated in 627 AD.
These acts of spoliation and mass-slaughter are celebrated in the Hadis
literature with unbounded pride and exultation.

*Sahih Muslim* devotes a whole chapter to this topic. According to this
work, “The Jews of Banu Nadir and Banu Quraiza fought against the
Messenger of Allah who expelled Banu Nadir and allowed the Quraiza to
stay on and granted favour to them until they too fought against him.
Then he killed their men and distributed their women, children and
properties among the Muslims. The Messenger of Allah turned out all the
Jews of Medina - Banu Qainuqa and the Jews of Banu Haritha and every
other Jew who was in Medina.” (No. 4364).

The same work cites another *hadîs* according to which the Prophet is
supposed to have declared, “I will expel the Jews and Christians from
the Arabian Peninsula and will not leave any but Muslims” (No. 4366).

This practice of expelling non-Muslims gets added confirmation from the
example of Umar, the second Caliph, who expelled the non-Medinese Jewish
tribes of Khaibar on the strength of this very *hadîs*. The reader would
remember that this tribe had been conquered in 628 AD, and the Prophet
had spared their lives and habitations by compelling them to pay
*jizyah*. Their subsequent expulsion during the rule of Umar is thus
narrated by Gibbon: “Under the reign of Omar, the Jews of Chaibar were
transplanted to Syria and the caliph alleged the injunction of his dying
master, that one and the true religion should be professed in his native
land of Arabia.”^([1](#1))

It would thus seem that expulsion of non-Muslims from lands conquered by
*jihãd* is sanctioned by both the Koran and the Sunnah. But I have not
included this activity as an ingredient of *jihãd* as the Prophet never
expelled idolaters from Arabia, nor does the Koran sanction this
practice except as an act of retribution. “Drive them out of the places
whence they drove you out,” says the Koran (2/191), and Muslims over the
centuries have not been slow to point out, on the strength of this very
verse, that *jihãd* does not mean aggression. This of course is
nonsense, as I have endeavoured to show by analysing very many passages
of the Koran that preach aggression with a vengeance. But the point of
the above passage is simply this - the Koran does not expressly sanction
expulsion of the generality of non-Muslims from Islamic countries except
in special circumstances, and even Jews and Christians outside the
limits of Arabia are absolved from any general ban. Also, the scriptural
practice of *jizyah* would lose all meaning if any such general ban was
ever intended.

Nevertheless, the practice of expelling non-Muslims, sporadically if not
systematically, has all along been a time-honoured practice in all
Islamic countries. Such expulsion should more properly be called
‘squeezing out’, as Muslims, wherever they reside in large numbers, are
prone to squeeze out their non-Muslim neighbours by the sheer pressure
of their numbers. Even such an arch-secularist as Mutafa Kemal started
his secularist career only after a wholesale expulsion of the Greek
population of Turkey. In fairness to Kemal, he did admit a proportionate
number of Turks from mainland Greece. But no such plea can be held up in
the case of the other Christian population of Turkey, which has gone on
being squeezed out from the secularist regime over all these years,
slowly but inexorably.

Coming to the Indian ‘subcontinent’, Hindus started being squeezed out,
right from 1947, from the erstwhile East Pakistan, now going by the name
of Bangladesh. The process started simultaneously with the holocaust in
Punjab where hundreds of thousands of Sikhs as well as mainstream Hindus
were butchered in one clean sweep by the marauding *mujãhids* of the
newly created state of Pakistan. It has been suggested that Bengali
Muslims being of a gentler stock were incapable of such mass slaughter.
This may be true to a certain extent, but the exodus of Hindus from East
Bengal, sometimes in trickles and sometimes assuming the proportions of
a flood, has been a spectacle no less heart-rending in the
interminableness of its duration than the wholesale and instantaneous
butchery of Punjab. In truth, it has been a tragedy of greater
dimensions, showing at once the utter helplessness of the Bengali Hindus
in their passive acceptance of their fate and the heartless unconcern of
the Hindu-dominated secular state of India. Between them, these helpless
Bengali Hindus and the callous Indian State have crowded out the basic
feature of this long-drawn-out exodus. That the gentler Bengali Muslims,
while flinching at outright mass-slaughter, have never shrunk from their
jihadic practice of continuous plunder of Hindu property and consistent
dishonour of Hindu women, making the said exodus inevitable, is a story
which has remained practically unknown to the world at large.

Indeed, the expulsion of non-Muslims from Islamic countries, while not a
positive tenet of *jihãd*, has always remained an accessory to it. Not
being a positive tenet it cannot from a part of any theoretical
exposition of the doctrine of *jihãd*. But it has been a fact of Islamic
history during the fourteen hundred years of Islam’s existence, and it
is a poor testament to the historians of the world that not one of them
has thought fit to chronicle this Islamic phenomenon in a systematic and
chronological form, embracing the whole length and breadth of
Islamdom.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))Gibbon on Islam is not always a trustworthy chronicler. But
the expulsion of the Jews of Khaibar, is attested by all historian of
early Islam.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
