+++
title = "ACKNOWLEDGMENTS"

+++



  


  


  


  


HOW, AFTER ALMOST thirty years, can I begin to thank adequately all the people who have made it possible to continue the research at Gombe? It is hard, looking back, to differentiate between contributions towards the actual study and contributions to my personal well-being. After all, the years at Gombe, the observing and documenting of the lives of the chimpanzees, are so entwined with my own personal life that it is often difficult to separate the two. Possibly I should not even try. But this means that I should write a whole separate book, for the help and support that I have been given has been so great. Sometimes I have been overwhelmed by the kindness, generosity and desire to help that I have found in people around the world. It makes for a warmth around the heart that has, again and again, given me strength to cope when times were rough.

I believe, and hope, that I did express my gratitude to all those who helped Gombe during the first ten years of the study—in my first book, *In the Shadow of Man.* Here I will try to express my thanks to those people and organizations who have enabled me to carry on since then.

First I must mention my gratitude to the Tanzanian government: to our past President, Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, now Chairman of the Party, conserver of forest habitats, a botanist in his own right and to his successor, President Hassan Mwinyi, and to the many individuals in various governmental departments who have been so helpful and supportive over so many years. Special thanks to the various regional commissioners and district development directors of the Kigoma Region who have given assistance at all times, and to the Director of Wildlife, Costa Mlay. Very special thanks to the Director of Tanzania National Parks, David Babu, and many of the Wardens; to the Director of the Tanzania Wildlife Research Institute, Karim Hirji; to the Director and staff \(especially Addie Lyaruu\) of the Tanzania Scientific Research Council.

Many foundations, institutions and individuals have contributed funds over the past twenty years. For the National Geographic Society a very special word of gratitude. The Society funded the entire research programme for many years and continues to support the work in a variety of ways. The publicity that the Gombe chimpanzees have received over the years through magazine articles, TV programmes and, more recently, magazine advertisements, has, more than any other single factor, made it possible for me, and for all those helping me, to raise money for various chimpanzee programmes. I must mention, especially, Melvin Payne, Gil Grosvenor, Mary Smith and Neva Folk who, over recent years, have been so very, very helpful.

The LSB Leakey Foundation made a number of generous grants, and especial thanks to Tita Caldwell, Gordon Getty, George Jagels, Coleman Morton and Debbie Spies for their support and friendship.

Many individuals have made donations that have helped to maintain the research at Gombe since the generous funding of the Grant Foundation ended soon after the 1975 kidnapping, when forty armed men abducted four students \(this is described in Chapter 7\). The donors are too numerous to mention by name, but my heartfelt thanks go to every one of you, not only for major contributions, but also for the smaller gifts that represent the same magnanimous spirit on the part of the givers. One of my most treasured donations came to me in Africa from a small boy who mailed a quarter, taped to a sheet of paper, with a note saying that there would be more when he could earn money himself.

And let me thank so much my good friend Jim Caillouette who has long assisted with medical supplies for the Tanzanian staff.

A number of companies have made donations, and I should especially like to thank Jeff Walters and the Sony Corporation for generously providing a number of video cameras, players and tapes for the recording of behaviour in the field.

Many people have been helpful in Kigoma, nearest town to Gombe. Special thanks to Blanche and Toni Bescia, Subhadra and Ramji Dharsi, Rahma and Christopher Liundi, Asgar Remtulla and Kirit and Jayant Vaitha.

I am continually grateful to Robert Hinde for his patience with me in the early days when I was his student, and for his subsequent help and support. And my thanks also to David Hamburg who, in 1972, negotiated an affiliation between Gombe and Stanford University and secured major funding that enabled a succession of talented students to work at Gombe as research assistants, giving new vigour to the project.

I cannot mention by name, here, all the students and assistants who took part in observing the chimpanzees and collecting data. But I am specially grateful for the major contributions of those who remained in the field for several years: Harold Bauer, David Bygott, Patrick McGinnis, Larry Goldman, Hetty and Frans Plooij, Anne Pusey, Alice Sorem Ford, Geza Teleki, Mitzi Thorndal, Caroline Tutin and Richard Wrangham. Also Curt Busse and David Riss, who did the fifty-day follow of Figan.

Next I come to the Tanzanian Field Assistants, for whose skilled work and dedication I have the highest respect. These men have worked at Gombe for many years—the work is their life. After the 1975 kidnapping our research would have come to an end had it not been for these men. My special thanks go to Hilali Matama who commenced work at Gombe in 1968 and is now in day-to-day charge of the data collections, and to Hamisi Mkono and Eslom Mpongo who have also been with me for over ten years. I thank also Yahaya Alamasi, Ramadhani Fadhili, Bruno Helmani, Hamisi Matama, Gabo Paulo. I would like to pay very special tribute to the late Mzee Rashidi Kikwale who passed away in 1988. Rashidi it was who accompanied me on my early travels through the mountains of Gombe. With him I saw my first chimps. Throughout the subsequent years Rashidi was a loyal worker and a real friend. Towards the end of his life he played an important role at Gombe, acting as honorary headman of staff camp. After he died, Hilali lamented: “We are like a body without a head.” He is greatly missed.

Two other people who have made major contributions to the research at Gombe are Christopher Boehm and Anthony Collins. Chris introduced the use of 8mm video cameras into the day-today recording equipment and trained certain of the Tanzanian field staff to use them. This has resulted in capturing, on tape, many unique incidents. And I am able to *see* much of what has gone on when I have been away. Tony is Field Director in charge of the baboon study. During his twice-yearly three-month visits he also takes over most of the administration—for the hours he has put into working out problems \(wages, benefits, insurance and so on\), as well as for his dedication to the baboon research, I am eternally grateful. More recently British veterinarian Kenneth Pack has entered the scene. For his opportune visit, just in time to help save the life of that very special chimpanzee, Goblin, I shall always be immensely grateful. And also for his skilled treatment of the Gombe baboons when disease recently swept through the study troops.

A wonderful team of people has helped with data analysis and administration in Dar es Salaam. For eight years Trusha Pandit was my right-hand woman—there was nothing she could not turn her hand to. She has recently left to go with her husband to India, and no one will ever quite replace her. Other people who have spent hour upon hour helping with data analysis and all manner of other aspects of running Gombe \(and organizing me\!\) are Jeanee Deane, Jenny Gould, Jennifer Hanay, Ann Hinks, Uta Soutter and Judy Taylor. My heartfelt thanks to all. And, too, to those wonderful friends who sprang into the breach after Derek’s death, helping and strengthening me in many ways: first and foremost, of course, members of my own warm and supportive family, Vanne \(who was to undergo open-heart surgery herself just a few months later\), Olly, Audrey and Judy. And Grub—poor fellow, having a mother always immersed in chimpanzees and chimpanzee talk. In Dar es Salaam there was Derek’s son, Ian. And Clarissa and Gunar Barnes, Jenny and Michael Gould, Frauke and Benno Haffner, Sigy and Ted McMahon, Nancy and Robert Nooter, Trusha and her husband Prashant, Judy and Adrian Taylor. And very special friends, with whom I stayed during the first miserable days after my return to Tanzania, Dick Viets and his wonderful wife, Marina who, tragically, passed away recently and is missed so deeply, but also remembered with much love and affection, by so many. And others, who have been of great help subsequently: Liz and Ron Fennell, Catherine and Tony Marsh, Penelope Breeze and Stevenson McIllvaine, Mollie and David Miller, Julie and Don Petterson, and Dimitri Mantheakis and his sons.

Next I must try to thank those who made possible the Jane Goodall Institute for Research, Conservation and Education, a tax-exempt organization into which all donations are now channelled. It was conceived by the late Prince Ranier di san Faustino and his wife, Geneviève. After his death, Genie worked hard and made his dream a reality with the help of other wonderful friends—Joan Cathcart, Bart Deamer, Margaret Gruter, Douglas Schwartz, Dick Slottow and Bruce Wolfe. So much effort, so much generosity in time, or money, or both. Subsequently other loyal supporters have been part of the Institute: Larry Barker, Ed Bass, Hugh Caldwell, the late Sheldon Campbell, Bob Fry, Warren Iliff, Jerry Lowenstein, Jeff Short, Mary Smith and Betsy Strode. Here a very special word of thanks to two people whose generosity did much to set the Institute on its feet—Gordon and Ann Getty whose fabulous challenge gift in 1984 gave us, for the first time, an endowment. And my heartfelt thanks, too, to William Clement who made extraordinarily generous contributions when the Institute moved from San Francisco to Tucson, Arizona. I must also express gratitude to staff members who have worked so hard for so little to help me realize some of my dreams over the past few years. To Sue Engel, for helping the fledgling Institute to fly. And to Jennifer Kenyon and ChimpanZoo coordinator, Virginia Landau. A number of people have generously donated their effort and time, and I specially thank Leslie Groff, Gale Paulin, and Humphrey and Penny Taylor. And how can I properly express my thanks to Robert Edison and Judy Johnson who have led the effort to build up the Institute over the past few years. Bob, in particular, shares all my values where animal welfare is concerned. Next, I must express my thanks to Geza Teleki who, after fighting for chimpanzee conservation and welfare virtually single-handed subsequent to his return from Sierra Leone, has now joined forces with the JGI. Geza, in fact, is “Our Man in Washington,” where he heads the Committee for Conservation and Care of Chimpanzees \(The Four C’s\). Geza, along with Heather McGiffin, also provides wonderful hospitality every time I visit America’s capital—which, these days, is many times a year. Other people who have been deeply involved in efforts to improve things for chimpanzees, and who have been very helpful in Washington, are Michael Bean, Bonnie Brown, Roger Coras, Kathleen Mozzoco, Senator John Melcher, Ron Nowak, Nancy Reynolds, Christine Stevens and Elizabeth Wilson.

Many others have made great contributions, each in his or her own unique way, and to all of them I am so grateful—especially to Michael Aisner for great fund-raising efforts and true dedication to the cause; to Mark Maglio for contributing terrific art work; and to Peggy Detmer, Trent Meyer and Bart Walter for their wonderful bronzes.

More recently still the Jane Goodall Institute \(UK\) was born. Already this is a strong organization—because of the remarkable people who agreed to join the Board as Trustees: Robin Brown, Mark Collins, Geneviève di san Faustino, Robert Hinde, Bertil Jernberg, Guy Parsons, Victoria Pleydell-Bouverie, Sir Laurens van der Post, Susan Pretzlik, Karsten Schmidt, John Tandy, Steve Matthews, the late Sir Peter Scott—and my mother, Vanne. Along with Karsten Schmidt who steered the Institute safely through the Charitable Trust Commission, the bulk of the day-to-day work is done by Guy Parsons, Robert and Dilys Vass, Steve Matthews, Sue Pretzlik, and Vanne. The success of the launching of this Institute was due also to the generous donation by the Condor Preservation Trust, arranged by Robin and Jane Cole, much hard work by Clive Hollands and his staff, and the contributions, in terms of books and posters, by Michael Neugebauer. We are off to an auspicious start and hope to do much in Britain to raise awareness about the plight of chimpanzees, particularly among children. And many people, such as John Eastwood, Pat Groves, Neil Margerison, and Pippit Waters, are out there helping us.

It is difficult to express adequately my indebtedness to my late husband, Derek Bryceson, for his help, support and advice. Without him I doubt I could have kept the research going after the kidnapping of 1975. Derek, with his vast knowledge and understanding of Tanzania, helped me to train the field staff and to reorganize the data collection. Many were the discussions I had with him on puzzling aspects of chimpanzee behaviour; his comments, proffered from the point of view of a farmer, were often penetrating, and gave me new insights. His contribution was indeed great; even now, because he was so loved and honoured in Tanzania, his name confers on me, his widow, a position I would never otherwise have attained.

Now I must try to thank my mother, Vanne, for the staggering contribution she has made. Not only did she encourage my childhood dream of studying wild animals, but, of course, she even accompanied me to Gombe in 1960. Her wisdom and advice over the sometimes stormy years between then and now have been invaluable. She has helped with fund raising, she has read and commented on manuscripts, and she has always been a tower of strength. And, of course, there would have been no book without her—for I should not have been\!

Finally, there are the chimpanzees themselves, all those unique, vivid personalities: Flo and Fifi, Gilka and Gigi, Melissa and Gremlin, Goliath and Mike, Figan and Goblin, Jomeo and Evered. And David Graybeard who, although he moved on to the Happy Hunting Grounds over twenty years ago, remains closest to my heart.

