+++
title = "05 CHAPTER FOUR REACTIONS TO PSYCHO-CHRISTOLOGY"

+++
**CHAPTER FOUR**

**REACTIONS TO PSYCHO-CHRISTOLOGY**

**4.1. Catholic reactions**

In Flanders, the Catholic-dominated press has kept very quiet about Dr.
Somers’ approach to Jesus.  Most theologians have kept mum.  The Vatican
has not reacted.  It had put some Jesuits to work on this theory, but
they did not publicly speak out.  Perhaps they are aware of its
explosive potential.  Perhaps they are, on the contrary, not worried at
all, because earlier psychopathological studies about Jesus had also not
toppled Christianity.

But those earlier theories had been put forward by staunch atheists who
had been a bit intemperate and triumphalistic in the presentation of
their case, which made it sound less scientific and less convincing. 
Moreover, psychology then was not what it is now. Then, there was an
Albert Schweitzer to write an in-depth reply which had convinced many
believers that there was nothing to worry, that this was just another of
those far-fatched hypotheses that anti-Christian skeptics used to come
up with.^([1](#1)) But now, no man of the stature of Albert Schweitzer
has come forward with a reply.  And this time, the psycho-analysis of
Jesus is being presented sobrely by a man who was a faithful servant of
the Church for most of his life, and who knows not only psychology, in a
more advanced form, but also the philological and theological aspects of
Bible research.

A comment on Dr. Somers’ work was written by the KUL (Catholic
University Leuven) theologian Leo Kenis, who denounced the book as
assuming the Bible text to be historical, and as not understanding the
Biblical language game, etc.^([2](#2)) A leftist weekly has collected a
few more reactions, notably those of Prof.  Etienne Vermeersch, another
ex-Jesuit, now staunch opponent of Church and religion; and of Prof. 
Edward Schillebeeckx, the famous Flemish theologian teaching in
Nijmegen, Holland.  Let us have a brief look at their objections.

1\. “Paraphrenia does not exist.  It is an outdated category in
psychopathology, not even mentioned in American manuals of psychiatry.”

It is a fact that in the US, the paraphrenia syndrome has been subsumed
under the more general category of paranoia.  But in continental Europe,
the fine distinction between the two is certainly being maintained. 
Even otherwise, it would only be a change in name-tag: the diagnosis of
at least a psychopathological condition of the paranoia family would
remain in place.  The symptoms remain symptoms, even if the condition
they indicate gets a less precise definition or another name.

2\. “This approach forces modern categories on ancient cultural
phenomena.  What would now be considered a disease was something divine
in those days.  Vincent Van Gogh was considered a madman in his time,
but a genius today.”

Just like physical diseases have been diagnosed on the leftovers of
people who died one hundred or ten thousand years ago, because physical
diseases have remained the same all along, mental afflictions can also
be diagnosed because they have also remained the same.  In fact, terms
like “epilepsy” and “paranoia” were coined by Greek doctors, so these
diseases were known in their time, and were considered as diseases. 
They were not that precisely defined and only known to very few
initiates (not to Jesus’ audience), but at least they indicate that
human psychopathology has not fundamentally changed over the millennia. 
The fact that the same psychological phenomena were interpreted
differently, not as disease but as ghost-possession or god-inspiration,
only goes to confirm the thesis that what was deemed a sign of divinity
by Jesus’ (and other prophets’) followers, may in reality have been a
pathological symptom.

The best proof that the diagnosis remains the same in spite of cultural
differences, is the fact that contemporaries of Jesus considered him
mentally disturbed.  The pharisees say: “Now we know that you are
possessed by a devil” (John 8:52).  According to the Gospel of the
Hebrews, an apocryphal text (i.e. kept out of the Church canon, not
because of unreliability but because of theological inconvenience),
Jesus’ family wants him to get baptized, because they hope that this
ritual may purify him from the impure spirit that troubles him.  And the
canonical Gospels confirm that Jesus’ own family members considered him
mentally afflicted: when they hear that his public life has started they
want to take him back home, “because they thought he had gone out of his
mind” (Mark 3:21). One could ask: but why have the Gospel editors not
scrapped this hint at a mental affliction?  The answer is that they had
to counter precisely this allegation from their audiences, so they
roundly admitted that people could consider mad what was in fact divine.

As for Van Gogh, if he was a mental patient in the 19th century, he
would still have been one today.  It so happens that there is a lot of
debate about the correctness of the diagnosis of Van Gogh.^([3](#3)) At
any rate, his condition did not prevent him from being a genius in
painting.  The point is that between functioning non-mad people and
non-functioning mad people, you have shades of gradual mental
affliction, which allow people to be somewhat mad and yet function. 
This unease may even act as an incentive to remarkable achievements,
like a peculiar inspiredness in painting, or a kind of charisma in a
wandering god-man.  Nevertheless, the “revelations” such people get, no
matter how creatively they integrate them, are at any rate the products
of their own minds, not messages from God.

3\. “The Bible stories do not give a historical report about Jesus’
doings and sayings.  Therefore, no diagnosis of a historical character
can be extracted from them.”

This stand, taken by modem theologians like Schillebeeckx, is in fact
dangerously undermining the foundations of the Christian faith.  As
Prof. Vermeersch, another ex-Jesuit who renounced Christianity,
commented on Prof.  Schillebeeckx’ reaction: if all these Bible stories
are only stories, do you think that the common faithful will remain
Christians if they are told the truth about these “mere stories”?  The
crux of the Christian faith is precisely that God has intervened in
history, by sacrificing his Only-begotten Son and resurrecting Him.  If
the report in the Gospels is not history, then the Christian myth is at
best of the same order as all the Pagan myths, and Christianity must
forsake its claims to uniqueness and finality.

What is worse from the scholarly angle: this hiding behind the
postulated non-historical character of the Gospel stories fatally leaves
important features of the Gospel unexplained.  Quite a few episodes
cannot possibly be explained as “post-paschal glorification” or any
other of the difficult concepts which the exegetes keep on inventing. 
They can only be understood as the report (even if distorted and
reworked) of a historical reality.

Prof. Schillebeeckx has said that Dr. Somers should study “literary
genres” and “narrativity” before he can speak about Gospel
interpretation.  As a negative authority argument this is quite
ludicrous, since dr. Somers is a Ph.D. in theology with a lot of
research publications to his credit, plus a number of other academic
titles and achievements besides, and he can talk circles around most
theologians, who are a class of specialists not taken seriously by most
fellow academics.  He rejects “narrativity” not because of ignorance,
but because on the contrary he has found that classifying the Gospel
episodes as different types of narrative does not add up to any
explanation and understanding worth the name.  In contrast to the
theologians, a number of psychiatrists have declared they could not find
any fault with Dr. Somers’ methodology and conclusions.

**4.2 Shock and disbelief**

For many people, Dr. Somers’ research findings have come as a shock.

Being shaken in your most cherished beliefs can be hard.  The first
reaction is outright rejection.  When I was 6 and my sister told me that
Saint Nicolas (a saint popular in the Low Countries, deformed in America
to Santa Claus), the saint who rides the rooftops on his white horse and
brings toys through the chimneys, “does not exist”, I was sincerely
indignant that she dared to say such scandalous things.  My indignation
lasted only a minute, I was still young and flexible; but when you have
spent decades nurturing a certain belief and making it the corner-stone
of your world-view and value-system, seeing it swept away can be
painful.

Dr. Somers has testified how for him too, discovering the untenability
of the belief system to which he had devoted his life had been a
long-drawn-out painful experience.  But what can we do?  We all have to
grow up one day, and accept that Saint Nicolas does not exist.

Many Christians have never had any scruples to disrupt the entire
culture, not merely the beliefs but also the entire way of life, of
non-Christians.  Actual disruption has happened on a large scale in many
countries, but verbal blackening has been truly universal among
believing Christians.  The Old Testament speaks in the most hateful
terms about the Gentiles, the New Testament is very harsh on the Jews
and the Pagans.  Christians are spoonfed this attitude to unbelievers
simply by hearing and reading their revered Scriptures.

To Christians shocked by the psychopathological approach to some of
their great religious figures, we may point out that Christian polemists
have always accused a similar prophet, Mohammed, of being something else
than a genuine spokesman of God.  Either he had to be an impostor, who
didn’t believe in his own prophethood but fooled the masses. Or he had
to be ghost-possessed: that was the perception of Mohammed’s
contemporaries, against which he had to defend himself a dozen times,
and which Christian polemists have borrowed and repeated numerous
times.^([4](#4))

Though Mohammed’s adversary Utba investigated the matter and gave
Mohammed a certificate of complete sanity (according to Muslim sources),
Christian polemists have kept on using the charge of a
psychopathological disturbance against their arch-rival Mohammed until
in the 20th century, secular-minded diagnoses of Jesus made them realize
that this approach would damage Jesus along with Mohammed.

The campaigns they have waged against the gods and religious figures of
non-Abrahamic religions have been along different lines, but usually
just as insulting.  So, Christian polemists are in no position to
protest when Jesus is put to psychopathological scrutiny.

Being confronted with facts and insights that jeopardize your cherished
beliefs may be painful for many, but for many others the experience
comes as a liberation.  Dr. Somers relates how after the publication of
his first book on Jesus, he received a grateful letter from a woman who
had been going through divorce proceedings before a Church Court.  For
Catholics, divorce is strictly forbidden even if the marriage is a
complete disaster, unless a Church Court declares the marriage invalid. 
For people who believe that Church-ordained morality is based on a
revelation through God’s Only-born Son, the thought of trespassing
against the divorce prohibition is extremely heavy to bear. In the case
of this lady, the news that Jesus was just a human person, whose
self-proclamation as Son of God was merely a delusion, reduced the
questions of morality she was facing to the human level where they
properly belong.  By accepting the failure of her marriage, she would
not be trespassing against a divine law, nor would she go to hell.

More generally, the suffocating grip of Church dogma over human
decisions has been eliminated at the source.  Many theologians have
tried to amend Church dogma or Biblical prescriptions by superficially
glossing over the implications of such reforms.  Either Jesus’
revelation is forever valid, and then no changes are possible in the
entire theological edifice logically constructed upon this basic belief;
or changes are possible, but then the divine and unique character of
Jesus’ mission and message is undermined.  In Dr. Somers’ approach, by
contrast, we have a contradiction-free solution: forget the prophets’
claims of divine authority, forget Jesus’ claims of a divine nature, and
start the human quest for meaning and for an ethical code all over on a
different basis.

**4.3. Prophetic monotheism and Sanatana Dharma**

In the past century, people belonging to the Hindu-Buddhist cultural
sphere have started projecting the characteristics of their own
spiritual masters on the monotheist prophets.  Thus, when Jesus says:
“The Kingdom of God is among you”, meaning “I, Jesus, am the Kingdom of
God”, these good-natured Orientals take it to mean: “The Kingdom of God
is inside of you, waiting to be discovered through meditation.” They
have started to say that the prophets were a kind of yogis who taught
their followers a way to attain a divine state of consciousness.

In fact, prophecy is radically different from yoga: it means allowing an
outside entity, which in the case of monotheism is called
Yahweh/God/Allah, to blow certain consciousness contents into your
mind.  Consciousness is not turned inward, but is (or believes it is)
communicating with another Being.  Moreover, the mind is not being
emptied of its contents and made to rest in itself, as it is in yoga; on
the contrary, it is being filled with a message beyond one’s control. 
The prophet receives a certain information: prophecy is like talking,
though with an unusual partner via an unusual channel; but yoga is
silence.  Lastly, if it is correct that prophethood is a mental
aberration and a delusion, then that makes it the very antithesis of
yoga, which is an undisturbed and realistic awareness of pure
consciousness.

Yoga is not an erratic and disturbing experience which befalls you and
drives you to tirades of doom and to outbursts against your fellow men. 
It is a systematic discipline and makes the practitioner calm and
serene.  The word yoga means discipline, control (it is also translated
as “uniting”: not the soul with an outsider called God, but the mind
with its object, i.e. concentration).  Since its field of working is
consciousness, it is not interested in outward experiences such as
recognition and glorification, or martyrdom.  There is nothing dramatic
about yoga, in stark contrast to the dramas enacted and encountered by
the prophets.

The most remarkable difference between the prophets’ discourse and that
of the rishis, is certainly this.  The prophets all talk about
themselves a lot.  They think they are very special, this one person in
this one body is different from the rest and has an exclusive
relationship with the Creator.  But the rishis talked about a universal
way, a world order in which we all participate, a state of consciousness
we can all achieve.  If God is defined as that which transcends all
worldly differences, the One above the Many, then this universalism is
far more divine than the prophets’ exclusivism.

What Hindus who have been trapped in a sentimental glorification of
Jesus and other prophets will have to learn, is that the essence of
Hindu Dharma is not “tolerance”, or “equal respect for all religions”,
but *Satya*, truth.  The problem with Christianity and Islam is
superficially their intolerance and fanaticism.  But this intolerance is
a consequence of these religions’ untruthfulness: if your belief system
is based on delusions, you have to pre-empt rational inquiry into it and
shield it from contact with more sustainable thought systems.  The
fundamental problem with the monotheist religions is not that they are
intolerant, but that they are untrue, (*Asatya* or *Anrita*).

At this point many Hindus will be sincerely shocked, they will object,
and Christian polemists will express the same objection: “By denouncing
some religions as untrue, you are making a pretentious claim to knowing
the ultimate truth.” In the case of Christians who know and believe the
essence of their religion, this objection is highly insincere, as they
themselves are confidently claiming to possess the ultimate, God-given
truth.  Otherwise, the objection against absolute truth-claims may be
valid.  The point is that by denouncing the defining beliefs of
Christianity (and similarly, Islam) as untrue, we are not making a claim
to know the final truth.  The quest for the final truth remains open. 
When scientists find that a certain hypothesis is empirically disproves,
they henceforth treat it as untrue and move on to more promising
hypotheses; this does not imply a pretentious claim to ultimate truth. 
It is simply that once a belief is found to be untrue, we should not
burden ourselves with it anymore, so that we can keep ourselves free for
something more true.

There are other respects also in which Christianity and Sanatana Dharma
are radically different.  Christianity worships a suffering convict on
the cross, and consequently glorifies suffering.  To a woman who was
heavily suffering, mother Teresa wrote: “You should be grateful for this
suffering.  It is Christ’s way of kissing you.”

In a sense, there is something to it that “hardships are the spice of
life, they mould the perfect man”.  Even so, the unabashed glorification
of happiness is a far healthier attitude than the glorification of
suffering.  Hardships will come anyway, but it is morbid to focus the
mind on them unnecessarily.  When Christians hear Chinese people wish
each other “much wealth” or in fact “much money”, on New Year’s day,
they find it rather shocking.  When they see depictions of Lakshmi or
Ganesh, with all their opulence and well-being and endless generosity,
they find something is very wrong.  At any rate, it is a kind of
iconography which you will not find in any church.

Like Christianity, several Sanatana traditions, esp.  Buddhism, focus on
suffering.  But they have an unambiguous verdict: suffering is the
problem, we offer a way out of it.  The common-sense position of
mainstream Hindu sources like the Bhagavad Gita is that suffering is a
fact of life, that we have to bravely face it, that enduring it makes us
stronger; but not that we should glorify it.  In Christianity, a
straightforward remedy against suffering is always resented as a bit
selfish; since we are sinners, suffering is what we deserve.

This attitude to suffering is symptomatic of the single most harmful
characteristic of Christianity: its lack of balance.  In traditional
Pagan and secular systems of ethics, the principle of the Golden Mean is
duly emphasized (Aristotle, Confucius, Buddha); by contrast,
Christianity fosters a sentimental extremism.

The only Bible books that consist of lucid observations about life, are
non-prophetic books like Proverbs and *Qohelet* (Ecclesiastes).  They
belong to a section of the Old Testament called *Ketuvim*, “Writings”,
for which no divine source is claimed.  Their source is just human and
normal, rather like any collection of quotations or “Collected Proverbs
from the Middle East”.  These sayings range from the trivial and
uninspired to the witty and the profound.  Some good, some not so good,
a few gems: your average human product.  These human sayings have some
good advice to offer on how to conduct life; in the prophetic
revelations, it is hard to find any such good advice.

Prophetism has caused innumerable hardships without giving anything
valuable in return.  Not one of the valuable things in the cultures
dominated by it, can be traced to their prophetic-monotheistic
component.  Its source has more often than not been mental darkness. 
Today, there is no justification for keeping humanity in the mental
prison of prophetism any longer.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))A. Schweitzer: *Die Psychiatrische Beurteilung Jesu* (German:
“The Psychiatric Evaluation of Jesus”), Tubingen 1913.

^([2](#2a))Review of *Jezus de Messias*, under pseudonym Joris
Christiaansen, in *Kultuurleven*, December 1986.

^([3](#3a))According to a report in the *Journal of the American Medical
Association*, Van Gogh really had Ménière’s disease, an ailment which
can cause hallucinations and a ringing in the ear. Perhaps he cut his
ear off as a way of relieving this suffering. But dr. Alan D. Kornblut,
chief editor of the *Ear, Nose and Throat Journal*, rejects this
diagnosis.

^([4](#4a))See Quran 15:6, 23:25, 23:70, 26:27, 34:8, 34:46, 37:36,
44:14, 51:39. 52:29, 68:2, 68:51, 81:22.  People also call him
“enchanted”, according to Quran 17:47, 25:8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
