+++
title = "Weight loss"
+++
(Source: https://threader.app/thread/1418653006933921793)

A WAY TO LOSE FAT (My way - not the only way)): The worst way to lose fat is to eat less and go jogging – this hardly works and makes you a moron.

- 1 Eating less makes you hungry – eventually you’ll cave-in.  
- 2: Never jog. Never, ever, jog. Run or sprint but never jog. You want to get lean. right? Jogging won’t help you. Jogging hardly uses any calories (might as well walk).

Generally,

- 1 Do some form of resistance training
- 2 Do high intensity exercise such as interval training
- 3 Eat no more than two meals a day
- 3 Reduce the carbohydrate content of your diet i.e. bread, pasta, rice, pizza, cakes, desserts, sweets. Eat as much meat, fish, eggs, non-starchy vegetables as you like. 

More specifically,

- *LC HP IF – the way forward (diet)* - LC (Low Carbohydrate) HP (High Protein) IF (Intermittent Fasting)
- *PA RT IT LA FT – the way forward (exercise)* - [As well as helping you lose fat, this is your code for dynamic strength, fitness and robust health.] 
  - PA (Physical Activity) RT (Resistance Training) IT (Interval Training) LA (Lactic Acid/Acidosis) FT (Fast Twitch Muscle)

At first glance this may seem like a lot; it isn’t - it’s the normal life of a wild carnivore. That’s what you should be. It’s only a lot of work for people who are used to wall-to-wall comfort. 

- LC - Reduce the carbohydrate content of your diet i.e. bread, pasta, rice, pizza, cakes, desserts, sweets. Eat non-starchy vegetables
- HP - Eat as much meat, fish, eggs, non-starchy vegetables as you like
- IF - Eat two meals a day in a 6-8hr window. Breakfast and lunch or lunch and supper. Don’t eat large meals late (within four hours of going to bed)
- PA - Don’t do all your physical activity in the gym. Lazy people only go to the gym, they do no other form of physical activity.
- RT - Some form of resistance training 2-3 times a week is essential, it helps retain/build muscle whilst you are losing fat. Muscle is metabolic machinery, it keeps you lean.
- IT - Interval training whether it is running, ergo, rowing, cycling is the dog’s bollocks, do 2x a week
- LA - You need to reacquaint yourself with acidosis, a high heart rate and muscular effort, especially generated by the lower limbs. You do this as an interval training session. There is something about a lactic acid session which re-engineers the body.
- FT - Engaging your fast-twitch muscle helps you build the dynamic strength and muscle of a wild beast.

- Don’t f**king question how or why this shit makes you lean, it just does. If you exercise (and eat) like this it will be impossible for you to stay overweight 