+++
title = "03 1 Encounter on the Euphrates"

+++
**1**  
**Encounter on the Euphrates**

Christian historians will have us believe that Hinduism first came in
contact with Christianity in AD 52 when St. Thomas, an apostle of Jesus
Christ, landed in Malabar. He is supposed to have travelled in South
India and founded seven churches before he was. “murdered” by the
“malicious” Brahmanas. The old Christians in Kerala, who knew as well as
introduced themselves as Syrian Christians till the other day, now take
pride in calling themselves St. Thomas Christians. We have examined this
story elsewhere^([1](#1)) as also the motives for floating it. Here it
should suffice to say that the more scrupulous Christian historians have
found the story too fanciful to be taken seriously.

Coming to facts of history, the first encounter between Hinduism and
Christianity took place not in India but in those parts of West Asia,
North Africa and Southern Europe which comprised the Roman Empire at the
dawn of the Christian era. There is evidence, archaeological as well as
literary, that Hinduism had made its presence felt in Graeco-Roman
religions and philosophies long before Jesus was born. The imprint of
Samkhya, Yoga and Vedanta on Eleatic, Elusinian, Orphic, Pythagorean,
Platonist, Stoic, Gnostic and Neo-Platonist philosophies is too manifest
to be missed easily. It was widely believed in the ancient Western world
that the Greeks had learnt their wisdom from the Brahmanas of India.
Evidence of Hindu colonies in some leading cities of the Roman Empire is
also available. Hindu temples had come up wherever Hindu merchants and
traders had established their colonies. Hindu saints, sages and savants
could not have lagged behind.

Christianity did not fail to notice this Hindu presence as soon as it
became a force in the Roman Empire. It was, from its very birth, wide
awake towards all currents and crosscurrents of thought and culture. We
find St. Hippolytus attacking the Brahmanas as a source of heresy as
early as the first quarter of the third country.^([2](#2)) It was not
long after that Hinduism faced a determined assault from Christianity as
did other ancient religions of the Roman Empire.

Hindu temples were the most visible symbols of the Brahmana religion.
They became targets of Christian attack like all other Pagan temples.
“According to the Syrian writer Zenob,” writes Dr. R. C. Majumdar,
“there was an Indian colony in the canton of Taron on the upper
Euphrates, to the west of Lake Van, as early as the second century
B.C. The Indians had built there two temples containing images of gods
about 18 and 22 feet high. When, about AD 304, St. Gregory came to
destroy these images, he was strongly opposed by the Hindus. But he
defeated them and smashed the images, thus anticipating the iconoclastic
zeal of Mahmud of Ghazni.”^([3](#3))

Historians of the Roman Empire have documented the large-scale
destruction of Pagan temples by Christianity from the fourth century
onwards.^([4](#4)) It is more than likely that some of these were places
of Hindu worship. The word “pagan” is a comprehensive term in Christian
parlance and covers a large variety of religious and cultural
expressions. Hindu historians will have to examine all archives, Pagan
as well as Christian. Meanwhile, let Christian theologians tell us of
the Christian virtues for which Gregory was canonised as a saint.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Sita Ram Goel, *Papacy. Its Doctrine and History*, Voice of
India, 1986, pp. 55-58. The St. Thomas story has since been examined in
great detail in *The myth of Saint Thomas and the Mylapore Shiva Temple*
by Ishwar Sharan, Voice of India, New Delhi, 1991, reprinted in a
revised and enlarged second edition in 1995.

[²](#2a) D. P. Singhal, *India and World Civilization*, Calcutta, 1972,
Volume I, p. 85.

[³](#3a) *The History and Culture of the Indian People*, Volume II, *The
Age of Imperial Unity*, Fourth Edition, Bombay, 1968, pp. 633-634. It
would have been more appropriate to mention Francis Xavier in this
context. Islamic iconoclasm is not the only iconoclasm which Hinduism
has known. Christian iconoclasm pioneered by Xavier was no less
ferocious and predatory. It is true that due to geographical and
historical factors, Christian iconoclasm came to this country much
later, was confined to a much smaller area and spread over a much
shorter time-span as compared to the large-scale and prolonged
iconoclasm practised by Islam. But, it was no less criminal in its
inspiration. Moreover, Islam did not invent iconoclasm. It had learnt it
from the Bible and the Christian practice down the ages.

[⁴](#4a) The evidence of Christian iconoclasm in many countries for many
centuries lies scattered in many Christian and non-Christian accounts.
During my travels in 1989, I searched several leading libraries in
Switzerland, Germany, France, England and the USA for a consolidated
study of the subject but failed to find any. A glimpse of what
Christianity did to Pagan temples in the Roman Empire can, however, be
had from Pierre Chuvin, *A Chronicle of the Last Pagans*, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Massachussetts, USA, 1990.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
