+++
title = "15 13 Encounter with Swami Vivekananda"

+++
**13**  
**Encounter with Swami Vivekananda**

The spokesman for Hinduism in the next dialogue between Hinduism and
Christianity was Swami Vivekananda (1863-1902).  A significant feature
of this dialogue was that, for the most part, it was held in the
homelands of Christianity.  Vivekananda not only carried the message of
Hinduism to the USA and Europe during his two trips from 1893 to 1897
and from 1899 to 1900, he also turned the tide against Christianity in
India so far as educated, upper class Hindus were concerned. 
Henceforward, Christian missionaries would reap a harvest either in the
tribal belts or during famines when charitable organisations abroad and
a patronising government at home placed funds for relief at their
disposal and Hindu orphans fell into their hands in large numbers.

Vivekananda himself symbolised an irony of that system of education
which had been deliberately designed to demolish Hinduism and promote
Christianity.  He was himself a product of that very education, but he
turned against Christianity and in defence of Hinduism the knowledge and
intellectual discipline which he had acquired as a student in a
missionary college.

The renewal of East India Company’s Charter in 1813 had opened the
Company’s dominions to Christian missionaries.  It had also advised
“introduction of useful knowledge and religious and moral improvement.”
A controversy had been going on ever since regarding the system of
education suitable for India.  The Orientalists among the British rulers
advocated retention of the traditional Indian system.  They were afraid
that imparting of Western knowledge to natives would encourage them to
claim equality with white men and demand democratisation of the
administration.  The Anglicists, on the other hand, were convinced that
knowledge of Western literature, philosophy and science would wean
Hindus away from their “ancestral superstitions” and draw them closer to
the religion and culture of the ruling race.

Christian missionaries were, by and large, with the Anglicists.  One of
them had written in 1822 that, through Western education, Hindus “now
engaged in the degrading and polluting worship of idols shall be brought
to the knowledge of true God and Jesus Christ whom He has
sent.”^([1](#1)) Missionaries felt immensely strengthened when Alexander
Duff, an ardent advocate of Western education, reached Calcutta in 1830.

Alexander Duff was convinced that “of all the systems of false religion
ever fabricated by the perverse ingenuity of fallen men, Hinduism is
surely the most stupendous”^([2](#2)) and that India was “the chief seat
of Satan’s earthly dominion.”^([3](#3)) He studied for some time the
effect which Western education was having on Hindu young men attending
the Hindu College and similar institutions which had come up in Calcutta
and elsewhere in Bengal since more than a decade before his arrival.  He
came to the definite conclusion that Western education would make the
Hindus “perfect unbelievers in their own system” and “perfect believers
in Christianity.” In an address delivered in 1835 to a General Church
Assembly he proclaimed that knowledge of Western literature and science
would “demolish the huge and hideous fabric of Hinduism” brick by brick
till “the whole will be found to have crumbled into
fragments.”^([4](#4))

A Committee of Public Instruction had been set up by the Government for
recommending a suitable system of education.  Alexander Duff had been
made a member of the Committee in 1834.  Next year, T. B. Macaulay, a
member of the Governor General’s Council, was appointed to preside over
the Committee.  He wrote a Minute on February 2, 1835, advocating
Western education.  There was a tie between the Anglicists and the
Orientalists when the Minute came before the Committee on March 7.
Macaulay used his casting vote and forced a decision.  The Western
system of education was adopted.  In a letter written to his father in
1836, Macaulay predicated, “It is my firm belief that if our plans of
education are followed up, there will not be a single idolator among the
respectable classes of Bengal thirty years hence.”^([5](#5))

The missionaries were trying hard to turn the dream into a reality. 
“And in what country,” Louis Rousslet, a French traveller to India,
wrote in 1876, “could such a spectacle be witnessed as that which met my
eyes that day in this square of Benares?  There, at ten paces from all
that the Hindoo holds to be most sacred in religion, between the Source
of wisdom and the idol of Siva, a Protestant missionary had taken his
stand beneath a tree.  Mounted on a chair, he was preaching in the
Hindostani language, on the Christian religion and the errors of
paganism. I heard his shrill voice, issuing from the depths of a
formidable shirt-collar, eject these words at the crowd, which
respectfully and attentively surrounded him You are idolaters; that
block of stone which you worship has been taken from a quarry, it is no
better than the stone of my house.  The reproaches called forth no
murmur; the missionary was listened to immovably, but his dissertation
was attended to, for every now and then one of the audience would put a
question, to which the brave apostle replied as best as he could. 
Perhaps we should be disposed to admire the courage of the missionary if
the well-known toleration of the Hindoos did not defraud him of all his
merit; and it is this tolerance that most disheartens the missionary one
of whom said to me - our labours are in vain; you can never convert a
man who has sufficient conviction in his own religion to listen, without
moving a muscle, to all the attacks you can make against it.”^([6](#6))

The fond hope that Hinduism will die out before long was expressed by
Richard Temple before a Christian audience in England in 1883.  “India
is like a mighty bastion,” he wrote, “which is being battered by heavy
artillery.  We have given blow after blow, and thud after thud, and the
effect is not at first very remarkable; but at last with a crash the
mighty structure will come toppling down, and it is our hope that some
day the heathen religions of India will in like manner
succumb.”^([7](#7)) At the same time, he felt sure that Christianity had
a very bright future in India.  “But we are not chasing a shadow,” he
continued, “we are not rolling a Sisyphean stone, we are not ascending
an inaccessible hill; or, if we are going up hill, it is that sort of
ascent which soon leads to a summit, from which we shall survey the
promised land. And when we reach the top what prospect shall we see? We
shall see churches in India raising up their spires towards heaven,
Christian villages extending over whole tracts of country, churches
crowded with dusky congregations and dusky communicants at the altar
tables.  We shall hear the native girls singing hymns in the vernacular,
and see boys trooping to school or studying for the universities under
missionary auspices.  Those things, and many others, I have seen, and
would to God I could fix them on the minds of my audience as they are
fixed upon my own.”^([8](#8)) Vivekananda shattered the hope and the
dream in the next decade.

Narendranath Datta, who was to become Swami Vivekananda, was born in
1863, the year when Alexander Duff left India well satisfied that
Hinduism was on its way out and Christianity on its way in, at least in
Bengal.  Macaulay’s prediction appeared to be coming true as there had
been a spate of conversions to Christianity.  In 1832 Alexander Duff had
converted Krishnamohan Banerji, a student of the Hindu
College.  Banerji, in turn, converted fifty-nine young men in the next
few years.  He became a minister of the Christ Church and was
“instrumental in converting several hundred Hindus in Krishnanagar in
1839.”^([9](#9)) The other important converts made by Duff were K. C.
Banerji and M. L. Basak in 1839 and Lal Behari De and Madhusudan Dutta
in 1843.

Leaders of the Brahmo Samaj were perturbed and tried to arrest the
trend.  A meeting held in Calcutta in May 1845 and attended by a
thousand Hindus, gave a call that Hindus should not send their boys to
missionary schools and colleges.  Some funds were collected for
promoting Hindu educational and humanitarian institutions.  But their
efforts did not make much headway.  The missionaries commanded much
larger resources and official patronage.  There was a craze for Western
education which was thought best when imparted in missionary
institutions.  Moreover, the coming of Keshub Chunder Sen to the top in
the Brahmo Samaj gave a further blow to Hinduism.  He was infatuated
with Jesus and the Bible and made hysterical outbursts in praise of
both.

The only resolute defender of Hinduism in this intellectually hostile
atmosphere was Bankim Chandra Chatterji.  He was well-versed in Western
literature and philosophy and his knowledge of Hindu Shastras and
history was deep as well as discerning.  He had come to the definite
conclusion that Hindus had nothing to learn from Christianity.  For him,
Jesus was “an incomplete man”, the Christian God “a despot” and the
Christian doctrine of everlasting punishment “devilish”.  He repudiated
the missionary accusation that Hinduism was responsible for corruptions
that had crept into Hindu society in the course of history.  “If the
principles of Christianity,” he wrote, “are not responsible for the
slaughter of the crusades, the butcheries of Alva, the massacre of St.
Bartholomew or the flames of the Inquisition... If the principles of
Christianity are not responsible for the civil disabilities of Roman
Catholics and Jews which till recently disgraced the English Statute
Book, I do not understand how the principles of Hinduism are to be held
responsible for the civil disabilities of the sudras under the Brahmanic
regime.  The critics of Hinduism have one measure for their own religion
and another for Hinduism.”^([10](#10)) For him, Sri Krishna was the
highest ideal, both human and divine.  His novels and essays were
creating a consciousness of pride in the Hindu heritage in that large
section of Hindu society which had not yet passed under the spell of
Jesus.

Narendranath was a student in Alexander Duffs General Assembly’s
Institution which later on became the Scottish Church College.  He had
made a wide study of Western literature, history and philosophy, had
joined the Brahmo Samaj and come to share Keshub Chunder Sen’s
admiration for Jesus.  But a turning point came in his life when he met
Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa in November 1880.  For the first time, he
was face to face with a powerful expression of Hindu spirituality and
that, too, in a simple man who had not been even to a primary school. 
His travels all over India after Sri Ramakrishna’s death gave him
further glimpses of how Hindu spirituality had percolated effortlessly
to the lowest levels of Hindu society.  He was thus in a position to
process Christianity from the vantage point of a new vision.  In the
end, he frustrated Alexanders Duff’s hope and falsified Macaulay’s and
Temple’s prediction.

Sri Ramakrishna had never heard of Jesus till Jesus was thrust under his
nose by those disciples who had come to him from the fold of Keshub
Chunder Sen. Mahendra Nath Gupta, whose record of the talks of Sri
Ramakrishna was to become famous as *The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna* had
an infantile fascination for Jesus and never missed an opportunity to
compare the sayings and doings of Jesus with those of the Paramahamsa. 
But to the last, Jesus remained for Sri Ramakrishna only a figure which
people belonging to a foreign religion worshipped as God.  He did not
have even a remote knowledge of the dogmas of Christianity.  The only
dogma, that of the original sin, which was presented to him by some
disciples, he repudiated with repugnance.  “Once someone gave me,” he
said on October 27, 1882, “a book of the Christians. I asked him to read
it to me.  It talked about nothing but sin.” Turning to Keshub Chunder
Sen, who was present, he continued, “Sin is the only thing one hears at
your Brahmo Samaj too... He who says day and night, ‘I am a sinner, I am
a sinner’, verily becomes a sinner... Why should one only talk about sin
and hell, and such things?”^([11](#11)) Thus he knocked the bottom out
of Christianity.  Without sin, there was no need for the atoning death
of a historical saviour.

Vivekananda carried forward the same idea.  “The greatest error,” he
said, “is to call a man a weak and miserable sinner.  Every time a
person thinks in this mistaken manner, he rivets one more link in the
chain of avidyA that binds him, adds one more layer to the
“self-hypnotism” that lies heavy over his mind.”^([12](#12)) He compared
the Hindu and Christian concepts of the soul.  “One of the chief
distinctions,” he said, “between the Vedic and the Christian religion is
that the Christian religion teaches that each human soul had its
beginning at its birth into this world, whereas the Vedic religion
asserts that the spirit of man is an emanation of the Eternal Being and
has no more a beginning than God Himself.”^([13](#13)) He hailed humans
as Children of Immortal Bliss - *amritasya putrAH* - in the language of
the Upanishads.  “Ye are the children of God,” he proclaimed while
addressing the Parliament of Religions, “the sharers of immortal bliss,
holy and perfect beings.  Ye divinities on earth - sinners!  It is a sin
to call man so; it is a standing libel on human nature.  Come up, lions!
and shake off the delusion that you are sheep; you are souls immortal,
spirits free, blest and eternal.”^([14](#14))

Vivekananda repudiated the idea of vicarious saving also.  He proclaimed
the Hindu doctrine that everyone has to work out his own salvation. 
“The Christians believe,” he said, “that Jesus Christ died to save man. 
With you it is belief in a doctrine, and this belief constitutes your
salvation.  With us doctrine has nothing whatever to do with salvation. 
Each one may believe in whatever doctrine he likes; or in no doctrine. 
What difference does it make to you whether Jesus Christ lived at a
certain time or not?  What has it to do with you that Moses saw God in
the burning bush?  The fact that Moses saw God in the burning bush does
not constitute your seeing him, does it?... Records of great spiritual
men in the past do us no good whatever except that they urge us onward
to do the same, to experience religion ourselves.  Whatever Christ or
Moses or anybody else did, does not help us in the least, except to urge
us on.”^([15](#15))

He was aware that the historicity of Christ had become highly
controversial among scholars of the subject.  “There is a great
dispute,” he wrote, “as to whether there ever was born a man with the
name of Jesus.  Of the four books comprising the New Testament, the Book
of St. John has been rejected by some as spurious.  As to the remaining
three, the verdict is that they have been copied from ancient books; and
that, too, long after the date ascribed to Jesus Christ.  Moreover,
about the time that Jesus is believed to have been born, among the Jews
themselves there were born two historians, Josephus and Philo.  They
have mentioned even petty sects among the Jews but not made the least
reference to Jesus or the Christians or that the Roman judge sentenced
him to death on the cross. Josephus’ book had a single line about it,
which has now been proved to be an interpolation. The Romans used to
rule over the Jews at that time, and the Greeks taught them all arts and
Sciences. They have all written a good many things about the Jews but
made no mention of either Jesus or the Christians.” He also knew that
doubts had been raised whether Jesus had himself said what was
attributed to him in the gospels. “Another difficulty,” he continued,
“is that the sayings, precepts, or doctrines which the New Testament
preaches were already in existence among the Jews before the Christian
era, having come from different quarters, and were being preached by
Rabbis like Hillel and others.”^([16](#16))

The miracles of Christ also failed to impress Vivekananda. In fact, they
repelled him strongly. “What were the great powers of Christ,” he asked,
“in miracles and healing, in one of his characters? They were low,
vulgar things because he was among vulgar beings... Any fool could do
those things. Fools heal others, devils can heal others. I have seen
horrible demoniacal men do wonderful miracles. They seem to manufacture
fruits out of the earth. I have known fools and diabolical men tell the
past, present and future. I have seen fools heal at a glance, by the
will, the most horrible diseases. These are powers, truly, but often
demoniacal powers.”^([17](#17))

And he was not at all interested in the historical Jesus. “One gets sick
at heart,” he said, “at the different accounts of the life of the Christ
that Western people give. One would make him a great politician;
another, perhaps, would make of him a great military general, another a
great patriotic Jew; and so on.”^([18](#18)) What interested him was
Jesus the spiritual teacher. He saw several points of strength in the
life and teachings of Jesus, particularly the purity of heart and
renunciation of worldly pursuits. “If you want to be Christian,” he
said, “it is not necessary to know whether Christ was born in Jerusalem
or Bethlehem or just the exact date on which he pronounced the Sermon on
the Mount; you only require to *feel* the Sermon on the Mount. It is not
necessary to read 2000 words on when it was delivered. All that is for
the enjoyment of the learned. Let them have it; say amen to that. Let us
*eat* the mango.”^([19](#19))

Christians were welcome to seek salvation through Christ. According to
Hinduism, everyone has the right to choose his own *ishTadeva*. “It is
absolutely necessary,” he said, “to worship God as man, and blessed are
those races which have such a ‘God-man’ in Christ; therefore, cling
close to Christ; never give up Christ. That is the natural way to see
God in man. All our ideas of God are concentrated there.” Christians go
wrong only when they insist that Christ is the only saviour. “The great
limitation Christians have,” he continued, “is that they do not heed
other manifestations of God besides Christ. He was a manifestation of
God; so was Buddha, so were some others, and there will be hundreds of
others. Do not limit God anywhere.”^([20](#20)) Delivering a lecture on
‘Christ, the Messenger’, he quoted Sri Krishna, “Wherever thou findest a
great soul of immense power and purity struggling to raise humanity,
know that he is born of My splendour, that I am working there through
him.” And he advised the Christians, “Let us, therefore, find God not
only in Jesus of Nazareth but in all the great ones that have preceded
him, in all that came after him, and all that are yet to come. Our
worship is unbounded. They are all manifestations of the same infinite
God.”^([21](#21))

Yet it was Christ that Vivekananda found missing from Christianity. He
wondered which Church, if any, represented Christ. All churches were
equally intolerant, each threatening to kill those who did not believe
as it did.^([22](#22)) The person of Christ rather than his teaching had
become more important for Christianity. He had been turned into the
“only begotten son of God.”^([23](#23)) Christian baptism remained
external and did not touch the inner man. It aimed at instilling some
mental beliefs and not at transforming human behaviour. Most men
remained the same after baptism as they were before it. What was worse,
the mere sprinkling of water over them and muttering of formulas by a
priest made them believe that they were better than other people. He
quoted the Kenopanishad in this context: “Ever steeped in the darkness
of ignorance, yet considering themselves wise and learned, the fools go
round and round, staggering to and fro like the blind led by the
blind.”^([24](#24)) The Eucharist was nothing more than the survival of
a savage custom. “They sometimes killed their great chiefs,” said
Vivekananda, “and ate their flesh in order to obtain in themselves the
qualities which made their leaders great.” Human sacrifice was a Jewish
idea which was borrowed by Christianity “in the form of atonement.” This
seeking for a “scapegoat” had made Christianity “develop a spirit of
persecution and bloodshed.”^([25](#25))

Christian missionaries were attacking the Puranas for containing
passages which they considered somewhat obscene. Vivekananda had studied
the Bible and knew that it contained a lot which was downright
pornography. But he had his own method of exposing the Bible. “The
Chinese,” he wrote, “are the disciples of Confucius, are the disciples
of Buddha, and their morality is quite strict and refined. Obscene
language, obscene books, pictures, any conduct the least obscene - and
the offender is punished then and there. The Christian missionaries
translated the Bible into Chinese tongue. Now in the Bible there are
some passages so obscene as to put to shame some of the Puranas of the
Hindus. Reading those indecorous passages, the Chinamen were so
exasperated against Christianity that they made a point of never
allowing the Bible to be circulated in their country… The simpleminded
Chinese were disgusted, and raised a cry, saying: Oh, horror! This
religion has come to us to ruin our young boys, by giving them this
Bible to read… This is why the Chinese are very indignant with
Christianity. Otherwise the Chinese are very tolerant towards other
religions. I hear that the missionaries have printed an edition, leaving
out the objectionable parts; but this step has made the Chinese more
suspicious than before.”^([26](#26))

The history of Christianity in Europe and elsewhere had simply horrified
Vivekananda, as it does any person with any moral sensibility. Besides
being blood-soaked, Christianity has been inimical to all free
enquiry. “The ancient Greeks,” wrote Vivekananda, “who were the first
teachers of European civilisation attained the zenith of their culture
long before the Christians. Ever since they became Christians, all their
learning and culture was extinguished.”^([27](#27)) When he was passing
by Egypt on his way to Europe, a missionary mentioned to him the
miracles which, according to the Bible, Moses had performed in that
country. But Vivekananda had read history. He knew the record of
Christianity in Egypt. “Here was the city of Alexandria,” he said,
“famous all over the world for its university, its library, and its
literati - that Alexandria which, falling into the hands of illiterate,
bigoted and vulgar Christians suffered destruction, with its library
burnt to ashes and learning stamped out. Finally, the Christians killed
the lady savant, Hypatia, subjected her dead body to all sorts of
abominable insult, and dragged it through the streets, till every bit of
flesh was removed from her bones.”^([28](#28))

Christianity had spread with the help of the sword since the days of
Constantine and tried to suppress science and philosophy. “What
support,” asked Vivekananda, “has Christianity ever lent to the spread
of civilisation, either spiritual or secular? What reward did the
Christian religion offer to the European Pandit who sought to prove for
the first time that the Earth is a revolving planet? What scientist has
ever been hailed with approval and enthusiasm by the Christian Church?”
Coming to modem times, Vivekananda found Christianity very
vindictive: “The great thinkers of Europe Voltaire, Darwin, Buchner,
Flammarion, Victor Hugo and a host of others like him – are in the
present time denounced by Christianity and are victims of vituperative
tongues of its orthodox community.”^([29](#29))

Christian missionaries in India were crediting to Christianity the rise
and progress of modern Europe. This was a great falsehood. “Whatever
heights of progress Europe has attained,” continued Vivekananda, “every
one of them has been gained by its revolt against Christianity - by its
rising against the Gospel. If Christianity had its old paramount sway in
Europe today, it would have lighted the fire of the Inquisition against
such modern scientists as Pasteur and Koch, and burnt Darwin and others
of his school at the stake. In modern Europe Christianity and
civilization are two different things. Civilization has now girded up
her loins to destroy her old enemy, Christianity, to overthrow the
clergy and to wring educational and charitable institutions from their
hands. But for the ignorance-ridden rustic masses, Christianity would
never have been able for a moment to support its present despised
existence, and would have been pulled out by its roots; for the urban
poor are, even now, enemies of the Christian Church!”^([30](#30))

Christian missionaries were citing the prosperity of the modern West as
an example of the superiority of Christianity. Much of that prosperity,
however, was derived from the plunder of other peoples. “We who have
come from the East,” he said in an interview to a U.S. newspaper on
September 29, 1893, “have sat here day after day and have been told to
accept Christianity because Christian nations are the most prosperous.
We look about us and see England, the most prosperous Christian nation
in the world, with her foot on the neck of 250,000,000 Asiatics. We look
back into history and see that the prosperity of Christian Europe began
with Spain. Spain’s prosperity began with the invasion of Mexico.
Christianity wins its prosperity by cutting the throats of its fellow
men. At such a price the Hindu will not have prosperity. I have sat here
and heard the height of intolerance. I have heard the creed of Moslems
applauded, when the Moslem sword is carrying destruction into India.
Blood and sword are not for the Hindu, whose religion is based on the
laws of love.”^([31](#31)) The newspaper described it as a “savage
attack on Christian nations.” Vivekananda had a lot to say on Western
colonialism and the massacre of natives in America, Australia, New
Zealand and elsewhere. But that is not the subject at present.

What really amazed him was the utter lack of logic in Christian
propaganda. “On metaphysical lines,” he wrote on his return to India in
1897, “no nation on earth can hold a candle to the Hindus; and curiously
all the fellows that come over here from Christian lands have that one
antiquated foolishness of an argument that because the Christians are
powerful and rich and Hindus are not, so Christianity must be better
than Hinduism. To which the Hindus very aptly retort that, that is the
very reason why Hinduism is a religion and Christianity is not; because
in this beastly world, it is blackguardism and that alone which
*prospers*, virtue always suffers.”^([32](#32))

Hindus have nothing to gain from Christianity as it is only a system of
superstitions. Hindus should not get frightened when the missionaries
threaten them with hell; in fact, hell is better than the company of a
Christian missionary. “There came a Christian to me once,” recalled
Vivekananda, “and said, ‘You are a terrible sinner.’ I said, ‘Yes, I am.
Go on.’ He was a Christian missionary. That man would not give me any
rest. When I see him I fly. He said, ‘I have very good things for you.
You are a sinner and you will go to hell.’ I said, ‘Very good, what
else?’ I asked him, ‘Where are you going?’ ‘I am going to heaven,’ he
answered. I said, ‘I will go to hell.’ “That day he gave me up.” If
Christ could help people become good, why has he failed in the Christian
countries where he has been worshipped for so long? “Here comes a
Christian man,” continued Vivekananda, “and he says, ‘You are all
doomed; but if you believe in this doctrine, Christ will help you out.’
If this were true - but of course it is nothing but superstition - there
would be no wickedness in Christian countries. Let us believe in it -
belief costs nothing - but why is there no result? If I ask, ‘Why is it
that there are so many wicked people?’ They say, ‘We have to work more.’
Trust in God but keep your power dry!”^([33](#33))

Criticism of Christianity, however, was not the primary task which
Vivekananda had set for himself. He was first and foremost an exponent
of Hinduism. He had to speak out about Christianity because the
missionaries forced it upon him by their unceasing sallies against
Hinduism. This is not the occasion even for a summary of his voluminous
writings and speeches on various aspects of the subject he loved above
all. We shall only touch a few points which he upheld against missionary
attack.

The missionaries were highly critical of the Vedas which Hindus have
always held in the highest esteem. Vivekananda upheld the Vedas as
depositories of divine wisdom. For him, scriptures like the Bible and
the Quran were *paurusheya*, that is, revelations accessible only to
particular persons whose experience could not be verified by other
people. The Vedas, on the other hand, were *apaurusheya*, that is,
statements of spiritual truths which any seeker could verify by
spiritual practice. “Although we find,” he said, “many names, and many
speakers, and many teachers in the Upanishads, not one of them stands as
an authority of the Upanishads, not one verse is based upon the life of
any one of them. These are simple figures like shadows moving in the
background, unfelt, unseen, unrealised, but the real force is in the
marvellous, the brilliant, the effulgent texts of the Upanishads,
perfectly impersonal. If twenty Yajnavalkyas came and lived and died, it
does not matter; the texts are there. And yet it is against no
personality: it is broad and expansive enough to embrace all the
personalities that the world has yet produced, and all that are yet to
come. It has nothing to say against the worship of persons, or Avataras,
or sages. On the other hand, it is always upholding it. At the same
time, it is perfectly impersonal.”^([34](#34)) Rather than processing
the Vedas in terms of the Bible, as the Brahmos had started doing, the
Bible should be weighed on the Vedic scale and prove its worth. “So far
as the Bible,” he observed, “and the scriptures of other nations agree
with the Vedas, they are perfectly good, but when they do not agree,
they are no more to be accepted.”^([35](#35)) On another occasion he
said, “It is in the Vedas that we have to study our religion. With the
exception of the Vedas every book must change. The authority of the
Vedas is for all time to come; the authority of every one of our other
books is for the time being. For instance, one Smriti is powerful for
one age, another for another age.”^([36](#36))

Brahmanas were the next target of missionary attack. Vivekananda stood
by these custodians of Hinduism. “The ideal man of our ancestors,” he
said, “was the Brahmin. In all our books stands out prominently this
ideal of the Brahmin. In Europe there is my Lord the Cardinal, who is
struggling hard and spending thousands of pounds to prove the nobility
of his ancestors and he will not be satisfied until he has traced his
ancestry to some dreadful tyrant who lived on a hill and watched the
people passing by, and whenever he had the opportunity, sprang out and
robbed them... In India, on the other hand, the greatest princes seek to
trace their descent to .some ancient sage who dressed in a bit of loin
cloth, lived in a forest, eating roots and studying the Vedas... You are
of the high caste when you can trace your ancestry to a Rishi, and not
otherwise... Our ideal is the Brahmin of spiritual culture and
renunciation.”^([37](#37))

Another practice of Hinduism which the missionaries never missed
pillorying was idolatry. “It has become a trite saying,” said
Vivekananda, “that idolatry is wrong and every man swallows it without
questioning. I once thought so, and to pay the penalty of that I had to
learn my lesson sitting at the feet of a man who realised everything
through idols. I allude to Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. If such Ramakrishna
Paramahamsas are produced by idol-worship, what will you have - the
reformer’s creed or any number of idols? I want an answer. Take a
thousand idols more if you can produce Ramakrishna Paramahamsas through
idol-worship, and may God speed you! Produce such noble natures by any
means you can. Yet idolatry is condemned! Why? Nobody knows. Because
some hundreds of years ago some man of Jewish blood happened to condemn
it? That is, he happened to condemn everybody else’s idols except his
own. If God is represented in any beautiful form or any symbolic form,
said the Jew, it is awfully bad; it is sin. But if He is represented in
the form of a chest, with two angels sitting on each side, and a cloud
hanging over it, it is the holy of holies. If God comes in the form of a
dove, it is holy. But if He comes in the form of a cow, it is heathen
superstition; condemn it! That is how the world goes. That is why the
poet says, ‘what fools we mortals be!’... Boys, moustached babies, who
never went out of Madras, standing up and wanting to dictate laws to
three hundred millions of people who have thousands of traditions at
their back!”^([38](#38))

Lastly, he defended the caste system, the *bete noire* of all
missionaries and reformers inspired by them. “Caste is a very good
thing,” he said. “Caste is the plan we want to follow... There is no
country in the world without caste. In India, from caste we reach the
point where there is no caste. Caste is based throughout on that
principle. The plan in India is to make everybody a Brahmin, the Brahmin
being the ideal of humanity. If you read the history of India you will
find that attempts have always been made to raise the lower classes.
Many are the classes that have been raised. Many more will follow till
the whole will become Brahmin. That is the plan. We have to raise them
without bringing down anybody... Indian caste is better than the caste
which prevails in Europe or America. I do not say it is absolutely good.
Where would you be if there were no caste? Where would be your learning
and other things, if there were no caste? There would be nothing left
for Europeans to study if caste had never existed. The Mohammedans would
have smashed everything to pieces.”^([39](#39)) Caste was never a
stationary institution. “Caste is continually changing,” said
Vivekananda, “rituals are continually changing. it is the substance, the
principle that does not change... Caste should not go; but should only
he readjusted occasionally. Within the old structure is to be found life
enough for the building of two hundred thousand new ones. It is sheer
nonsense to desire the abolition of caste. The new method is - evolution
of the old.”^([40](#40))

The great strength of Hinduism is that it does not lay down one dogma
for everybody as is the case with Christianity and Islam. “The fault
with all religions like Christianity,” said Vivekananda, “is that they
have one set of rules for all. But Hindu religion is suited to all
grades of religious aspiration and progress. It contains all the ideas
in their perfect form.”^([41](#41)) A universality which does not
preserve individuality is false. “Individuality in universality,” he
continued, “is the plan of creation... Man is individual and at the same
time .universal. It is while raising the individual that we realise even
our national and universal nature.”^([42](#42)) It is because of this
spirit of universality that Hinduism has never been a persecuting
religion: “You know that the Hindu religion never persecutes. It is the
land where all sects may live in peace and unity. The Mohammedans
brought murder and slaughter in their train, but until their arrival
peace prevailed.”^([43](#43))

The hour had come for Hinduism to carry its message abroad once more:
“India was once a great missionary power. Hundreds of years before
England was converted to Christianity, Buddha sent out missionaries to
convert the world of Asia to his doctrine.”^([44](#44)) Vivekananda had
himself given the lead. “I have planted the seed,” he wrote from America
to the Raja of Khetri, “in this country; it is already a plant, and I
expect it to be a tree very soon. The more the Christian priests oppose
me, the more I am determined to leave a permanent mark on their
country.”^([45](#45))

It was natural that Christian missionaries should notice Vivekananda the
moment he spoke at the Parliament of Religions. They had never heard of
the man before. They went into action in both the U.S.A. and India and
were joined by some Brahmos of Keshub’s school. “They joined,” reported
Vivekananda in a speech at Madras soon after his return, “the other
opposition - the Christian missionaries. There is not one black lie
imaginable that these latter did not invent against me. They blackened
my character from city to city, poor and friendless though I was in a
foreign country. They tried to oust me from every house and make every
man who became my friend my enemy. They tried to starve me out.” At the
same time he hit out at the Brahmo leaders who saw salvation of India
through Christianity. “I am sorry to say,” added Vivekananda, “that one
of my own countrymen took part against me in this. He is the leader of a
reform party in India. This gentleman is declaring every day, ‘Christ
has come to India.’ Is this the way Christ is to come to India?… Is that
the lesson that he had learnt after sitting twenty years at the feet of
Christ? Our great reformers declare that Christianity and Christian
power are going to uplift the Indian people. Is that the way to do it?
Surely, if that gentleman is an illustration, it does not look very
hopeful.”^([46](#46))

J. Murrary Mitchell who was working as a missionary in India at that
time reacted adversely to reports about Vivekananda’s popularity in the
U.S.A. “We fear men from the East,” he wrote, “mistook politeness with
which they were received as guests for sympathy with their opinions.
Very singular at all events, have been the accounts that have been
transmitted to Asia regarding the effect of their exposition of the
Oriental creeds. They had carried the war into the enemy’s country, and
were everywhere victorious.” He selected P. C. Mozumdar as the real
representative of “advanced and intelligent Hindus” at the Parliament of
Religions. Mozumdar had said, “Representatives of all religions, may all
your religions merge in the Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of
man, so that Christ’s prophecy may be fulfilled and mankind become one
Kingdom under God as our Father.” Mr. Mitchell regretted that Mozumdar
did not draw the applause he deserved because of his admiration for
Christianity. “But Mr. Protap Chunder Mozumdar,” he said, “seems to have
made much less impression than a young man who has assumed the honorofic
title of Swami a step which Mr. \[Keshub Chunder\] Sen never ventured to
take. Mr. Mozumdar appeared in plain Western dress, the Swami stood
arrayed in all the colours of the rainbow. The ladies clustered around
him in admiration.”

What had hurt Mr. Mitchell the most was Vivekananda’s denunciation of
the doctrine of sin. “We need not dwell,” he mourned, “on the Swami’s
teaching. Let one specimen suffice.” He quoted verbatim what Vivekananda
had said when he hailed people at the Parliament as “sharers of bliss”
and “divinities on earth.” Vivekananda had hit Christianity in its solar
plexus. How could Christianity thrive without selling sin? “We are truly
sorry for the man,” concluded Mr. Mitchell, “who can thus trifle with
his hearers with deeply solemn questions.”^([47](#47))

Vivekananda was rather mild in his criticism of missionaries when he
spoke in the Parliament of Religions on September 29, 1893. “You
Christians, who are so fond of sending out missionaries to save the soul
of the heathen why do you not try to save their bodies from starvation?…
You erect Churches all through India but-the crying evil in the East is
not religion - they have religion enough - but it is bread that the
suffering millions of burning India cry out for with parched throats...
It is an insult to a starving people to offer them religion; it is an
insult to a starving man to teach him metaphysics.” He knew that
missionaries were not preaching purely out of religious zeal; they had
chosen the mission as a career and were paid for it. “In India,” he
said, “a priest who preached for money would lose caste and be spat upon
by the people.”^([48](#48))

He spoke in the same Vein when he addressed the Parliament of Religions
on October 11, 1893. “Christian missionaries,” he said, “come to offer
life but only on condition that the Hindus became Christians, abandoning
the faith of their fathers and forefathers. Is it right?… If you wish to
illustrate the meaning of ‘brotherhood’, treat Hindus more kindly even
though he be a Hindu and is faithful to his religion. Send missionaries
to teach them how better to earn a piece of bread, and not teach them
metaphysical nonsense.”^([49](#49)) But when he noticed that even his
mild comments on missionary activities were received with great
resentment in Christian circles, his tone became sharp. The Detroit Free
Press dated February 21, 1894 reported a lecture which he had delivered
on ‘Hindus and Christians’. Coming to Christian missionaries he said,
*“You train and educate and pay men to do what? To come over to my
country to curse and abuse all my forefathers, my religion, and
everything.* They walk near a temple and say, ‘You idolators, you will
go to hell.’ But they dare not do that to the Mohammedans of India; the
sword would be out. But the Hindu is too mild... And then you who train
men to abuse and criticise, if I just touch you with the least bit of
criticism, with the kindest purpose, you shrink and cry: ‘Don’t touch
us; we are Americans. We criticise all the people in the world, curse
them and abuse them, say anything, but do not touch us, we are sensitive
plants?’… And whenever your ministers criticise us let them remember
this: *If all India stands up and takes all the mud that is at the
bottom of the Indian ocean and throws it up against the Western
countries, it will not be doing an infinitesimal part of that which you
are doing to us.* And what for? Did we ever send one missionary to
convert anybody in the world? We say to you: ‘Welcome to your religion,
but allow me to have mine?’... With all your brags and boastings, where
has Christianity succeeded without the sword? Show me one place in the
whole world. One I say, throughout the history of the Christian religion
- one; I do not want two. I know how your forefathers were converted.
They had to be converted or killed; that was all. What can you do better
than Mohammedanism, with all your bragging?”^([50](#50))

As he heard the malicious propaganda against Hinduism which missionaries
were mounting in America and saw ‘their methods of raising money’, he
hit them hard. “What is meant,” he asked, “by those pictures in the
school-books for children where the Hindu mother is painted as throwing
her children to the crocodiles in the Ganga? The mother is black but the
baby is painted white to arouse more sympathy, and get more money. What
is meant by those pictures which paint a man burning his wife at a stake
with his own hands, so that she becomes a ghost and torments the
husband’s enemy? What is meant by the pictures of huge cars crushing
over human beings? The other day a book was published for children in
this country, where one of these gentlemen tells a narrative of his
visit to Calcutta. He says he saw a car running over fanatics in the
streets of Calcutta. I have heard one gentleman preach in Memphis that
in every village of India there is a pond full of the bones of little
children. *What have the Hindus done to these disciples of Christ that
every Christian child is taught to call the Hindus vile, and ‘wretches’
and the most horrible devils on earth?* Part of the Sunday School
education for children here consists in teaching them to hate everybody
who is not a Christian, and the Hindu especially, so that from their
very childhood they may subscribe their pennies to the
missions.”^([51](#51))

Vivekananda warned the missionaries about the effect which their
propaganda was having on the moral and mental health of people who
listened to them. “If not for the sake of truth,” he said, “for the sake
of the morality of their own children, the Christian missionaries ought
not to allow such things going on. Is it any wonder that such children
grow up to be ruthless and cruel men and women?… A servant-girl in the
employ of a friend of mine had to be sent to a lunatic asylum as a
result of her attending what they call here a revivalist-preaching. The
dose of hell-fire and brimstone was too much for her.”^([52](#52))

He saw how various missions were competing for collecting money and
pouring calumny on each other. “Those to whom religion is a trade,” he
observed, “are forced to become narrow and mischievous by their
introduction into religion of the competitive, fighting and selfish
methods of the world.”^([53](#53)) Having witnessed their ways, many
educated Americans were losing respect for the missionaries. On the
other hand, they were eager to listen to exponents of other cultures. “I
have more friends,” he wrote in a letter to India in 1895, “than
enemies, and only a small number of the educated care about the
missionaries. Again, the very fact of the missionaries being against
anything makes the educated like it. They are less of a power here now,
and are becoming less so every day.”^([54](#54))

While Vivekananda caused a stir among the intellectual elite of America
as was obvious from reports in the American press, the missionary
circles were infuriated. “The Christian missionaries,” wrote *The Indian
Mirror* on June 23, 1897, “rage and fume over the success of Swami
Vivekananda’s mission in America. In its impotent fury, the *Missionary
Review of the World* says that ‘Swami Vivekananda is simply a specimen
of the elation and inflation of a weak man over the adulation of some
silly people. If America ever gives up Christ, it will be for the devil,
not Buddha or Brahma or Confucius. It will be lapse into utter apostasy,
unbelief and infidelity.’ The writer, when penning these lines, was
evidently under a fit of insanity brought on by the unlooked for
spectacle of a Hindu preacher making disciples among American members of
the Christian Church.”^([55](#55))

The Christian Literature Society which had its headquarters in London
and a branch in Madras published a book, *Swami Vivekananda and his Guru
with letters from prominent Americans on the alleged programme of
Vedantism in United States*, in 1897. The book was reviewed by *The
Indian Mirror* which wrote, “The object of the first part of this book
is to show that, on account of his *Shudra* birth and for his want of
knowledge as well as on the part of his Guru, Vivekananda is not
qualified for teaching the Vedanta; that he, in consequence of his
doings, is not entitled to be called a ‘Swami’; that Schopenhuer, the
admirer of the Upanishads, was a bad man, and that Professor Max Muller
(in connection with his opinion of Vedantic books) is a ‘man having two
voices’.”

Rev. Dr. W. W. White, Secretary to the College Young Men’s Christian
Association of Calcutta, had written to “a number of ladies and
gentlemen of America, mostly belonging to missions and educational
institutions” in order to find out if there was any “likelihood of
America abandoning Christianity and adopting… Hinduism… in its stead.”
The replies he had received were reproduced in the second part of the
above-mentioned book. “Some of the writers say,” continued *The Indian
Mirror*, “that the Swami made no impression on the people, while some
others asserted that the Swami may have made a few converts, but such
converts were vaccilators and seekers of novelty. All of them consoled
the enquirers with the assurance that Christianity had made a firm
footing in America and there was no fear of its being Supplanted by any
other religion.”^([56](#56))

Vivekananda had said again and again that he was not out to make any
converts to Hinduism and that what he aimed at was the deepening and
purification of Christianity which had been vulgarised by theologians
and debased by missionaries. But the missionaries had their fears and
wanted to be reassured that their citadel was not in danger of imminent
collapse.

There was a corollary to Vivekananda’s defence of Hinduism and critique
of Christianity, particularly of the Christian missions. He called upon
Hindu society to open its doors and take back its members who had been
alienated from it by foreign invaders. Christian as well as Islamic
missionaries were taking advantage of Hindu orthodoxy which was
reluctant to receive those who had been forced or lured away from the
Hindu fold but who were now ready to return to the faith of their
forefathers. Vivekananda viewed this orthodoxy as nothing but a blind
prejudice induced by the Hindus’ deep distrust of imported creeds. The
distrust he regarded as well founded but the prejudice against victims
of force or fraud as unjustified. His thoughts on the subject were
expressed in an interview he gave to the representative of the
*Prabuddha Bharata*, a monthly magazine started by his disciples in
Madras. The interview, published in the April 1899 issue of the monthly,
deserves to be reproduced at some length:

> “I want to see you, Swami,” I began, “on this matter of receiving back
> into Hinduism those who have been perverted from it. Is it your
> opinion that they should be received?”
>
> “Certainly,” said the Swami, “they can and ought to be taken.” He sat
> gravely for a moment, thinking, and then resumed. “Besides,” he said,
> “we shall otherwise decrease in numbers. When the Mohammedans first
> came, we are said - I think on the authority of Ferishta, oldest
> Mohammedan historian - to have been six hundred millions of Hindus.
> Now we are about two hundred millions. *And then every man going out
> of the Hindu pale is not only a man less, but an enemy the more.*
>
> “Again, the vast majority of Hindu perverts to Islam and Christianity
> are perverts by the sword, or the descendants of these. It would be
> obviously unfair to subject these to disabilities of any kind. *As to
> the case of born aliens, did you say? Why, born aliens have been
> converted in the past by crowds, and the process is still going on.*
>
> “In my own opinion, this statement not only applies to aboriginal
> tribes, to outlying nations, and to almost all our conquerors before
> the Mohammedan conquest, but also to all those castes who find a
> special origin in the Puranas. I hold that they have been aliens thus
> adopted.^([57](#57))
>
> “Ceremonies of expiation are no doubt suitable in the case of willing
> converts returning to their Mother-Church, as it were; but on those
> who were alienated by conquest - as in Kashmir and Nepal - or on
> strangers wishing to join us, no penance should be imposed.”
>
> “But of what caste would these people be, Swamiji?” I ventured to ask.
> “They must have some, or they can never be assimilated into the great
> body of Hindus. Where shall we look for their rightful place?”
>
> “Returning converts,” said the Swami quietly, “will gain their own
> castes, of course. And new people will make theirs. You will
> remember,” he added, “that this has already been done in the case of
> Vaishnavism. Converts from different castes and aliens were all able
> to combine under that flag and form a caste by themselves,-and a very
> respectful one too. From Ramanuja down to Chaitanya of Bengal, all
> great Vaishnava teachers have done the same.”
>
> “And where should these new people expect to marry?” I asked.
>
> “Amongst themselves as they do now,” said the Swami quietly.
>
> “Then as to names,” I enquired, “I suppose aliens and perverts who
> have adopted non-Hindu names should be named newly. Would you give
> them caste-names, or what?”
>
> “Certainly,” said the Swami, thoughtfully, “there is a great deal in a
> name” and on this question he would say no more.
>
> “But my next enquiry drew blood. ‘Would you leave these newcomers,
> Swamiji, to choose their own forms of religious belief out of many
> visaged Hinduism, or would chalk out a religion for them?’
>
> “Can you ask that?” he said. “They will choose for themselves. For
> unless a man chooses for himself, the very spirit of Hinduism is
> destroyed. The essence of our Faith consists simply in this freedom of
> the Ishta.”^([58](#58))

Vivekananda paid a second visit to the West from June 1899 to December
1900. During his stay in California in February-May 1900, he received a
gift of 160 acres from one of his American admirers. The society which
he had founded during his first visit for the propagation of Vedanta,
had now a home in America. It was named the Shanti Ashram. This is not
the place to tell the story of how the precedent set by Vivekananda was
followed in years to come by many other Hindu missionaries. It should
suffice to say that today no country in the West is without Hindu
presence in some form or the other. Seekers in the West have become
increasingly aware of the major schools of Sanatana Dharma - Yoga and
Vedanta, Buddhism and Jainism, Shaivism and Vaishnavism, Shaktism and
Tantra.

The impact of Vivekananda in his own country was far more momentous. He
had taken over from where Bankim Chandra had left. Among the writers and
thinkers of modern India, Bankim Chandra had fascinated him the most.
During his lecture tour in East Bengal in 1901 he is reported to have
advised Bengal’s young men to “read Bankim, and Bankim, and Bankim
again.” Small wonder that Bankim’s AnandamaTha inspired revolutionary
organisations fighting for India’s freedom and his *Vande MAtaram*
became the national song par excellence when the awakening brought about
by Vivekananda burst forth in a political movement soon after his death
in 1902.

This was the Swadeshi Movement led by Sri Aurobindo. It was renascent
India’s first experiment in mass mobilization. Powerful *mantras* such
as *svadeshI* and *svarAjya*, first invoked by Maharshi Dayananda, came
to the fore and fired the people’s imagination. The struggle against
Western imperialism in all its forms including Christianity became
linked with the earlier struggle against Islamic imperialism. Maharana
Pratap, Shivaji, Guru Govind Singh and Banda Bairagi resumed their full
stature as national heroes after having suffered an eclipse in the
national memory.

Sri Krishna gave a message to Sri Aurobindo while the latter was
incarcerated in the Alipore Jail. The Great Teacher of the Gita said,
“Something has been shown to you in this year of seclusion, something
about which you had your doubts and it is the truth of the Hindu
religion. It is this religion that I am raising up before the world, it
is this that I have perfected and developed through the Rishis, saints
and Avatars, and is now going forth to do my work among the nations. I
am raising up this nation to send forth my word. This is the Sanatan
Dharma, this is the eternal religion which you did not really know
before, but which I have now revealed to you… When you go forth, speak
to your nation always this word, that it is for the Sanatan Dharma that
they arise. It is for the world and not for themselves they arise. I am
giving them freedom for the service of the world. When therefore it is
said that India shall rise, it is the Sanatan Dharma that shall rise.
When it is said that India shall be great, it is the Sanatan Dharma that
shall be great. When it is said that India shall expand and extend
herself, it is the Sanatan Dharma that shall expand and extend itself
over the world. It is for the Dharma and by the Dharma that India
exists. To magnify the religion means to magnify the
country.”^([59](#59))

The speech which Sri Aurobindo delivered at Uttarpara in 1909, soon
after his acquittal in the Alipore Conspiracy Case, ended with the
following words: “I say no longer that nationalism is a creed, a
religion, a faith; I say that it is Sanatan Dharma which for us is
nationalism. This Hindu nation was born with the Sanatan Dharma, with it
is moves, and with it grows. When the Sanatan Dharma declines, then the
nation declines, and if the Sanatan Dharma were capable of perishing,
with the Sanatan Dharma it would perish. The Sanatan Dharma, that is
nationalism.”^([60](#60))

The Brahmo Samaj which had been fascinated by Christianity could not
remain unaffected. Rabindranath Tagore wrote his novel, Gora, in 1910.
The following dialogue between Suchitra, the heroine, and *Gora*, the
hero, showed the new trend that had started emerging in Brahmoism:

> She put aside her shyness and said with simple modesty, “I have never
> before thought about my country so greatly and so truly. But one
> question I will ask: What is the relation between country and
> religion? Does not religion transcend country?”
>
> He replied, “That which transcends country, which is greater than
> country, can only reveal itself through one’s country. God has
> manifested his one eternal nature in just such a variety of forms... I
> can assure you that through the open sky of India you will be able to
> see the sun therefore there is no need to cross the ocean and sit at
> the window of a Christian church.”
>
> “You mean to say that for India there is a special path leading to
> God? What is this speciality?” asked Suchitra.
>
> “The speciality is this,” replied Gora, “it is recognised that the
> Supreme Being who is without definition is manifest within limits -
> the endless current of minute and protracted, subtle and gross, is of
> Him. He is at one and the same time with endless attributes and
> without attributes; of infinite forms and formless.. In other
> countries they have tried to confine God with some one definition. In
> India no doubt there have also been attempts to realise God in one or
> other of his special aspects, but these have never been looked upon as
> final, nor any of them conceived to be the only one. No Indian devotee
> has ever failed to acknowledge that God in His infinity transcends the
> particular aspect which may be true for the worshipper
> personally.”^([61](#61))
>
> Later on in this novel Rabindranath rejects Christianity in more clear
> terms:
>
> Suchitra had been listening with her head bowed, but now she lifted
> her eyes and asked, “Then what do you tell me to do?”
>
> “I have nothing more to say,” answered Gora, “only this much I would
> add. You must understand that the Hindu religion takes in its lap,
> like a mother, people of different ideas and opinions, in other words,
> the Hindu religion looks upon man as man and does not count him as
> belonging to a particular party. It honours not only the wise but the
> foolish also and it shows respect not merely to one form of wisdom but
> to wisdom in all its aspects. *Christians do not want to acknowledge
> diversity; they say that on one side is Christian religion and on the
> other eternal destruction, and between these two there is no middle
> path. And because we have studied under these Christians we have
> become ashamed of the variety that is there in Hinduism.* We fail to
> see that through this diversity Hinduism is coming to realise the
> oneness of all. Unless we can free ourselves from this whirlpool of
> Christian teaching we shall not become fit for the glorious truths of
> Hindu religion.”^([62](#62))

A new spirit was abroad. The English educated intelligentsia which had
turned away from Hinduism, particularly in Bengal, was acquiring respect
for it at a deeper level. The missionary machine had to change gear and
turn towards the tribal areas.

It is an altogether different story that the Ramakrishna Mission which
Swami Vivekananda had founded for the defence and spread of Hinduism,
was taken over by the disciples of Keshub Chunder Sen. It was not long
before an authoritative biography of Sri Ramakrishna depicted him not as
a giant Hindu saint but as a unique *sAdhaka* who had met and absorbed
into himself both Jesus and Muhammad! The next inevitable step was to
present Sri Ramakrishna as a synthesiser of Hinduism, Islam, and
Christianity. Finally, the Mission was hailing Sri Ramakrishna as the
founder of a new religion - Ramakrishnaism - which was “far superior” to
Hinduism. Sri Ramakrishna, according to the Mission mystique, was the
“first saint” (or prophet, if you please) in human history who had
“demonstrated practically” that Hinduism and Christianity and Islam were
only different paths for reaching the same spiritual goal!

It is useless to tell the salesmen of Ramakrishnaism that this country
has known thousands of saints like Sri Ramakrishna, that he would have
remained unknown like most of them if Vivekananda had not made him
famous, and that Vivekananda who was his dearest disciple had viewed
Islam and Christianity not as religions but as doctrines of the sword.
The Mission has become a world-wide network, and a wealthy institution
patronized by the high and the mighty, not only in India but also
abroad. And the Mission knows that Hindus can always be taken for
granted. The Mission is neither the first nor the last to fatten with
the help of Hindu society and then render service to the enemies of that
society. The story will be repeated till Hindu society learns how to
deal with turn-coats and traitors.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Quoted in R.C. Majumdar (ed.), *The History and Culture of the
Indian People*, Volume X: *British Paramountcy And Indian Renaissance*,
Part II, 2nd edition, Bombay, 1981, p. 36.

[²](#2a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 155.

[³](#3a) Quoted in Sisir Kumar Das, *op. cit.,* p. 50.

[⁴](#4a) Quoted in *Indian Church History Review*, December 1988, p. 90.

[⁵](#5a) Quoted in *Indian Church History Review*, December 1973, p.
187.

[⁶](#6a) Louis Rousslet, *India and its Native Princes*, published in
1876, cited by Marie Louis Burke, *Swami Vivekananda In America*,
Calcutta, 1958, p.145.

[⁷](#7a) Richard Temple, *Oriental Experience*, London, 1883, p. 142.

[⁸](#8a) *Ibid.,* pp. 142,143.

[⁹](#9a) Sisir Kumar Das, *op.cit.,* 52.

[¹⁰](#10a) Quoted in Sisir Kumar Das, *op. cit.,* pp. 117-118.

[¹¹](#11a) *The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna*, Volume 1, Madras, 1985, p.
138. 

[¹²](#12a) Quoted by M.M. Thomas, *The Acknowledged Christ of Indian
Renaissance*, Second Edition, Madras 1976, p. 125.

[¹³](#13a) *The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda*, Calcutta, 1985,
Volume VI, p. 85.

[¹⁴](#14a) *Ibid.,* Volume I, p. 11.

[¹⁵](#15a) *Ibid.,* Volume VI, pp. 98-99.

[¹⁶](#16a) *Ibid.,* Volume VII, pp. 370-71.

[¹⁷](#17a) *Ibid.,* Volume IV, pp. 32-33.

[¹⁸](#18a) *Ibid.,* p. 145.

[¹⁹](#19a) *Ibid.,* Volume IV, pp. 25-26.

[²⁰](#20a) *Ibid.,* p. 31.

[²¹](#21a) *Ibid.,* p. 152.

[²²](#22a) *Ibid.,* pp. 151-52.

[²³](#23a) *Ibid.,* pp. 150-151.

[²⁴](#24a) *Ibid.,* Volume VIII, pp. 114-115.

[²⁵](#25a) *Ibid.,* Volume VII, pp. 71-71.

[²⁶](#26a) *Ibid.,* Volume V, p. 503.

[²⁷](#27a) *Ibid.,* Volume VII, pp. 361-361.

[²⁸](#28a) *Ibid.,* p. 347. He was referring to the doings of a mob of
Christian monks led by St. Cyril in 391 AD.

[²⁹](#29a) *Ibid.,* Volume V, p. 532. “The European Pandit” refers to
Galileo on whom Mother Teresa frowns in our own times.

[³⁰](#30a) *Ibid.,* p. 533. The reference is to the working class
movement in Europe.

[³¹](#31a) *Ibid.,* Volume III, p. 474. The reference to Moslems found
in *The Chicago Daily Tribune* has been omitted in this edition of *The
Collected Works*. That is how the Ramakrishna Mission has “honoured” its
founder!

[³²](#32a) *Ibid.,* volume VI, pp. 390-91.

[³³](#33a) *Ibid.,* Volume VI, p. 132.

[³⁴](#34a) *Ibid.,* Volume III, p. 32.

[³⁵](#35a) *Ibid.,* p. 333.

[³⁶](#36a) *Ibid.,* Volume V, p. 125.

[³⁷](#37a) *Ibid.,* Volume HI, pp. 196-197.

[³⁸](#38a) *Ibid.,* p. 218. “The reformer’s creed” refers to the Brahmo
Samaj and allied movements which had swallowed Christians polemics
against Hinduism and tried to “purge” Hinduism of its “evils”.

[³⁹](#39a) *Ibid.,* Volume V, p. 214.

[⁴⁰](#40a) *Ibid.,* p. 215.

[⁴¹](#41a) *Ibid.,* Volume VI, p. 120.

[⁴²](#42a) *Ibid.,* p. 121.

[⁴³](#43a) *Ibid.,* Volume V, p. 190.

[⁴⁴](#44a) *Ibid.,* p. 191.

[⁴⁵](#45a) *Ibid.,* p. 91.

[⁴⁶](#46a) *Ibid.,* Volume III, pp. 210-211. The gentleman was P. C.
Mozumdar, a Brahmo leader who had also gone to the Parliament of
Religions in Chicago, U.S.A.

[⁴⁷](#47a) Sisir Kumakr Das, *op.cit.,* p. 141.

[⁴⁸](#48a) *The Complete Works*, Volume I, p. 20.

[⁴⁹](#49a) Quoted in Swami Jyotirmayananda, *Vivekananda, His Gospel of
Man-Making*, Second edition, Madras 1988, p. 474.

[⁵⁰](#50a) *Ibid.,* p. 486. Emphasis added.

[⁵¹](#51a) *Ibid.,* volume IV, pp. 344-345. Emphasis added. Mother
Teresa paints the same negative picture of India to her Western
audiences. Only her language is less picturesque due to changed
circumstances.

[⁵²](#52a) *Ibid.,* p. 345.

[⁵³](#53a) *Ibid.,* Volume V, p. 60.

[⁵⁴](#54a) *Ibid.,* p. 86.

[⁵⁵](#55a) Quoted in Swami Jyotirmayananda, *op. cit.,* p. 568.

[⁵⁶](#56a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 591-592.

[⁵⁷](#57a) The Puranas mention a number of castes which arose after the
descendants of *PArasikas* (Persians), *Yavanas* (Greeks), *Sakas*
(Scythians), *KushANas* and *Hunas*, etc., were integrated into Hindu
society.

[⁵⁸](#58a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 587-88.

[⁵⁹](#59a) Keshavmurthi, *Sri Aurobindo: The Hope of Man*, Pondicherry,
1969, pp. 165-166.

[⁶⁰](#60a) *Ibid.,* pp. 167-68.

[⁶¹](#61a) Rabindranath Tagore, *Gora*, translated into English,
Calcutta, 1961 impression, p. 103.

[⁶²](#62a) *Ibid.,* p. 296. Emphasis added.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
