+++
title = "19 17 Missions Since Independence"

+++
**17**  
**Missions Since Independence**

The Constitution of independent India adopted in January 1950 made
things quite smooth for the Christian missions.  They surged forward
with renewed vigour.  Nationalist resistance to what had been viewed as
an imperialist incubus during the Struggle for Freedom, broke down when
the very leaders who had frowned upon it started speaking in its
favour.  Voices which still remained ‘recalcitrant’ were sought to be
silenced by being branded as those of ‘Hindu communalism’.  Nehruvian
Secularism had stolen a march under the cover of Mahatma Gandhi’s
*sarva-dharma-sambhAva*.

The followers of Mahatma Gandhi were the first to forget what their
Master had said repeatedly on the subject of proselytization.  Some of
them found berths in the new power set-up and fell in. line with Pandit
Nehru.  Some others who felt frustrated for one reason or the other
became fascinated by Mao-tse Tung and started seeing the Mahatma
reincarnated in Red China.  Constructive workers of the Gandhian
movement gave priority to economic programmes and sidelined all social
and cultural problems.  A new breed of ‘Gandhians’ became busy floating
Voluntary Agencies and looking forward to being funded by Western
Foundations.  Some of these foundations were avowedly dedicated to
promoting only Christian causes.  Small wonder that these ‘Gandhians’
became, in due course, active or passive accomplices of the Christian
missions.

The worst crisis, however, overtook those who became known as Hindu
leaders in post-independence India.  So long as the Mahatma was alive
they had prospered by accusing him of promoting ‘Muslim and Christian
causes’ at the cost of ‘Hindu interests’.  Now that he was no more, they
did not really know what to do.  Some of them continued to live in the
past, deriving satisfaction from cursing the Mahatma for misleading the
country for all time to come.  Others revised their attitude towards him
but they did so more out of convenience than conviction. 
*Sarva-dharma-samabhAva* acquired a new meaning for them.  Criticism of
Christian, dogmas became a ‘negative’ approach.  The ‘positive’
approach, they started saying, should match the missionary effort in the
fields of education, medicine and social services.  It did not occur to
them that Hindu society being poor and bereft of a state of its own was
in no position to run the race.  The ‘positive’ approach thus became,
for all practical purposes, an excuse for not facing the problem at all.

The bright sunshine in which Christian missions started basking can be
reported best in the words of a Jesuit missionary.  “The Indian Church,”
writes Plattner, “has reason to be glad that the Constitution of the
country guarantees her an atmosphere of freedom and equality with other
much stronger religious communities.  Under the protection of this
guarantee she is able, ever since independence, not only to carry on but
to *increase and develop her activity as never before without serious
hindrance or anxiety*.^([1](#1)) The number of foreign missionaries
registered an unprecedented increase.  “One must admit,” continues
Plattner, “that the number of missionaries who came to India soon after
independence had perceptibly increased.  During the war years very few
of them ever reached India.  So a kind of surplus was building in Europe
with corresponding lack of personnel in India… At the same time the
Communists were expelling thousands of missionaries - mainly members of
the American sects - from China.  Some of them were then transferred to
India but not all of them could adapt themselves to Indian
conditions.”^([2](#2))

Far more foreboding than this forward march of the Christian missions,
however, was the fact that they were able to take in their stride two
serious exposures of their character and activities made during the
fifties.  The first jolt they received was from a book by K. M. Panikkar
published in 1953.  The second was the publication, in 1956, of the
Niyogi Committee’s report on missionary activities in Madhya Pradesh. 
The powers that be - the Government, the political parties, the national
press and the intellectual elite - either protected the missions for one
reason or the other or shied away from studying and discussing the
exposures publicly for fear of being accused of ‘Hindu communalism’, the
ultimate swear-word in the armoury of Nehruvian Secularism.

Panikkar’s study was primarily aimed at providing a survey of Western
imperialism in Asia from A.D. 1498 to 1945.  Christian missions came
into the picture simply because he found them arrayed, always and
everywhere, alongside Western gunboats, diplomatic pressures,
extraterritorial rights and plain gangsterism.  Contemporary records,
consulted by him, could not but cut to size the inflated images of
Christian heroes like Francis Xavier and Matteo Ricci.  They were found
to be not much more than minions employed by European kings and princes
scheming to carve out empires in the East.  Their methods of trying to
convert kings or commoners in Asia were fraudulent or conspiratorial or
morally questionable.  Seeing that “missionary activities… were
connected with Western political supremacy in Asia and synchronised with
it”,^([3](#3)) Panikkar had concluded, “It may indeed be said that the
most serious, persistent and planned effort of European nations in the
nineteenth century was their missionary activities in India and China
where a large scale attempt was made to effect a mental and spiritual
conquest as supplementing the political supremacy already enjoyed by
Europe.”^([4](#4))

What hurt the missionaries most, however, was Panikkar’s observation
that “the doctrine of the monopoly of truth and revelation is altogether
alien to the Asian mind” and that “practically every educated Asian who
seriously and conscientiously studied to understand the point of view of
the missionary, from Emperor Kang Hsi to Mahatma Gandhi, has emphasised
this point.”^([5](#5)) He had knocked the bottom out of the missionary
enterprise.  No monopoly of truth and revelation, no missions.  It was
as simple as that.

The missionaries were up in arms.  “To prove his point,” they said,
“Panikkar picks and chooses historical facts and then deals with them
one-sidely.” But none of them came out with facts which could redeem or
even counterbalance those presented by Panikkar.  Efforts to explain
them away or put another interpretation on them, also remained a poor
exercise.  Fr. Jerome D’Souza had jibed, “A very fine narrative Mr.
Panikkar, but you must not call it history.”^([6](#6)) He or his
missionary colleagues, however, never bothered to tell what was that
history which Panikkar had not taken into account.  Subsequent Christian
writings show that missionaries have not been able to stop smarting from
the hurt caused by Panikkar’s study.

The message that Panikkar had tried to convey to Asians, particularly,
his own countrymen, was that the history of Christianity was, for all
practical purposes, a running commentary on the Christian doctrine. 
Christian missions were quick to understand it although they have never
acknowledged the debt.  Ever since, Christian historians have been
making herculean efforts to salvage the doctrine from the history it had
created.  By now there is a plethora of Christian literature which
bemoans ‘the colonial handicap’ that has stood in the way of Christ
scoring over Rama and Krishna.  And there has been a determined effort
to present to the Indian people what Stanley Jones has described as the
‘disentangled Christ’.  It is only India’s politicians and intellectual
elite who have failed to grasp what Panikkar had revealed about the
character of the Christian doctrine.

Thus howsoever serious the flutter which Panikkar’s book caused inside
missionary dovecotes, the atmosphere outside continued to be favourable
for them.  Of course, ‘narrow minded Hindus and fanatical Communists’
provided some pen-pricks off and on.  But they came to nothing in every
instance.  “The question was raised in Parliament,” narrates Plattner,
“as to whether the right to propagate religion was applicable only to
Indian citizens or also to foreigners residing in India, for example the
missionaries.  In March 1954, the Supreme Court of India-expressed its
opinion that this right was a fundamental one firmly established in the
Constitution and thus applied to everyone - citizen and non-citizen
alike - who enjoyed the protection of India’s laws.  With this
explanation the missionaries were expressly authorised to spread the
faith, thus fulfilling the task entrusted to them by the
Church.”^([7](#7))

In 1955 a bill came before Parliament “which if passed would have
seriously handicapped the work of missionaries”, because it “provided
for a strict system of regulating conversions.” The issue was
conversions brought about by force, fraud or material inducements.  But
no less a person than the Prime Minister of India, Pandit Nehru, came to
the rescue of Christian missions and persuaded the Parliament to throw
out the bill.  “I fear that this bill,” said Pandit Nehru, “will not
help very much in suppressing evil methods but might very well be the
cause of great harassment to a large number of people.  We should deal
with those evils on a different plane, in other ways, not in this way
which may give rise to other ways of coercion.  Christianity is one of
the important religions of India, established here for nearly two
thousand years.  We must not do anything which gives rise to any feeling
of oppression or suppression in the minds of our Christian friends and
fellow-countrymen.”^([8](#8))

The signing of the defence pact between the U.S.A. and Pakistan in 1954
had, however, made the Government of India somewhat strict about
granting of visas to foreign, particularly American, missionaries.  “The
Catholic Bishops of India,” writes Plattner, “found it very difficult to
reconcile themselves to this new turn of affairs, which they considered
highly unpleasant and unjustifiable.  In March 1955 a delegation under
the leadership of Cardinal Gracias of Bombay requested an interview with
Prime Minister Nehru and Home Minister Pandit Pant, who had succeeded
Dr. Katju.”^([9](#9)) Pandit Nehru, according to the Secretary of the
Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India, was “sympathetic but pointed out
that the problem was political and national, not religious.” Pandit
Pant, on the other hand, gave a practical advice which proved very
helpful to the missions in the long run.  “He could not understand,”
continues Plattner, “why the Catholic Church, which had a long and
historic existence in the country, had not succeeded in training Indian
priests and professors for seminaries.  The interview helped us to
realise that in every sphere we have to recruit locally and train
selected candidates for responsible positions.”^([10](#10)) The Home
Minister of India, it seems, had no objection to the sale of a narcotic
provided the vendors were native.  Nor did he see any danger in the
spread of a network financed and controlled from abroad.  The lesson
that the East India Company had subjugated the country by training and
employing native mercenaries, had not been learnt.

What the network was doing was revealed soon after by the report of an
Enquiry Committee appointed by the Government of Madhya Pradesh.  “In
the words of the Secretary of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of
India,” reports Plattner, “it created a sensation everywhere in India. 
For the Committee roundly condemned the efforts of Catholic and
Protestant missionaries among the aboriginal tribesmen of the State’s
remote rural areas.  The converts, it was alleged, were estranged from
the ways of their own country with the express purpose of creating a
‘State within a State’.  It expressed the fear that one day the
Christian community would assert its right to form a separate state as
the Moslems of Pakistan had done.”^([11](#11))

The appointment of the Committee was occasioned by “the activities of
some Mission organisations in the recently Merged States of Raigarh,
Udaipur, Jashpur and Surguja” where trouble had been reported soon after
their merger in Madhya Pradesh.  “This strip of land,” recorded the
Committee, “comprising Surguja, Korea, Jashpur, Udaipur, Chang-bhakar
and some other small States of Orissa is surrounded by Bihar and Orissa
States and is inhabited by a very large percentage of aboriginals.  The
tract is full of forests and mineral resources.  Foreign Missionaries
from Belgium and Germany had established themselves in Bihar and Orissa
and also in Jashpur in 1834 and had succeeded in converting a very large
number of people to Christianity.  In order to consolidate and enhance
their prestige, and possibly to afford scope for alien interests in this
tract, the Missionaries were reported to be carrying on propaganda for
the isolation of the Aboriginals from other sections of the community,
and the movement of Jharkhand was thus started.  This movement was
approved by the Aboriginals, local Christians and Muslims and the
Missionaries sought to keep it under their influence by excluding all
the nationalist elements from this movement. The demand for Adiwasisthan
was accentuated along with the one for Pakistan in 1938.  The Muslim
League is reported to have donated Rs. One Lakh for propaganda
work.  With the advent of political independence in India, the agitation
for Adiwasisthan was intensified with a view to forming a sort of
corridor joining East Bengal with Hyderabad, which could be used for a
pincer movement against India in the event of a war between India and
Pakistan.”^([12](#12))

The missionaries had not welcomed the merger of these states with Madhya
Pradesh.  “On the integration of the States,” according to the
Committee, “Missionaries became afraid of losing their influence.  So
they started an agitation, playing on the religious feelings of the
primitive Christian converts, representing the Madhya Pradesh Government
as consisting of infidels and so on.  Some of the articles published in
Missionary papers, such as ‘Nishkalank’, ‘Adiwasi’ and ‘Jharkhand’ were
hardly distinguishable from writings in Muslim papers advocating
Pakistan, before the 15th of August 1947.  The Missionaries launched a
special attack on the opening of schools by Madhya Pradesh Government
under the Backward Area Welfare Scheme.”^([13](#13))

Simultaneously, Mr. Jaipal Singh, member of the Constituent Assembly and
President of the All India Adiwasi Mahasabha, “accused the Bihar
Government with failure to serve the people by not insisting on the
integration of those states with Bihar.” A pro-Bihar agitation was
started in November 1947 and some Congressmen from Bihar were roped in.
These Congressmen, however, became wise when they saw what the agitation
was aimed at.  They “brought to the District Superintendent of Police’s
notice that there was a conspiracy between Pakistan and some American
and German missionaries to instigate the aboriginals to take Possession
of their own land commonly known as Jharkhand.”^([14](#14)) The
*Jharkhand News* reported on March 6, 1949 a controversy “between Shri
Jaipalsingh and Professor Hayward, his secretary, as regards the person
who had received the amount of 50,000 from the Muslim
League.”^([15](#15))

The Government of Madhya Pradesh had to take notice of the agitation
worked up by Christian missionaries.  It had already led to violence in
the adjoining States merged with Orissa.  The missionaries had become
too powerful in Madhya Pradesh to be ignored any longer.  “It must be
noticed,” recorded the Committee, “that about 30 different Missions are
working in Madhya Pradesh with varying number of centres in each
district.  Almost the entire Madhya Pradesh is covered by Missionary
activities and there is hardly any district where a Mission of one
denomination or the other is not operating in some form or the
other.  More than half the people of Madhya Pradesh (57.4 percent)
consist of members of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Classes and it is amongst these that Missionary activities are
mostly confined.”^([16](#16))

The appointment of the Committee was announced on April 16, 1954 by a
press note of the Government of Madhya Pradesh which said,
“Representations have been made to Government from time to time that
Christian Missionaries either forcibly or through fraud and temptations
of monetary and other gain convert illiterate aboriginals and other
backward people thereby offending the feelings of non Christians.  It
has further been represented that Missions are utilised directly or
indirectly for purposes of extra-religious objectives.  The Christian
Missionaries have repudiated these allegations and have asserted on the
other hand that their activities are confined solely to religious
propaganda and towards social, medical and educational work.  The
Missionaries have further alleged that they are being harassed by
non-Christian people and local officials.  As agitation has been growing
on either side, the State Government consider it desirable in the public
interest to have a thorough inquiry made into the whole question through
an impartial Committee.”^([17](#17))

The Committee had seven members including the Chairman, Dr. Bhawani
Shankar Niyogi, retired Chief justice of the Nagpur High Court.  Mr.
K.C. George, a professor in the Commerce College at Wardha, represented
the Christian community.  It started by studying the material in
government files.  As a result it was led to enlarge its terms of
reference to include political and extra-religious activities also. 
“The material gathered in the initial stages of the enquiry revealed to
the Committee that its significance far transcended the bounds of any
one country or region in the world and that it was calculated to have
world-wide repercussions.  That compelled the Committee to view the
subject as an integral part of a larger picture on the broad canvas of
world history.  The Committee had to consult a number of published
books, pamphlets and periodicals for determining the nature and form of
their recommendations.”^([18](#18))

The terms of reference enabled the Committee to evolve a Questionnaire
which was sent to such individuals and organisations as could help in
the investigation.  It received 385 replies to the Questionnaire, 55
from Christians and 330 from non-Christians.  Besides, the Committee
toured 14 districts in which it visited 77 centres, contacted 11,360
persons, and received 375 written statements.  Hospitals, schools,
churches, leper homes, hostels, etc., maintained by various missions
were among the Christian institutions visited by the Committee.  The
persons interviewed came from 700 villages.

“In all these places,” recorded the Committee, “there was unanimity as
regards the excellent service rendered by the Missionaries in the fields
of education and medical relief.  But on the other hand there was a
general complaint from the non-Christian side that the schools and
hospitals were being used as means of securing converts.  There was no
disparagement of Christianity or of Jesus Christ, and no objection to
the preaching of Christianity and even to conversions to Christianity. 
The objection was to the illegitimate methods alleged to be adopted by
the Missionaries for this purpose, such as offering allurements of free
education and other facilities to children attending their schools,
adding some Christian names to their original Indian names, marriages
with Christian girls, money-lending, distributing Christian literature
in hospitals and offering prayers in the wards of in-door patients. 
Reference was also made to the practice of the Roman Catholic priests or
preachers visiting new-born babies to give ‘ashish’ (blessings) in the
name of Jesus, taking sides in litigation or domestic quarrels,
kidnapping of minor children and abduction of women and recruitment of
labour for plantations in Assam or Andaman as a means of propagating the
Christian faith among the ignorant and illiterate people.  There was a
general tendency to suspect some ulterior political or extra-religious
motive, in the influx of foreign money for evangelistic work in its
varied forms.  The concentration of Missionary enterprise on the hill
tribes in remote and inaccessible parts of the forest areas and their
mass conversion with the aid of foreign money were interpreted as
intended to prepare the ground for a separate independent State on the
lines of Pakistan.”^([19](#19))

To start with, Christian missions put up a show of cooperation with the
Committee.  But they realized very soon that the Committee was
well-informed and meant business.  “The authorities and members of the
Roman Catholic Church cooperated with the Committee in their exploratory
tours in Raigarh, Surguja, Bilaspur, Raipur and Nimar districts.  Shri
G. X. Francis, President of the Catholic Regional Council, and Shri P.
Lobo, Advocate, High Court, Nagpur, associated themselves with the
Committee.  But subsequently the Catholic Church withdrew its
co-operation, not only filing statement of protest, but also moving the
High court for a Mandamus Petition (Miscellaneous Petition No. 263 of
1955).”^([20](#20))

The Petition was dismissed by the High Court on April 12, 1956, “holding
that it was within the competence of the State Government to appoint a
fact-finding Committee to collect information and that there had been no
infringement of any fundamental rights of the petitioner.” At the same
time the High Court made some adverse remarks about certain questions in
the Questionnaire.  The Committee considered the remarks and “informed
the petitioner and the public that none of the questions represented
either the views of the Committee or any individual member thereof and
our anxiety to have information on various points was due to our desire
to find out to what extent, if any, could any activity be considered to
infringe the limits of public order, morality and health imposed by the
Constitution.”^([21](#21))

The Report of the Committee, published in July 1956, presented the
“history of Christian missions with special reference to the old Madhya
Pradesh and Merged States.”^([22](#22)) Coming to the agitation for
Jharkhand, it gave the background.  “The separatist tendency,” it said,
“that has gripped the mind of the aboriginals under the influence of the
Lutheran and Roman Catholic Missions is entirely due to the consistent
policy pursued by the British Government and the Missionaries.  The
final segregation of the aborigines in the Census of 1931 from the main
body of the Hindus considered along with the recommendations of the
Simon Commission which were incorporated in the Government of India Act,
1935 apparently set the stage for the demand of a separate State of
Jharkhand on the lines of Pakistan.”^([23](#23))

The subsequent formation of the Adiwasi Mahasabha and the Jharkhand
Party followed in stages as the separatist forces gathered strength. 
“This attempt of the Adiwasis,” observed the Report, “initiated by the
Christian section thereof is a feature which is common to, the
developments in Burma, -Assam and Indo-China among the Karens, Nagas and
Amboynes. This is attributed to the spirit of religious nationalism
awakened among the converted Christians as among the followers of other
religions.  But the idea of change of religion as bringing about change
of nationality appears to have originated in the Missionary
circles… Thus while the Census officer isolates certain sections of the
people from the main bodies, the Missionaries by converting them give
them a separate nationality so that they may demand a separate State for
themselves.”^([24](#24))

Next, the Report considered “Christian post-war world
policy,”^([25](#25)) and quoted from several Christian sources.  The aim
of this policy in India was three fold: “(1) to resist the progress of
national unity... (2) to emphasise the difference in the attitude
towards the principle of coexistence between India and America... (3) to
take advantage of the freedom accorded by the Constitution of India to
the propagation of religion, and to create a Christian party in the
Indian democracy on lines of the Muslim League ultimately to make out a
claim for a separate State, or at least to create a ‘militant
minority’.”^([26](#26))

The newly adopted Constitution of India, according to the Committee, had
encouraged the controllers of Christian missions in Europe and America
to concentrate on India.  “Although Europe itself,” observed the Report,
“required ‘re-Evangelisation and re-Christianisation’ because of the
spread of the Gospel of Communism according to Marx, the
W.C.C.^([27](#27)) and I.M.C.^([28](#28)) turned their attention to
India and other colonial countries.  They were encouraged by the
promulgation of our Constitution which set up a secular State with
liberty to propagate any religion in the country.  They noted that the
Churches in India were growing steadily in number partly by natural
increase, partly from evangelisation and that the mass or community
movements to Christianity did not die out though slowed down, but that
the spiritual life of the congregation was low and that the Indian
Church lacked economic maturity.  Though India has the most highly
organised *National Christian Council* it had to be largely *paid for
from abroad*.  Even the institutional activities of Missions, viz.,
schools, colleges and hospitals were dependent upon foreign support. 
Even the ordinary congregational life and pastoral duty still required
some form of foreign aid.”^([29](#29))

The Report surveyed the state of religious liberty in various countries
in the past and at present.  It cited High Court Judgments in India to
the effect that religious liberty is “not an absolute protection to be
interpreted and applied independently of other provisions of the
Constitution.”^([30](#30)) Then it turned to “missionary activities in
Madhya Pradesh since independence as disclosed by oral and documentary
evidence.”^([31](#31)) This was the most substantial as well as the most
revealing part of the Report.  It laid bare what the Christian Missions
had been doing not only in Madhya Pradesh but all over India in the name
of exercising religious liberty.

There was a detailed account of “how this programme of mass
proselytisation was inspired and financed by foreigners”^([32](#32)) and
how the paid *pracharaks* of various missions had fanned out in the
rural and tribal areas.  The *pracharaks* were particularly noticeable
in the erstwhile Native States which had kept missionary operations
under control before their merger in Madhya Pradesh.  “It is thus
indisputably clear,” recorded the Report, “that financial assistance
from abroad had been extended in far more liberal manner than even
before the Constitution of India was promulgated, and that it is mainly
with this help that Mission organisations are carrying on
proselytisation amongst backward tribes, especially in areas freshly
opened.”^([33](#33))

This greatly extended scale of missionary operations was dressed up
ideologically in a new theological concept.  “It may be recalled,”
commented the Report, “that the expression ‘Partnership in Obedience’
came into vogue at the meeting of the Committee of the international
Missionary Council held at Whitby in 1947 (page 94, World Christian
Handbook, 1952) and it has a bearing on the expression ‘need of
particular churches to be rooted in the soil and yet supranational in
their witness and obedience’ (page 29, ibid.). These particular churches
are in the old Mission fields ‘which are touched by new nationalisms
independent in temper and organisation and yet needing help from other
churches’ (page 29, ibid.). The expression ‘Partnership in Obedience’
was being interpreted variously and it was after discussion at a meeting
of the Lutheran World Federation Executive and also of the Executive of
the World Council of Churches held at Geneva in 1951, that it came to be
interpreted as implying full and unreserved co-operation between the old
and the younger churches in the effort of extending the Kingdom of
God.”^([34](#34)) In plain language, the pompous proclamation meant that
missions and churches in Europe and America which provided the finance
would continue to plan, direct and control missionary activities in
India.

The Report quoted Christian sources to show the extent to which
Christianity in India was dependent on foreign finance.  Rolland Allan
had written in his book, *The Spontaneous Expansion of the Church*,
published in 1949, that “it is money, money everywhere, all the time,
everything depends on money.” In another book, *Missionary Methods: St.
Paul’s or Our’s*, published by the same author in 1953, he had felt “sad
to sit and watch a stream of Christian visitors calling upon a
Missionary and to observe that in nearly every case the cause which
brings them is money.” *Christianity in the Indian Crucible* by Dr. E.
Asirvatham had been published in 1955.  “One chief reason,” he had
observed, “why Indian Christians in general still welcome foreign
Missionaries is economy; it is an open secret that the Indian Church is
not yet out of the swaddling clothes, so far as its economic support is
concerned.  To give an extreme illustration only Rs. 6,000 of the total
income of Rs. 1,12,500 of the National Christian Council of India... is
from Indian sources and the rest comes from the Mission Boards
abroad.”^([35](#35)) It was curious that Christianity was presented as a
two-thousand years old banyan tree when it came to its right to spread
its tentacles, and as a tender seedling when it came to its capacity for
growing up on its own.

The Report provided details of how much had been contributed by which
Western country to the total of Rs. 29.27 crores received by Christian
missions in India from January 1950 to June 1954:  
   
 

[TABLE]

The Report revealed that the bulk of this foreign money received
ostensibly for maintaining ‘educational and medical institutions’ was
spent on proselytisation.  “It has been contended,” said the Report,
“that most of the amount is utilised for creating a class of
professional proselytisers, both foreign as well as Indian.  We have not
been able to get the figures of the salaries which the foreign
Missionaries receive for their service in India.  Only Rev. Hartman
(Amravati No. 1) was pleased to declare that his salary was 63 dollars
per month paid from Home, plus free quarters and vehicle allowance.  One
can have some idea of the scale of salaries of American Missionaries
from the fact that in the American Evangelical and Reformed Church there
are 28 Missionaries on the India roll and under the head of Missionary
salaries and appurtenances the figure comes to 90,072,23 dollars
(American Evangelistic and Reformed Church Blue Book, 1955, pages
56,60).  They are supplied with well-furnished bungalows, and they
command resources in vehicles and other things.”^([37](#37)) At the same
time it noted a great disparity between the scales of salaries and
allowances paid to foreign missionaries on the one hand and to their
native mercenaries on the other.

There were 480 foreign missionaries working in Madhya Pradesh at that
time.  Out of them as many as 236 were Americans.  The Report gave a
count of foreign missionaries, Americans and others, stationed in the 22
districts of the then Madhya Pradesh.  “Besides those,” it added,
“included in the number given by the National Christian Council in the
Christian Handbook of India 1954-55, it appears from the statement of
Rev. R. C. Das that there is a large number of unattached
evangelists.  Rev. Das’s statement receives support from the remark made
in the Compiler’s introduction to the Christian Hand-Book of India
1954-55 that the increased personnel has occurred in the smaller
Missions most of which do not yet have any organised
Churches.”^([38](#38))

The methods of proselytisation had remained the same as in days of old.
The Report gave concrete instances of how mission schools were used to
influence the minds of young people. Harijan and ‘Adivasi’ students came
in for special attention. They were “given free boarding, lodging and
books” provided they attended Christian prayers. Bible classes were made
compulsory by treating as absent for the whole day those students who
failed to be present in those classes. School celebrations were used for
showing the victory of the cross over all other symbols. Hospitals were
used for putting pressure on poor class patients to embrace
Christianity. The richest harvest, however, was reaped in mission
orphanages which collected orphans during famines and other natural
calamities such as floods and earthquakes. “No wonder,” observed the
Report, “that the largest number of converts are from such backward
classes living in areas where due to various causes only Mission schools
and hospitals exist. Most conversions have been doubtless insincere
admittedly brought about in expectation of social service benefits and
other material considerations.”^([39](#39))

Another device employed for proselytisation was moneylending. Roman
Catholic mission had specialised in this field. Poor people often
approached the local missionary for loans which are written off if the
debtor became a convert; otherwise he had to repay it with interest
which he often found difficult. Protestant missionaries and others cited
before the Committee instances of how this method worked. One of the
conditions for getting a loan, for instance, was that the recipient
agreed to chop off the top-knot (chotI), the symbol of his being a
Hindu. “Some of the people,” the Report noted, “who had received loans
were minors and casual labourers. It also appeared that when one member
of a family had taken a loan, all the other members of that family were
entered in the book as potential converts. The rate of interest charged
was 10 per cent and in a large number of cases examined, one year’s
interest was deducted in advance. On being questioned, the people
without any hesitation, said that their only purpose in going to the
Mission had been to get money; and all said that without the lure of
money none would have sought to become Christian.”^([40](#40)) Some
other allurements such as the “promise of gift of salt, plough, bullocks
and even milk powder received from abroad” were used to the same
effect.^([41](#41))

There were several other ways of attracting converts. For instance, the
new converts were employed as pracharaks on salaries ranging from Rs.
40/- to Rs. 100/- per month. This by itself proved an attractive
proposition to those who were not in a position or qualified to earn
even Rs. 20/-. Christians working in various government departments were
exhorted and expected to participate in the game. Those who did not help
were cursed in missionary publications. Christians placed in higher
positions and missionaries who became influential members of the Janapad
Sabhas put pressure on junior officers for influencing people in favour
of Christianity.

The Report also noted “various methods of propagating
Christianity.”^([42](#42)) Missionary publications “attacked idol
worship in rather offensive terms.” Dramas in which idol worship was
ridiculed were performed in schools and elsewhere. Songs to the same
effect were composed and sung. Rama was “described as a God who
destroyed Ravan and was contrasted with Jesus who died for the
wicked.” Methods evolved for conveying Christianity in Hindu cultural
forms were also in evidence. Some of them were plainly dishonest, as for
instance, “the expression occurring in Tulsidas’s *Ramayan*, viz.
‘Girjapujan’ was interpreted to the people as ‘Girjaghar’ i.e., a
Church.”^([43](#43)) But, on the whole, preference was given to vicious
attacks on Hinduism, which was held up as a false religion. “Such
virulent and sinister attacks on Hinduism,” observed the Report, “are in
no way a departure from the manner which characterised the Christian
preaching in the past, which Gandhiji referred to, particularly Bishop
Heber’s famous hymn, ‘where every prospect pleases and only man is
vile’.”^([44](#44))

The Report contained a section on Mass Conversions brought about by
material inducements. “If conversion is an individual act,” it noted,
“one would expect deep thought and study of the particular religion one
wanted to embrace. But what we have found is groups of illiterate
Adivasis, with families and children getting their top-knots cut and
being shown as Christians. Most of them do not know even the rudiments
of the new religion… The Government has supplied us with a list of
persons recently converted in the Surguja district after the
promulgation of the Constitution. A perusal thereof will show that about
4000 Uraons were converted in two years. Persons of varying ages from 60
years to 1 year are shown as converts and the list includes women and
children also. We have met many Uraons in the course of our tours and we
were struck very much by their total absence of religious
feeling.”^([45](#45))

The Committee had “reliable information that Mission organisations
possess upto-date records of Baptisms.”^([46](#46)) But they refused to
produce these records. “It would not be unsafe,” concluded the Report,
“to presume that the reluctance on the part of the Roman Catholic
Mission organisations to produce such evidence was in no small measure
due to the fear of the Truth being out… As a rule, groups have been
converted, and we find ‘individual conversion’ has been an exception
rather than the rule. We have come across cases of individual
conversions only of persons who are village leaders and they have
invariably been followed by ‘Mass conversions’ of the entire village
soon after. We have not found it possible to accept the contention that
the immediate material prosperity of these converted leaders bore no
causal relation to their conversions.”^([47](#47))

The Report expressed the view that conversions led directly to
denationalisation. Greetings such as ‘Ram Ram’ and ‘Jai Hind’ were
substituted with ‘Jai Yeshu’. “The idea of the unique Lordship of
Christ,” recorded the Report, “is propagated in rural areas by the
exhibition of the film ‘King of Kings’, which we had the pleasure of
witnessing at Buldana. The supremacy of the Christian flag over the
National flag of India was also depicted in the drama which was staged
in a school at Jabalpur.”^([48](#48)) The missionary paper,
*Nishkalanka*, had written, “Why does India desire that Portugal which
has been exercising sovereignty for 400 years over Goa should surrender
it? The fact is that a large majority of residents of Goa are quite
contented with their present condition. Only a handful of Goans resident
in Goa and in India are shouting for the merger of Goa with India. This
attitude is not justified and those who are following this course are
giving unrighteous lead to India.”^([49](#49)) The missions thus sided
with Western imperialism and pooh-poohed India’s aspiration to reclaim
national territory under foreign occupation.

Finally, the Report found no substance in the Christian complaint that
the Government of Madhya Pradesh was following a policy of
discrimination against Christians. ‘The Government of Madhya Pradesh,’
it said, “have throughout followed a policy of absolute neutrality and
non-interference in matters concerning religion and allegations of
discrimination against Christians and harassment of them by Government
officials have not been established. Such allegations have been part of
the old established policy of the Missions to overawe local authority
and to carry on propaganda in foreign countries.”^([50](#50))

The Report was quite clear in its larger perceptions. “Evangelisation in
India,” it said, “appears to be part of the uniform world policy to
revive Christendom for re-establishing Western supremacy and is not
prompted by spiritual motives. The objective is to disrupt the
solidarity of the non-Christian societies, and the mass conversion of a
considerable section of Adivasis with this ulterior motive is fraught
with danger to the security of the State.”^([51](#51)) The Christian
missions were making a deliberate and determined “attempt to alienate
Indian Christian Community from their nation.”^([52](#52)) The Community
was most likely to become a victim of foreign manipulations in times of
crisis.^([53](#53)) The history of the Christian missions provided ample
proof that religion had been used for political
purposes.^([54](#54)) Evangelization was not a religious philosophy but
a force for politicisation.^([55](#55)) The Church in India was not
independent but accountable to those who paid for its upkeep. The
concept of ‘Partnership in Obedience’ which covered the flow of foreign
finances to the Church was of a piece with the strategy of Subsidiary
Alliances which the East India Company had employed earlier for
furthering and consolidating its conquests.^([56](#56)) And conversions
were nothing but politics by other means.^([57](#57))

The recommendations made by the Report followed logically from these
perceptions. It recommended that (1) those missionaries whose primary
object is proselytisation should be asked to withdraw and the large
influx of foreign missionaries should be checked; (2) the use of medical
and other professional services as a direct means of making conversions
should be prohibited by law; (3) attempts to convert by force or fraud
or material inducements, or by taking advantage of a person’s
inexperience or confidence or spiritual weakness or thoughtlessness, or
by penetrating into the religious conscience of persons for the purpose
of consciously altering their faith, should be absolutely prohibited;
(4) the Constitution of India should be amended in order to rule out
propagation by foreigners and conversions by force, fraud and other
illicit means; (5) legislative measures should be enacted for
controlling conversion by illegal means; (6) rules relating to
registration of doctors, nurses and other personnel employed in
hospitals should be suitably amended to provide a condition against
evangelistic activities during professional service; and (7) circulation
of literature meant for religious propaganda without approval of the
State Government should be prohibited.^([58](#58))

The Report which was accompanied by two volumes of documentation raised
a storm in missionary circles in India and abroad. The missions were in
no position to dispute the facts presented or contest the conclusions
arrived at by the Enquiry Committee. All they could do was to raise the
spectre of ‘Hindu communalism’ and warn against the ‘danger of Hindu
Raj’. It was said that “members of Hindu Mahasabha had begun to wield
considerable influence” in the Government of Madhya Pradesh and that
“their aim was to make one Hindu state out of India.”^([59](#59))

The fact of missions in India seeking financial and other aids from
missions abroad was equated with the Government of India seeking
“foreign technical knowledge and the assistance of friends from many
European and American countries in the development of the
nation-building activities.” The replacement of foreign missionaries was
found impossible as the Government of India had “found impossible to
replace foreign personnel with Indian personnel.”^([60](#60)) It was
promised that “in the not distant future the coming of missionaries from
abroad into India will be matched by the going out of Indian
missionaries from this country.”^([61](#61)) The logic was quite in
keeping with the way the Church in India had come to look at itself.

If this self-image of the Church as a State within the State looked
pretentious to some people, it could be accounted for only by their
tendency towards totalitarianism. ‘There is a striking contrast,’ wrote
a leading theologian, M. M. Thomas, “between the democratic idea of the
State and the totalitarian idea of the State which is both implicit and
explicit in the Recommendations of the Niyogi Report... The philosophy
of State underlying the Report and advocated by it is unashamedly
totalitarian. It therefore is a matter of vital concern to every one in
this country whether Christian or non-Christian who believes in
democracy.”^([62](#62)) The test of a state being democratic was that it
recognised and honoured “supranational loyalties.” In support of his
proposition Dr. Thomas quoted Mahatma Gandhi who had “recognized truth
and non-violence as realities demanding loyalty above the nation,” and
President Sockarno of Indonesia who had “stated that Nationalism should
be limited by Humanism.”^([63](#63)) Thus servility to foreign
financiers and controllers of missions in India became transformed into
loyalty to universal moral values! “In deploring this,” concluded Dr.
Thomas, “and characterising supranationalism as ‘extraterritoriality’,
the Niyogi Report has shown the kinship of its ideology with
totalitarian Facism.”^([64](#64))

The missions also tried to rally support from some persons of public
standing in India. Dr. Hare Krishna Mahtab, then Governor of Bombay,
obliged them readily. “We should not think,” he said, “of closing our
doors to anyone. If we think in terms of exclusiveness, we shall not
make any progress.”^([65](#65)) But they found a h-rd nut in C.
Rajagopalachari. “It seems,” he wrote to a foreign missionary, “you
expect from me an expression of my views on the specific question: What
type of missionary workers are wanted in India, rather than on the
question whether any missionary workers should come at all to India? I
shall respectfully speak my opinion on the latter point. I feel it is
not really possible on the ground of logic or on the evidence of
miracles to hold that amongst the religions known as- Hinduism,
Buddhism, Islam, and Christianity, anyone is nearer the truth than any
other. You will permit me to object to the exclusive claims for Truth
made on behalf of any one of these faiths. If this first point is
granted, the only justification for missionary work is proselytism. But
is it good on the whole for men and women to change from one religion to
another? I think it is not desirable to make any effort at proselytism.
I feel that such efforts undermine the present faith of the people,
which is good enough for promoting right conduct in them and to deter
them from sin. They tend to destroy family and social harmony, which is
not a good thing to do.”^([66](#66))

Rajagopalachari was repeating the views expressed very often and very
forcefully by Mahatma Gandhi. But the men who ran the Government in New
Delhi could not afford to defend the Father of the Nation. They had to
defend their Secularism and Democracy which had come under shadow in the
powerful Christian press in India and abroad. They found the
recommendations of the Niyogi Report “in discordance with the
fundamental rights of the Constitution” and “the Report was
sheived.”^([67](#67))

The Government of India’s stand vis-a-vis the Report became clear within
two months after its publication. In September 1956, “a question was
raised in the Parliament about an alleged increase in the anti-Indian
activities on the part of foreign Christian missionaries.” The Minister
of State for Home Affairs, B. N. Datar, came promptly to their defence.
“There is no factual basis,” he said, “for the assumption made in the
question, according to the information available with the Government of
India.” At the same time he affirmed that “no steps would be taken to
check the work of foreign missionaries.”^([68](#68))

A Bill was introduced in the Parliament in 1960 for protecting Scheduled
Castes and Tribes “from change of religion forced on them on grounds
other than religious convictions.” It was also thrown out because of
resistance from the ruling party. “It was rejected,” records Plattner,
“after Mr. Datar declared in no uncertain terms that it was
unconstitutional and that there were no mass conversions as alleged by
the mover.” The Minister went much further. “They were carrying on,” he
said, “Christ’s mission by placing themselves at the service of mankind
and such work was one of their greatest contributions to the world.” He
credited the missionaries with “the uplift of a large number of
downtrodden people through their schools and social
work.”^([69](#69)) It may be mentioned in anticipation that the same
fate will meet the Freedom of Religion Bill which O. P. Tyagi will try
to introduce in Parliament during the Janata Party regime.

“This attitude of Nehru and his government,” concluded Plattner, “has
inspired the Christians with confidence in the Indian
Constitution.”^([70](#70)) Nehru had “remained true to his British
upbringing.”^([71](#71)) Small wonder that the Catholic Bishops’
Conference of India became quite optimistic about the future. “With the
Indian Hierarchy well established,” it proclaimed in September 1960,
“and the recruitment of the clergy fairly assured, it may be said that
the Church in India has reached its maturity and has achieved the first
part of its missionary programme. The time seems to have come to face
squarely the Church’s next and more formidable duty: the conversion of
the masses of India.”^([72](#72))

There were good grounds for this optimism. Conversions to Christianity
were on the increase as was soon indicated by the Census for 1971. “In
India as a whole,” wrote a Christian historian, “the Christian
population increased by 64.9% between 1951 and 1971. This may be
compared with a general population increase of 51.7% during the same
period. In North East India the Christian population increased by 171.1%
during the same period, compared with a general population growth in
that region of 116.5%. Even these figures do not give the full picture
because in 1971, 74.7% of the total North East India population was in
Assam where the growth of the Christian community is the lowest. In the
196171 decade alone the growth of the Christian community in states and
territories other than Assam was as follows:  
   
 

|           |                                     |                                             |
|-----------|-------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| **State** | **Percentage Growth of Christians** | **Percentage Growth of General Population** |
| Nagaland  | 76.29%                              | 39.88%                                      |
| Meghalaya | 75.43%                              | 31.55%                                      |
| Manipur   | 83.66%                              | 37.33%                                      |
| Tripura   | 56.52%                              | 36.28%                                      |

In the 1951-1971 period, the Christian growth in Nagaland was 251.6% and
in Tripura 298.6%… According to the Census of 1901 Christians in the
North East constituted 1.23% of the whole, by 1951 the proportion was
7.8% and in 1971, 12.5%. North East India now had 39.8% of the
non-southern Christian population.”^([73](#73))

A major part of this rich harvest in this region had been reaped by the
Catholic Church. “Without question,” continued the historian, “the most
important post-war development has been the rapid expansion of the Roman
Catholic Church. At the beginning of the war there were but 50,000
Catholics in the region; in 1977 there were 369,681. In part this was
due to an extraordinary expenditure of resources both in terms of money
and missionary personnel, including personnel brought in from other
parts of India. But it was due also to the removal after independence of
the restrictions the British had placed upon Catholic
missions.”^([74](#74))

This spate of conversions could be traced directly to the expansion of
Catholic education. “The growth of Catholic educational programme in the
North East,” noted the historian, “was certainly phenomenal. While in
1935 they were operating 299 primary schools, 9 middle and high schools,
and 2 colleges, by 1951 the numbers had increased to 591, 65 and 2
respectively. By 1977 there were 744 primary schools, 63 middle and high
schools (a slight decrease) and 4 colleges… Altogether there were 811
educational institutions with 79, 891 students.”^([75](#75))

The region reflected the expansion of Catholic education in the country
as a whole. “The dawn of independence,” wrote the Catholic educationist,
T. A. Mathias, in 1971, “is a landmark in the development of Christian
educational work in this country. Since 1947 there has been a fantastic
expansion in the number of Christian institutions, chiefly among the
Roman Catholics. Colleges have gone up from 42 to 114 and secondary
schools from 500 to 1,200. The Catholic Directory, 1969, gives fairly
accurate statistics for Catholic educational work. There are now 6000
elementary schools, 1200 secondary schools, 114 colleges, and 80
specialised institutions.”^([76](#76)) 

The Catholic Directory for 1984 reported a still more phenomenal growth.
The number of kindergarten (elementary schools) in 1981 had reached
2,550, the number of primary schools 6,183 and the number of secondary
schools 2,986. The Directory does not give the number of colleges and
specialised institutions, though it tells us that 1,141,787 students
were studying in Catholic colleges and 35,519 in institutes for other
studies.

The Catholic educational network, however, represents only a part of the
Catholic apparatus, though it is the most important from the missionary
point of view. It alienates Hindu young men and women from their
ancestral culture or at least neutralises them against missionary
inroads if it does not incline them positively towards the promotion of
Christianity. Schools at the lower levels and in rural and tribal areas
win converts directly by forgoing tuition fees, providing free textbooks
and stationery etc., housing students freely in hostels, and giving free
meals to day scholars. Colleges provide many recruits to the higher
echelons in government services besides executives in business houses.
Most of them look quite favourably at the ‘humanitarian services which
Hindus have neglected’. Big sums flow into the coffers of the Catholic
missions from bribes given by neo-rich parents looking forward to their
children speaking English in the ‘proper accent’. Convent educated girls
are in great demand in the Hindu marriage market.

The other part of the apparatus comprises what are known as medical,
social, and humanitarian service agencies. In 1984 the Catholic missions
maintained 615 hospitals, 1529 dispensaries, 221 leprosoria, 309 homes
for the aged and the handicapped, 1,233 orphanages and 1,271 centres for
training people in various crafts and skills. That is also where work of
conversion is carried on openly. These services are free or very cheap
for those who show readiness to embrace ‘the only true faith’. For
others, they are quite expensive, particularly the hospitals furnished
with imported equipment of the latest kind.

This apparatus was spread in 1984 over 17, 288 mission stations and
manned by 49, 956 religious women, 4, 993 religious priests and 2, 801
religious men other than priests. The missionary personnel was grouped
in 167 congregations of sisters, 39 congregations of priests and 19
congregations of brothers. The sisters functioned from more than 4000
houses maintained in different parts of the country by a personnel of
more than 56,000. Corresponding figures for priests came to more than
700 houses and a personnel of nearly 14,000, and for brothers it was
nearly 200 houses with a personnel of more than 2,000. Besides, there
were 14 secular institutes with nearly 30 houses and a personnel of
nearly 400. A majority of these congregations had their headquarters
abroad - 97 of sisters, 25 of priests, 8 of brothers. Though they
recruited their personnel for the most part from India, their control
was completely in the hands of establishments abroad. As many as 26, 541
catechists were in the field for netting new birds and making them cram
the Catholic creed.

There was a corresponding expansion of what is called the Catholic
Hierarchy which the Pope had taken over, partly from the Portuguese, in
1886. The Hierarchy had grown apace till. 1947 when it had 10
Archdioceses and 35 Dioceses. By 1984, a period of only 37 years, the
number of Archdioceses had almost doubled to 19 and that of Dioceses
more than trebled to 110. A record increase of 18 Dioceses in a single
year took place in 1977 when the Janata Party was in power. Six of these
were created in the sensitive areas of Madhya Pradesh where the State
Government had stalled expansion of the Hierarchy after the Niyogi
Committee had laid bare the missionary mischief in 1956. The Government
of Madhya Pradesh in 1977, it may be noted, was dominated by the
erstwhile Jana Sangh component of the Janata Party.^([77](#77))

The Hierarchy presided over 5,159 parishes and quasiparishes grouped in
110 ecclesiastical territories and manned by 7, 058 diocesan priests.
The Catholic Directory gives the Latin names of Bulls and Decrees
proclaimed by the Pope while creating new Dioceses and Archdioceses and
appointing Bishops and Archbishops on advice from his Nuncio in New
Delhi. Neither the Government of India nor any State Government has ever
been consulted in the matter. In 1974, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi had
started negotiations for a Pre-Notification treaty with the Vatican but
the Pope had stalled them on one excuse or the other. The Janata Party
dropped even the negotiations when it came to power in 1977. The Pope
was thus free to continue carving out a State within the State.

In addition, the Catholic apparatus controlled some 150 printing presses
and more than 200 periodicals in English and Indian languages. Around
350 seminaries of all sorts were busy training missionaries, priests and
other specialised functionaries for its missions. The number of students
in these seminaries was 2,125 in 1984. In the same year, 3, 528 persons
turned out by these seminaries were candidates for religious
priesthood.^([78](#78))

We have not been able to obtain and analyse corresponding data regarding
the expansion of the Protestant missions and churches. They stopped
publishing consolidated figures quite some time ago. It can., however,
be safely assumed that there has been a considerable expansion of the
Protestant apparatus as well, though it might not have been as
phenomenal as the Catholic. Missions from or financed by the U.S.A. and
West Germany, we are told, have become particularly prosperous and are
active over wider fields.

The cost of maintaining and expanding this huge missionary apparatus,
Catholic and Protestant, should be considerable, though it is kept a
closely guarded secret by the missions and churches concerned. The
budgets for maintaining missions and church hierarchies are never made
public. Not even a hint is available in Christian publications regarding
how much money is received and from where. The Christian community in
India is too poor to maintain this colossal and expensive edifice, not
to speak of financing its widespread and multifarious operations. The
logical conclusion that the apparatus is financed almost entirely from
abroad, is confirmed by the budgets published by controllers of missions
in Europe and America, as also by such figures of foreign remittances to
Christian organisations as are made known by the Government of India
from time to time. “One billion dollars,” says a recent and reliable
report, “that is how much American Protestant Christian organisations
spent last year \[1988\] trying to gain conversions from other
religions, and the Catholic Church spent an equal amount. According to
official Indian government reports US dollars 165 millions is sent to
Christian missions in India each year.”^([79](#79)) This represents a
staggering increase on the amount of foreign remittances noted by the
Niyogi Committee for the period from January 1950 to June
1954.^([80](#80))

Thus it can be maintained no longer that the Portuguese and British
imperialists alone were responsible for the expansion of Christianity in
India. The native Indian rulers have proved far more helpful to the
Christian missions. They have provided constitutional protection to
Christian propaganda. They have made it possible for the missions to
enter into areas from where the British had kept them out. What is most
important, in the years since independence Christianity has come to
acquire a prestige which it had enjoyed never before in this country.

It cannot be said that the country has not faced problems created by
Christian missions. Converts to Christianity in the North East and
Central India have constantly evinced separatist and secessionist
tendencies. The Government of India has recognised the mischief
potential of Christian missions by expelling from the country some well
known missionaries who were found fomenting political unrest and
promoting violence. But the larger lesson that Christian missions in
general mean no good and much mischief to the country and its culture,
has yet to be learnt.

Even before independence, some Christian missionaries had ganged up with
the Muslim League and floated the scheme of a sovereign Christian State
composed of tribal areas in the North East and Central India. The two
enclaves were to be linked together by a corridor passing through Bihar
and Bengal. The Nizam of Hyderabad was expected to provide another
corridor towards Christian populations in the Madras Presidency (Now
Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu) and the princely states of Travancore and
Cochin (now Kerala). It was hoped that, in due course, these Christian
populations would gravitate towards the sovereign Christian State and
provide access to the Christian world outside via the Coromandal and
Malabar coasts. The movement for an independent Travancore had drawn
enthusiastic support from the local Christians. Cochin was expected to
follow suit.

After independence, the hand of Christian missions has been manifest in
violent secessionist uprisings in Nagaland, Mizoram, Manipur and
Tripura. Christian missions in these areas have not been loathe to join
hands with the Communists who have pursued the same aim in cooperation
with Red China. It has cost India vast sums of money for meeting the
menace militarily. Thousands of lives have been lost. And the fires
lighted by the Christian missionaries are still smouldering under the
surface in spite of concessions made in the shape of several Christian
majority States.

Meanwhile, the Christian-sponsored agitation for a separate State of
Jharkhand has been gaining strength. ‘A secret report of Intelligence
Bureau,’ according to the *Indian Express* of January 13, 1989, “has
claimed that some voluntary organisations who received foreign
contributions had been ‘covertly’ helping the Jharkhand movement for a
separate state comprising 21 districts of Bihar, West Bengal and Orissa.
The organisations named by the report are: The Willian Carey Study and
Research Centre (WCSRC), the Christian Institution for Study of Religion
and Science (CISRC), the Liberal Association for the Movement of People
(LAMP), the Gana Unnayan Parishad (GUP), and the Indian People’s Welfare
Society (IPWS). The Forum for the Concerned Rural journalists (FCRJ)
with its registered office at Jhargram, was also said to be a recipient
of subsidy from WCSRC and CISRC.” 

Some of the foreign organisations from which finances flow to these
“voluntary organisations” in India have also been named. “According to
the report GUP, WCSRC etc., had been getting foreign contributions from
several foreign agencies including ‘EZE, ECCO and AGKED (West Germany),
NAVIB Foundation (Netherlands). Swedish International Development Agency
(SIDA), World Council of Churches (Geneva) and Bread for the World’.”

The “voluntary organisations” know how to get around the laws of the
land for serving their subterranean purposes. “These organisations, the
report said, had their own techniques for circumventing Government
regulations. The organisations receiving foreign contributions
registered themselves with the Central Government, maintained an account
of foreign contributions and kept records about the purpose and manner
of utilisation of funds. But, while the annual returns of these
organisations to the Reserve Bank of India showed that the money was
spent on cultural, economic, educational, religious and social
programmes, in reality, the report claimed, much less amount than that
claimed in the returns was actually spent on the programmes, with the
rest being either ‘misappropriated’ or ‘clandestinely donated to
designing organisations and elements to further their ulterior
objectives’.”

They also play hide and seek with the law enforcement agencies of the
Government,. “They operate in cooperation with many other voluntary
organisations. If one particular organisation comes to adverse notice it
floats some other cover, and front organisations maintain close liason
with organisations which have not come under the cloud. GUP and IPWS had
thus been floated by the WCRSC and LAMP… WCSRC had been reportedly
giving monetary help to the Jharkhand Coordination Committee, a common
front with 49 cultural and political groups and mass organisations
formed to give a new pitch to the Jharkhand movement… The organisation,
the report said, encouraged ‘struggles of working people, women,
tribals, dalits, oppressed and children’ of the Jharkhand region
‘inciting’ the organisations for a separate Jharkhand state.”

Such a report in a leading national daily called for some comments from
leaders of the nation, if not questions in Parliament. But it was not
even noticed, least of all by those who pass as Hindu leaders, not to
speak of politicians who swear by Secularism. The only response it
elicited was some letters of protest from the functionaries of Christian
organisations. In the letters to-the-editor column of the daily they
denounced the report as concocted. The editor maintained that the report
emanated from reliable and responsible quarters. That was the end of the
matter. The Christian missions in India had not a worry in the world
except that caused by their own theological quibbles.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Felix Alfred Plattner, op. cit., p. 6. Emphasis added.

[²](#2a) *Ibid.,* p. 10.

[³](#3a) K. M. Panikkar, *Asia and Western Dominance*, London, 1953, p.
15.

[⁴](#4a) *Ibid.,* p. 481.

[⁵](#5a) *Ibid.,* P. 455.

[⁶](#6a) Felix Alfred Plattner, *op. cit.,* p. 14.

[⁷](#7a) *Ibid.,* pp. 6-7.

[⁸](#8a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 7. There is no record that Pandit Nehru
ever gave any thought to the ‘different plane’ or ‘other ways’ of
dealing with ‘those evils’.  It remained his life-long privilege “to
talk vaguely and generally about things in general”, as he himself had
said.  His patent way of showing disapproval was to talk of a ‘different
plane’ and ‘other ways’.  Those who understood his language took the
hint and fell in line.

[⁹](#9a) Christians were unhappy with Dr. Katju because in April 1953 he
had made a statement in Parliament that “for a long time he had been in
possession of information about questionable proselytising activities of
missionaries in Central India” (*Ibid.,* p. 10).

[¹⁰](#10a) *Ibid.,* p. 12

[¹¹](#11a) *Ibid.,* p. 11.

[¹²](#12a) Report of the *Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry
Committee, Madhya Pradesh* (known and henceforward referred to as the
Niyogi Committee Report), Nagpur, 1956, Part I, p. 9.

[¹³](#13a) *Ibid.,* p. 7.

[¹⁴](#14a) *Ibid.,* p. 10.

[¹⁵](#15a) *Ibid.,* p. 50.

[¹⁶](#16a) *Ibid.,* p. 23.

[¹⁷](#17a) *Ibid.,* p. 169.

[¹⁸](#18a) *Ibid.,* p. 4.

[¹⁹](#19a) *Ibid.,* p. 3.

[²⁰](#20a) *Ibid.,* p. 5.

[²¹](#21a) *Ibid.*

[²²](#22a) *Ibid.,* Part II, Chapter II.

[²³](#23a) *Ibid.,* p. 49.

[²⁴](#24a) *Ibid.,* pp. 50-51.

[²⁵](#25a) *Ibid.,* Chapter III.

[²⁶](#26a) *Ibid.,* pp. 59-60.

[²⁷](#27a) World Christian Council.

[²⁸](#28a) International missionary Council.

[²⁹](#29a) *Ibid.,* p. 54. Italics in source.

[³⁰](#30a) *Ibid.,* p. 94.

[³¹](#31a) *Ibid.,* Part Ill, Chapter Ill, pp. 95-129.

[³²](#32a) *Ibid.,* P. 99.

[³³](#33a) *Ibid.,* p. 102.

[³⁴](#34a) *Ibid.,* p. 100.

[³⁵](#35a) *Ibid.,* p. 102.

[³⁶](#36a) *Ibid.,* p. 96.

[³⁷](#37a) *Ibid.,* p. 103.

[³⁸](#38a) *Ibid.,* p. 105.

[³⁹](#39a) *Ibid.,* p. 113.

[⁴⁰](#40a) *Ibid.,* p. 115.

[⁴¹](#41a) *Ibid.,* p. 116.

[⁴²](#42a) *Ibid.,* pp. 118-122.

[⁴³](#43a) *Ibid.,* p. 119.

[⁴⁴](#44a) *Ibid.,* p. 121.

[⁴⁵](#45a) *Ibid.,* pp. 122-123.

[⁴⁶](#46a) *Ibid.,* p. 123.

[⁴⁷](#47a) *Ibid.,* pp. 123-124.

[⁴⁸](#48a) *Ibid.,* p. 125.

[⁴⁹](#49a) *Ibid.,* p. 126.

[⁵⁰](#50a) *Ibid.,* p. 132.

[⁵¹](#51a) *Ibid.*

[⁵²](#52a) *Ibid.,* p. 144.

[⁵³](#53a) *Ibid.,* p. 145-148.

[⁵⁴](#54a) *Ibid.,* pp. 148-149.

[⁵⁵](#55a) *Ibid.,* p. 149.

[⁵⁶](#56a) *Ibid.,* pp. 149-150.

[⁵⁷](#57a) *Ibid.,* pp. 151-152.

[⁵⁸](#58a) *Ibid.,* pp. 163-64.

[⁵⁹](#59a) Felix Alfred Plattner, *op. cit.,* p. 10.

[⁶⁰](#60a) *The National Christian Council Review*, October 1956, p.
403.

[⁶¹](#61a) *Ibid.,* P. 405.

[⁶²](#62a) *Ibid.,* p. 395.

[⁶³](#63a) *Ibid.,* pp. 395-96.

[⁶⁴](#64a) *Ibid.,* pp. 396-97.

[⁶⁵](#65a) *Ibid.,* pp. 397.

[⁶⁶](#66a) *Ibid.,* December 1956, p. 490.

[⁶⁷](#67a) Felix Alfred Plattner, *op. cit.,* p. 11.

[⁶⁸](#68a) *Ibid.,* p. 7.

[⁶⁹](#69a) *Ibid.,* pp. 7-8.

[⁷⁰](#70a) *Ibid.,* p. 8.

[⁷¹](#71a) *Ibid.,* p. 9.

[⁷²](#72a) *Ibid.,* p. 134.

[⁷³](#73a) F. S. Downs, *Christianity in North East India: Historical
Perspectives*, Gauhati, 1983, pp. 3-4.

[⁷⁴](#74a) *Ibid.,* pp. 151-52.

[⁷⁵](#75a) *Ibid.,* p. 154.

[⁷⁶](#76a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 153.

[⁷⁷](#77a) I tried to find out from various bigwigs of the then Janata
Party including the then Prime Minister Morarji Desai, the reason for
this sudden spurt. I drew a blank. No one was even aware that this had
happened. The Catholic Church alone knows and can reveal the secret.

[⁷⁸](#78a) For full details, See Sita Ram Goel, *Papacy: Its Doctrine
and History*, New Delhi. 1986. It is a Voice of India publication.

[⁷⁹](#79a) ‘The Big Business of Evangelisation’, *Hinduism Today*,
February 1989. As always, this article too is based on wide-ranging
research.

[⁸⁰](#80a) See page 338 in this chapter.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
