+++
title = "20 18 Dethroning Monotheism"

+++
**18**  
**Dethroning Monotheism**

Another dialogue between Hinduism and Christianity commenced with the
publication of Shri Ram Swarup’s magnum opus, *The Word As Revelation:
Names of Gods*, in September 1980. It is still continuing.

The dialogue which Raja Ram Mohun Roy had started in the third decade of
the nineteenth century stopped abruptly with the passing away of Mahatma
Gandhi in January 1948. The Hindu leadership or what passed for it in
post-independence India was neither equipped for nor interested in the
battle for men’s minds. It believed in ‘organising’ the Hindus without
bothering about what they carried inside their heads. It neither knew
nor cared to know what Hinduism stood for. Its history of India began
with the advent of the Islamic invaders. The spiritual traditions, ways
of worship, scriptures and thought systems of pre-Islamic India were
beyond its mental horizon.

The Christian missions, as we have seen, had never had it so good.
Unchallenged ideologically, they broke out of the tight corner in which
Mahatma Gandhi had put them and resumed the monologue which had
characterised them in the pre-dialogue period. A number of mission
strategies were dressed up as ‘theologies in the Indian context’. The
core of the Christian dogma remained intact, namely, that Jesus Christ
was the only saviour. The language of presenting the dogma, however,
underwent what looked like a radical change to the unwary Hindus,
particularly those in search of a ‘synthesis of all faiths’.

In the days of old, the missions had denounced Hinduism as devil-worship
and made it their business to save the Hindus from the everlasting fire
of hell. Now they abandoned that straight-forward stance. In the new
language that was adopted, Hinduism was made a beneficiary of the Cosmic
Revelation that had preceded Jehovah’s Covenant with Moses. Hinduism was
also credited with an unceasing quest for the ‘True One God’. The
business of the missions was to direct that quest towards Christ who was
‘hidden in Hinduism’ and thereby make them co-sharers in the final
Covenant which Jesus had scaled with his blood. That was the Theology of
Fulfilment. A number of learned treatises were turned out on the
subject. The labour invested was perhaps praise-worthy. The purpose,
however, was deliberately dishonest.

In the days of old, Hindu culture like Hindu religion was a creation of
the devil. It had to be scrapped and the stage swept clean for the
culture of Christianity to take over. In the new language, Hindu culture
was credited with great creations in philosophy, literature, art,
architecture, music, painting and the rest. There was reservation only
at one point. This culture, it was said, had stopped short of reaching
the crest because its spiritual perceptions were deficient, even
defective. It could surge forward on its aborted journey only by
becoming a willing vehicle for ‘Christian truths’. That was the Theology
of Inculturation or Indigenisation. It created another lot of
literature. The missions, however, did not stop at the theoretical
proposition. They demonstrated practically how Hindu culture should
serve Jesus. Christ. A chain of Christian Ashrams sprang up all over the
country. A number of Christian missionaries started masquerading as
Hindu sannyasins, wearing the ochre robe, eating vegetarian food,
sleeping on the floor and worshipping with the accoutrements of Hindu
pUjA. The sacrifice they made of comforts in the mission stations and
monasteries was perhaps admirable. The purpose of the exercise, however,
was perfidious.

The controllers of the missions were not exactly happy when they found
that Communism was proving more attractive than Christianity for some of
the missionaries. Marxism was in the air and it was difficult to
dissuade some theologians and field workers from seeing a social
revolutionary in Jesus. So the controllers did what they thought to be
the next best thing. They encouraged the hot-heads to hammer out another
theology, complete with class struggle and the rest, and hurl it against
the ‘oppressive social system sanctioned by Hinduism’. It became the
business of the Christian missions to help the ‘have-nots of Hindu
society’ rise in revolt against their ‘oppressors’. Hindu society was
found to be brimful of caste discrimination, class coercion, degradation
of women, neglect of children, untouchability, bonded labour, and so on.
That was the Theology of Liberation. It also produced some literature.
Malcontents from among the Hindus were hired to lend their names as
authors. Never mind if the pamphlets were poorly written and badly
printed. The pretence that they came from the ‘deprived and the
down-trodden section of Hindu society’ had to be maintained.

The Christian press presented the quibbles among these competing
theologies as if momentous matters were being discussed. Hindus were
left with the impression that the house of Christianity stood divided
from within. The controllers of the missions, however, had everything
under control. They were experimenting with various strategies in order
to find out which was likely to yield the best results in the long run.
In any case, different strategies could be employed simultaneously by
different flanks of the missionary phalanx. Each Hindu who came in
contact with them could be served with the theology which suited his or
her taste.

What helped the Christian missions a good deal from the outside was the
rise of Nehruvian Secularism as India’s state policy as well as a raging
fashion among India’s intellectual elite. The knowledgeable among the
missionaries were surprised and somewhat amused. They knew that
Secularism had risen in the West as the deadliest enemy of Christian
dogmas and that it had deprived the churches of their stranglehold on
state power. In India, however, Secularism was providing a smokescreen
behind which Christianity could steal a march. Politicians of all
parties including parties which passed as Hindu, leading journalists and
academicians, and scribes of all sorts saw the spectre of ‘Hindu
communalism’ whenever someone raised a voice, howsoever feeble and
apologetic, about the foreign finances and subversive activities of the
Christian missions. An informed critique of Christianity invited angry
snarls from the same quarters. The missions did not feel quite
comfortable with the guardians of India’s Secularism; there were too
many goddamned Communists, Royists, Socialists and Leftists of all sorts
in that crowd. But that was a problem to be faced in the long run. In
the short run, the deep hostility which Secularism in India entertained
for Hinduism could be turned to Christianity’s advantage. At the same
time, Hindus could be frightened into entering a ‘united front of all
religions against the forces of Godless materialism’.

Mahatma Gandhi’s *sarva-dharma-sambhAva* was providing grist to the same
mill. The old man had tried to cure Christianity of its exclusiveness
and sense of superiority. That was the substance of his objection to
proselytisation. He had advised Christians in general and Christian
missionaries in particular to be busy with their own moral and spiritual
improvement rather than with the salvation of Hindus. In his own days,
Christian theologians had resented his doctrine of
*sarva-dharma-samabhAva* and repudiated it as destructive of the very
basis of Christianity. But now that the doctrine had been turned into a
mindless slogan by the Mahatma’s own disciples and handed over to the
watchdogs of Nehruvian Secularism as another bark against Hinduism, it
was safeguarding Christianity’s right to multiply its missions. The
doubting Thomases among the Hindus could be told that Bapu stood for
equality of all religions and their opportunity to flourish without let
or hindrance.

This was the atmosphere in which Ram Swarup’s book, mentioned at the
beginning of this chapter, came out of the press. He had invested in it
many years of meditation and reflection. Its subject was neither
Christianity, nor its missions.

On the contrary, it was an attempt at understanding the spiritual
consciousness which had manifested itself in a multiplicity of Gods, not
only in India but in many other lands. Christianity came in for a brief
examination when he evaluated Monotheism from the standpoint of the
spiritual vision which has sustained religious pluralism among the
Hindus down to the present day. But the premises from which he would
subsequently develop his deeper critique of Christianity became clear in
this book.

Before we take up Ram Swarup’s critique of Christianity in some detail,
it would be helpful if we survey briefly the history of how Monotheism
came to India and how it acquired the prestige it enjoys at present in
the eyes of the dominant and vocal section of the Hindu intelligentsia.
It is not rarely that one meets Hindu thinkers who regard Monotheism as
a distinct and major contribution made to religious thought by
Christianity and Islam. Many Hindu thinkers disown as relics from a
primitive past the multiplicity of Gods for which Hinduism is well
known; they also denounce idol worship round which Hinduism has remained
centred down the ages. Even those Hindu thinkers who do not disown the
Hindu pantheon, consign it to an inferior status vis-a-vis the Great God
who is ‘One without a second’; if they defend idol worship, they do so
only as a device meant for the spiritually underdeveloped’ seekers who
are supposed to be incapable of viewing God without the aid of visible
forms.

Monotheism was unknown to Hinduism in ancient times, either as a
religious doctrine or as a philosophical concept, not to speak of as a
theology. The notion of the ‘True One God’ as opposed to ‘False Many
Gods’ was unknown to the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Buddhist and Jain
Shastras, the Epics and the Puranas, and the six systems of Hindu
philosophy. “Indian spirituality,” writes Ram Swarup, ‘proclaimed that
the true Godhead was beyond number and count; that it had many
manifestations which did not exclude or repel each other but included
each other, and went together in friendship; that it was approached in
different ways and through many symbols; that it resided in the hearts
of its devotees. Here there were no chosen people, no exclusive
prophethoods, no privileged churches and fraternities and *ummas*. The
message was subversive of all religions based on exclusive
claims.”^([1](#1)) This spirituality was summed up in the Vedic
*mantra*, They hail It as Indra, as Mitra, as Varuna, as Agni, and as
that divine and noble-winged GarutmAn. Truth (or Reality) is one; the
wise ones speak of it in various ways, whether as Agni, or as Yama, or
as MatarishvAn.^([2](#2))

Monotheism came to this country for the first time as the war-cry of
Islamic invaders who marched in with the Quran in one hand and the sword
in the other. It proclaimed that there was no God but Allah^([3](#3))
and that Muhammad was the Prophet of Allah. It claimed that Allah had
completed his Revelation in the Quran and that Muslims who possessed
that Book were the Chosen People. It invoked a theology which called
upon the believers to convert or kill the infidels, particularly the
idolaters, capture their women and children and sell them into slavery
and concubinage all over the world, slaughter their sages and saints and
priests, break or at least desecrate their idols, destroy or convert
into mosques their places of worship, plunder their properties, occupy
their lands, and heap humiliations on such of them as cannot be
converted or killed either due to their capacity for fighting back or
the need of the conquerors for slave labour. The enormities which the
votaries of Islamic Monotheism practised on a vast scale and for a long
time vis-a-vis Hindu religion, culture and society, were unheard of by
Hindus in the whole of their hoary history. Muslim theologians, sufis
and historians who witnessed or read or heard of these doings hailed the
doers as soldiers of Allah and heroes of Islam. They thanked Allah and
the Prophet who had declared a permanent war on the infidels and
bestowed their progeny and properties on the believers. They quoted
chapter and verse from the Quran and the Sunnah of the Prophet in order
to prove that what was being done to Hindus was fully in keeping with
the highest teachings of Islam.

The mainstream of Hinduism drew the inescapable conclusion that Islam
was not much more than glorified gangsterism, and closed its doors to
any willing contact with the hated creed and its vicious votaries. There
was, however, a somewhat different response from some marginal sections
of Hindu society. We need not go into the objective and subjective
factors which facilitated this response. The result was the same in
every case. The doings of Islam were divorced from its doctrine and
viewed as aberrations due to human failing. Its Monotheism was
abstracted and absorbed as the doctrine of One God as against Many Gods.
Finally, Islam was presented as good a religion as Hinduism. The saints
who performed this feat are now known as the pioneers of the ‘Nirguna
school of Bhakti’. Most of them show symptoms of the deep inroad which
Monotheism had made into their psyche.

In the prevalent lore of present-day Hindu scholarship, the Nirguna
school of Bhakti has become a ‘progressive movement of social protest’
inspired by the message of human equality and brotherhood supposed to
have been brought in by Islam. There are several other myths which,
joined together, make this school sound like a radical, even a
revolutionary departure from the mainstream of Hinduism. A study of the
literature produced by this school, however, provides no evidence that
its saints said anything which had not been said long ago and in a
loftier language by the ancient sages of Sanatana Dharma, or which was
not being said by the other and contemporary school of Bhakti. By and
large, the Nirguna school, like the other school of Bhakti, was wedded
to Vaishnavism and drew upon the Epics and the Puranas, particularly the
Bhagavata, for its devotional stories and songs. What made the Nirguna
school sound different in its historical setting was the stress which
most of its saints laid on the ‘True One God (*sacchA sAhib*)’and the
contempt they poured on idol worship (*pAthar-pUjA*). The Shaktas who
worshipped the Great Mother were subjected to virulent attacks in the
literature of this school. Allah of the Quran who brooked no partners,
particularly of the female gender, and permitted no idol worship, had
won a victory without his victims knowing it.

Some Jain monks succumbed to Monotheism in their own way. Jainism had no
God who could be made exclusive, nor Gods and Goddesses who could be
spurned. But it had its Tirthankaras whose idols were worshipped in its
temples. There is evidence that the Sthanakavasi sect of the Svetambara
school of Jainism renounced idol worship and turned its back on temples
under the influence of Islam.

Islamic invasion was defeated in due course and Muslim rule disappeared
from the greater part of the Hindu homeland. But Monotheism retained the
prestige it had acquired during the days of Muslim dominance. This
happened largely because medieval Hindu thinkers had refused or failed
to study and understand Islamic Monotheism in all its ramifications and
from its own sources.

Many Hindu writers and poets of the medieval period have left for
posterity some graphic accounts of the Muslim behaviour pattern with all
its essential ingredients - sack of cities and villages and massacre of
whole populations, capture of women and children, humiliation of
Brahmanas, breaking of sacred threads, burning of scriptures, slaughter
of cows, desecration of idols, destruction of temples or their
conversion into mosques, plunder of properties, and so on. But what we
miss altogether in the whole of medieval Hindu literature is an insight
into the belief system which produced this behaviour pattern. There is
not even the hint of a curiosity as to why Muslims were doing what they
were doing. No Hindu acharya - there were quite a few of this class
during this period - is known to have had a close look at Allah or the
Prophet or the Quran or the theology which sanctioned these dismal
deeds. Islamic Monotheism was thus allowed to remain unchallenged as a
religious doctrine.

Ram Swarup observes, “Hindus fought Muslim invaders and locally
established Muslim dynasties but neglected to study the religious and
ideological motives of the invaders. Hindu learning or whatever remained
of its earlier glory, followed the old grooves and its texts and
speculations remained unmindful of the new phenomenon in their
midst. For example, even as late as the fourteenth century, when Malik
Kafur was attacking areas in the far South, in the vicinity of the seat
of Sri Ramanujacharya, the scholarly dissertations of disciples of the
great teacher show no awareness of the fact.”^([4](#4))

He continues, “Hindus were masters of many spiritual disciplines; they
had many Yogas and they had developed a science of inner exploration.
There had been a continuing discussion whether the ultimate reality was
*dvaita* or *advaita*. It would have been very interesting and
instructive to find out if any of these savants of Yoga ever met, on
their inner journey, a Quranic being Allah (or its original, Jehovah of
the Bible) who is jealous of other Gods, who claims sole sovereignty and
yet whom no one knows except through a pet go-between, who uses the
latter’s mouth to publish his decrees, who proclaims crusades and jihAd,
who teaches to kill the unbelievers and destroy their temples and
shrines and levy tribute on them and to convert them into hewers of wood
and drawers of water.”^([5](#5))

Monotheism which had survived the defeat of Islamic invasion was
reinforced by Christianity which appeared on the Indian scene along with
European Imperialism. Christian Monotheism was no different from that of
Islam; both of them shared a common source in the Bible. Nor had
Christian Monotheism lagged behind its Islamic variation in committing
atrocities on a large scale, for a long time, and in many lands; in
fact, Islam had followed in many respects the precedents set by
Christianity. But in the Indian context, Christian Monotheism had an
advantage over that of Islam. Hindus had no opportunity to see the
fierce face of Christianity except in the small Portuguese and French
enclaves for a short time. By the time Christianity was active in India
on any scale, it had suffered a steep decline in the estimation of the
dominant Western elite; the rise of modern science, rationalism and
secularism had knocked the bottom out of Christian theology and deprived
it of its stranglehold on the state. The British conquerors of India
were not willing to back the Christian missions with state power to any
great extent; the missions were not allowed to use their tried and
tested methods for ‘saving the Hindus from hell’.

Most Hindus felt offended when Christian missionaries used foul language
vis-a-vis Hindu religion, culture and society and started making
conversions. But few of them were equipped intellectually to identify
the doctrine from which the language sprang and the attempts at
conversion emanated. Christian missionaries were presenting themselves
as worshippers of the ‘True One God’ and denouncing Hinduism as idolatry
wedded to many Gods and Goddesses. Some Hindus defended their pantheon
in the best manner they knew and continued to worship in their
traditional temples. But others, particularly those who had benefited
from English education, took the missionary accusation to heart and
started ransacking their own scriptures in search of the ‘True One God’
who could stand shoulder to shoulder with the God of Christianity. They
ended by disowning the multiplicity of Gods and denouncing idol worship.
They gave out a call for purging Hinduism of its ‘polytheism’ so that
Hinduism could be saved. That is how the Hindu reform movements started
in the nineteenth century.

The psychology that was at work in the reform movements is illustrated
best by the rise of Raja Ram Mohun Roy to name and fame in a short time.
He owed his fascination for Monotheism to his study of Islam. Hindus of
Calcutta did not take to him kindly when he started denouncing
polytheism and idol worship. It was only when he criticised the
Christian doctrine of Trinity and the crude methods of Christian
missionaries that the English educated gentry of Calcutta warmed up to
him. He was hailed as a Hindu leader by this gentry when he discovered
the ‘True One God’ in the Brahma of the Vedas and the Upanishads. The
Brahmo Samaj he founded took the message to Madras, Malabar,
Maharashtra. The North Western Provinces (now U.P.) and the Punjab.

The Arya Samaj, founded by Maharshi Dayananda, spread Monotheism over a
larger area and among those sections of Hindu society which had never
known it earlier. As a result, Hindu society seemed to acquire
self-confidence. But the logic of what had been set in motion was
remorseless. The wheel turned full circle in the Punjab where
Neo-Sikhism forced the lives and sayings of the Gurus into the framework
of Monotheism borrowed bodily and wholesale from Islam and Christianity.
Nothing could have been more distorted and dishonest. But the exercise
succeeded because by this time the dominant and vocal section of Hindu
intelligentsia had become votaries of Monotheism. This section applauded
when the Akalis drove out the Brahmana priests from the gurudwaras after
accusing them of having installed idols of many Gods and Goddesses in
places meant for the worship of the ‘True One God’. Hindus who had
retained their reverence for the idols had to collect and install them
elsewhere when they were thrown out of the gurudwaras. Mahatma Gandhi
protested in vain when a temple inside the Harimandir at Amritsar was
demolished; he was told that Sikhism did not permit idol worship in its
holy places.

The Hindu reform movements had started with the best of intentions. They
aspired to save Hindu society from the onslaught of Islam and
Christianity. They also succeeded in stopping conversions. But in as
much as they were rooted in reaction against Islam and Christianity
rather than in a resurgence of the Hindu spiritual vision, they misfired
in the long run. Instead of forging their own weapon of defence, they
borrowed it from the adversary’s armoury. Small wonder that it
boomranged and turned out to the disadvantage of the cause they had
espoused.

In disowning the multiplicity of Hindu Gods, the Hindu reform movements
tended to disown the rich heritage of Hindu art, architecture,
sculpture, music, dance and literature which had developed round these
divinities and had no other *raison d’etre*. It was not long before they
forgot the very purpose, namely defence of Hinduism, for which they had
placed themselves in the vanguard of Hindu society. Worse still, the
reform movements created an elite which looked down upon its own people
and became progressively alienated from them in most of its perceptions.
The wide gulf that yawns at present between the two sections of Hindu
society is illustrated best by their respective response to the remains
of Hindu temples destroyed by the Islamic invaders.

It is not unoften that Hindus in the countryside chance upon remains of
temples which lie scattered on some site and which have escaped the
notice of the Archaeological Survey of India. Invariably, they collect
these remains, cleanse them, install them under a tree or in an
improvised temple, and start worshipping them. Experts from the
Archaeological Survey who receive the report and visit the spot feel
amused at the simplicity of these people. Sometimes the ‘heap’ consists
entirely of the outer and decorative portions of a temple and does not
contain a single figure of a God or Goddess, either in relief or in the
round. But that does not make any difference to the worshippers. All
they know and care for is that the remains came from a temple where
their ancestors had worshipped at one time but which was subsequently
destroyed by Muslims.

The story becomes entirely different when one visits the drawing rooms
of the Hindu elite. One sees there an array of sculptures selected with
care from the same ruins and installed on tasteful stands. But they draw
no reverence from those who possess them. They are only antiques meant
for interior decoration. One is expected to contemplate them for their
lines and forms and place them properly in the history of Indian art.
Woe betide the visitor who becomes curious as to how these idols which
were once housed in some temple or temples have landed in a modern
drawing room, and how they got mutilated or defaced or deprived of
limbs. That sort of curiosity is most likely to be met with stunned
silence or derisive smiles. One has exhibited one’s utter lack of the
aesthetic sense. This irrelevant digging into a dead past is simply not
done in polished society. Or, worse still, one has betrayed one’s
inclination towards ‘Hindu communalism’, a dangerous disease in a
society dedicated to Secularism.

It was not that voices in defence of Gods and their worship as idols
were not raised while the Hindu reform movements surged forward. Some of
these voices came from the tallest figures in the saga of India’s
re-awakening to her ancient heritage. Swami Vivekananda had said that if
idol worship could produce a spiritual master like Sri Ramakrishna, all
honour to it. Sri Aurobindo had expounded at length how the concrete
images to which Vedic *rishis* addressed their hymns had emerged out of
the deepest intuitions of spiritual consciousness. Mahatma Gandhi had
avowed his reverence for idols and temples in unmistakable terms. But
the voices, it seems, failed to impress the followers of these great
men. The Ramakrishna Mission installed life-like statues of Sri
Ramakrishna in the temples it built. Sri Aurobindo Ashram raised their
own guru to the same status. Mahatma Gandhi has so far been spared that
‘honour’. His followers, however, are not known for their fondness for
Hindu idols or temples.

What was worse, the Ramakrishna Mission and the Sri Aurobindo Ashram
imbibed the theology of Monotheism in another respect, namely, the cult
of the latest and the best which will not be bettered. in the eyes of
the Mission, Sri Ramakrishna is no more a saint who sought and verified
in his own experience the truths of Sanatana Dharma; he has become a
‘synthesis of all faiths’ including Islam and Christianity such as has
never been seen in the past and will not be witnessed again in future!
The Ashram hails Sri Aurobindo not as a great yogin and sage who
explored and explained to the modern world the deepest insights of the
Hindu spiritual tradition, but as the highest manifestation of the
Divine in human history! Shades of Christ and Muhammad.

The stalwarts of India’s re-awakening never claimed to be founders of
new religions. Nor were they interested in Hinduism because it carried
some exclusive message made known to mankind by some Hindu at some point
in time. For them, Hinduism was Sanatana Dharma, that is, a spiritual
vision valid at all times, in all places and for all people, and
directly accessible to all seekers without the help of an historical
intermediary. To the Buddha, a new way was suspect. He described his own
way as that on which the Buddhas of the past had walked and the Buddhas
of the future will walk. And that is Ram Swarup’s starting point in his
book. He seeks the “higher meanings” of the Hindu pantheon not only
because “it will add to our understanding of Hinduism, one of the most
ancient and still one of the major world-religions” but also because,
“it will throw light on the ancient Gods of many Asian and European
countries, Gods by now so completely forgotten that we cannot study them
directly.”^([6](#6))

“The Hindu pantheon,” observes Ram Swarup, “has changed to some extent
but the old Gods are still active and are still understood though under
modified names. Hindu India has a continuity with its past which other
nations, which changed their religions at some stage, lack. It is known
that the Hindu religion preserves many old layers and forms. Therefore,
its study may link us not only with its own past forms but also with the
religious consciousness, intuitions and forms that prevailed in the past
in Europe, in Greece, in Rome, in many Scandinavian and Baltic
countries, amongst the German and the Slavic peoples, and also in
several countries of the Middle East. In short, the study may reveal a
fundamental form of spiritual consciousness which is wider than its
Hindu expression.”^([7](#7)) This emergence of similar spiritual
insights and forms over a vast area was not an accident.

The earliest Hindu expression of that spiritual consciousness is found
in the Vedas, “humanity’s oldest extant scripture.”^([8](#8)) Three
things “stand out prominently” when we study the Vedic pantheon.
Firstly, there is “a very large use of concrete images... many important
Gods like *Surya, Agni, Marut* take their names after natural
objects.”^([9](#9)) Secondly, “the spiritual consciousness of the race
is expressed in terms of a plurality of Gods.”^([10](#10)) Thirdly, “all
Gods have multiple names.”^([11](#11)) These are also features shared by
the pantheons of many other peoples.

Ram Swarup starts with the Names of Gods which, in turn, lead him to an
inquiry into the nature of language and the higher meanings of words.
Taking up concrete images in the Vedic pantheon, he observes, “We have
already seen that the physical and the intellectual are not opposed to
one another. The names of physical objects become names of ideas, names
of psychic truths, names of Gods; sensuous truths become intellectual
truths, become spiritual truths… In fact, this is the only way in which
the sense-bound mind understands something of the higher knowledge… This
reverberating, echoing and imaging takes place up and down the whole
corridor of the mind at all levels of abstraction. Here, as we traverse
the path, we meet physical-forms, sound-forms, vision-forms,
thought-forms, universal-forms, all echoes of each other. We meet
*mantras* and *yantras* and icons of various efficacies and psychic
qualities. In one sense, they are not the light above but they are its
important formations. They invoke the celestial and raise up the
terrestrial…^([12](#12)) There is another reason why images in the Vedas
and the Upanishads are concrete. When the fever of the soul subsides,
when the mind becomes calm, when the spiritual consciousness opens,
things are no longer lifeless. In this state, things which have hitherto
been regarded as ordinary are full of life, light and consciousness. In
this state, ‘the earth meditates as it were; water meditates as it were;
mountains meditate as it were.’^([13](#13)) In this state, no need is
felt to separate the abstract from the concrete because both are
eloquent with the same message, because both image one another. In this
state, everything expresses the divine; everything is the seat of the
divine; everything is That; mountains, rivers and the great earth are
but the TathAgata, as a Chinese teacher, Hsu Yun, proclaimed after his
spiritual awakning.”^([14](#14))

How did the Vedic sages see Gods in Nature’s mighty phenomena like the
earth, the sky, the sun and the stars? “They saw in them sources and
springs of their own lives; they saw that these things were part of one
Great Life; that they were meeting points of great spiritual truths;
that they revealed what was concealed; that they prefigured a mighty
design; that they were kith and kin, friends and lovers. But in order to
yield their deeper meanings, they demanded continued fellowship. This
the old sages gave ungrudgingly and joyfully. They filled their hearts
and the fullness of their hearts broke out in songs of
praise.”^([15](#15))

Coming to the plurality of the Vedic Gods and their names, he comments,
“The names of Gods are not names of external beings. These are the names
of the truths of man’s own higher self. So the knowledge of the epithets
of Gods is a form of self-knowledge. Gods and their names embody truths
of the deeper Spirit and meditation on them in turn invokes those
truths. But those truths are many and, therefore Gods and their names
too are many, though they are all held together in the unity of a
spiritual consciousness.”^([16](#16))

Equipped with this perspective on the nature of spiritual consciousness
and its inevitable expressions, Ram Swarup proceeds to examine
Monotheism and Polytheism. He finds merit in both of them so long as
they remain spiritual ideas and do not become intellectual concepts.

“The Spirit,” he observes, “is a unity. It also worships nothing less
than the Supreme. Monotheism expresses, though inadequately, this
intuition of man for unity and for the Supreme^([17](#17))… When the
urge for unity is spiritual, the theology of One God is no bar and the
seeker reaches a position no different from *Advaita*, from *ekam* sat.
He realizes that *God alone is*, and not that there is only One God. But
if the motive for unity is merely intellectual, it helps little
spiritually speaking. God remains an outward being and does not become
the truth of the Spirit. It does not even help to reduce the number of
Gods; instead it multiplies the number of Devils - if Christianity is
any guide in the matter. We know Medieval Christianity was chockful of
them. In fact, they occupied the centre of attention of the Church for
many centuries to the exclusion of everything else. During these
centuries it was difficult to say whether the Church worshipped God or
these devils… The Church also abounded in Gods though they were not as
plentiful as the devils. But these were not recognised as such because
they appeared in the guise of angels, cherubims and
seraphims.”^([18](#18))

Coming to Polytheism, he comments, “If monotheism represents man’s
intuition for unity, polytheism represents his urge for differentiation.
Spiritual life is one but it is vast and rich in expression. The human
mind also conceives it differently. If the human mind was uniform,
without depths, heights and levels of subtlety or if all men had the
same mind, the same imagination, the same needs; in short, if all men
were the same, then perhaps One God would do. But a man’s mind is not a
fixed quantity and men and their powers and needs are different. So only
some form of polytheism alone can do justice to this variety and
richness. Besides this variety of human needs and human minds, the
spiritual reality itself is so vast, immense and inscrutable that man’s
reason fails and his imagination and fancy stagger. Therefore this
reality cannot be indicated by one name or formula or description. It
has to be expressed in glimpses from many angles. No single idea or
system of ideas could convey it adequately. This too points to the need
for some form of polytheism.”^([19](#19))

“The Vedic approach,” concludes Ram Swarup, “is perhaps the best. It
gives unity without sacrificing diversity. In fact, it gives a deeper
unity and a deeper diversity beyond the power of ordinary monotheism and
polytheism. It is one with the yogic and the mystic
approach^([20](#20))... In this deeper approach, the distinction is not
between a true One God and false Many Gods; it is between a true way of
worship and a false way of worship. Wherever there is sincerity, truth
and self-giving in worship, that worship goes to the true altar by
whatever name we may designate it and in whatever way we may conceive
it. But if it is not desireless, if it has ego, falsehood, conceit and
deceit in it, then it is unavailing though it may be offered to the most
true God, theologically speaking.”^([21](#21))

Summing up, Ram Swarup says, “The truth is that the problem of One or
Many Gods is born of a theological and not of a mystic consciousness. In
the Atharvaveda, the sage Vena says that he ‘sees That in that secret
station of the heart in which the manifoldness of the world becomes
one-form’… But in another station of man, where not his soul but his
mind rules, there is opposition between the One and the Many, between
God and Matter, between God and Gods. On the other hand, when the soul
awakens, Gods are born in its depths which proclaim and glorify one
another. Gods are bound to appear when the spiritual consciousness
awakens; though in another sense they also fall away, God as well as
Gods, with all their outward, anthropomorphic forms, and along with all
our conceptions of them, however sublime and. exalted. Yes, even God
falls away. For there is a spiritual consciousness which can do without
God. Buddhism, Jainism, SAMkhya, Taoism and Zen confirm the truth of
this observation. In fact, in Buddhism and Jainism, though Gods are
plentiful, there is very little of One God. Yet in spiritual perception,
insight and attainment, these religions are not less than those where
One God rules the roost and is the sole cock of the walk.”^([22](#22))

Monotheism as known to history is not born of spiritual seeking. Ram
Swarup says, “Monotheism was not always a spiritual idea. In many cases
it was an ideology. It was consolidated in wars and in turn it led to
further wars… there was a larger association to create, an empire to
consolidate, or other nations and tribes to conquer, and the idea of a
‘One True God’ was handy in the pursuit of this object. The diplomacy,
the sword, systematic vandalism, all played their part in making a
particular god supreme. From very early days, the One God of
Christianity was bound up with the imperial needs of Rome. In more
recent times, the Biblical God has tried to consolidate what the
European arms and trade have conquered^([23](#23))… In the cultural
history of the world, the replacement of Many Gods by One God was
accompanied by a good deal of conflict, vandalism, bigotry, persecution
and crusading. These conflicts were very much like the ‘wars of
liberation’ of today, hot and cold, openly aggressive or cunningly
subversive. Success in such wars played no mean role in making a local
deity, say Allah of certain Arab tribes, win a wider status and assume a
larger monarchical role^([24](#24))… This point needs stressing. For in
the past, the controversy between One God and Many Gods or between My
True God and Your False God led to many rolling of heads and much
spilled blood, and even today there is no dearth of hot heads and the
discussion still tends to polemics, bad blood, and frayed tempers. There
are still organised churches and missions out to make war on the false
Gods of the heathens.”^([25](#25))

On the other hand, Polytheism “bred a spirit of religious tolerance and
freedom” wherever it prevailed. “Ancient Rome, Greece and Egypt - all
polytheistic cultures - were relatively free from religious wars...
Rome, Alexandria and Athens were open places where different religions
met and discussed freely. When St. Paul visited Athens, he was invited
by the Athenians to speak about his doctrine. He did not avail himself
of the opportunity but it is obvious that he did not feel at home in
this atmosphere of free enquiry... St. Paul represented not the spirit’s
impatience with what is only cerebral but a passionate attachment to a
fixed idea which is closed to wider viewpoints and larger truths of
life. In polytheistic Rome too, men of different religious persuasions
and sects met and built their temples and worshipped in their own way.
But this freedom disappeared when Christianity, the religion of One True
God, took over.”^([26](#26))

Ram Swarup, therefore, calls upon the people of various countries in
Asia, Africa, Europe and America to return to their ancient Gods which
have been replaced by the semitic Gods in the recent past. “It would,
therefore, be difficult,” he writes, “to hold that the present Gods of
semitic origin are superior to the now defunct pagan Gods. There was a
time when the old pagan Gods were pretty fulfilling and they inspired
the best of men and women to acts of greatness, love, nobility,
sacrifice and heroism. It is, therefore, a good thing to return to them
in thought and pay them our homage. We know pilgrimage, as ordinarily
understood, as wayfaring to visit a shrine or a holy place. But there
can also be a pilgrimage in time and we can journey back and make our
offerings of the heart to those Names and Forms and Forces which once
incarnated and expressed man’s higher life. They are holy Names and
Symbols.”^([27](#27))

Restoration of old Gods will restore among the people concerned a
respect for their past. It will also fill the gap in their cultural
history. “The present generations of many countries tend to regard their
past as a benighted period of their history. A more understanding
approach towards their Gods of old will work for a less severe judgement
about their past and their ancestors. It will also fill the generation
gap, not the one we talk about the most these days but a still wider
one, the general rootlessness of a whole nation. Gods provide an
invisible link between the past and the present of a nation; when they
go, the link also snaps. The peoples of Egypt, Persia, Greece, Germany
and the Scandinavian countries are no less ancient than the people of
India; but they lost their Gods, and therefore they lost their sense of
historical continuity and identity.”^([28](#28))

Such a restoration is particularly relevant for the peoples of Africa
and South America. “The countries of these continents have recently
gained political freedom of a sort, but it has done little to help them
and to give them a spiritual identity. If they wish to rise in a deeper
sense, they must recover their soul, their Gods, their roots in their
own psyche; there has to be a spiritual reassertion, a resurrection of
their Gods. If they need any change, and there is no doubt they do, it
must come from within themselves as a part of their own experience. If
they do enough self-churning, then their own Gods will put forth new
meanings in response to their new needs. They have to make the best of
their own psychic and spiritual gifts and discover their own Gods within
themselves. No people can import their Gods ready-made and rise
spiritually under the aegis of imported deities, saviours and
prophets.”^([29](#29))

The old Gods are not dead; they have only withdrawn themselves. “If
there is sufficient aspiration, invoking, and soliciting, there is no
doubt that even Gods apparently lost could come back again. They are
there all the time. For nothing that has any truth in it can be
destroyed. It merely goes out of manifestation; but it could reappear
under propitious circumstances. So could the old Gods come to life again
in response to new summons.”^([30](#30))

It was quite apt that a review of Ram Swarup’s book which appeared in
*The Times of India* dated March 29, 1981 described it as a call for
“The Return of the Gods”. The reviewer was the noted scholar from
Santiniketan, Dr. Sisir Kumar Ghose. He was well-known as an exponent of
Sri Aurobindo’s thought.

Five years later, Ram Swarup examined Monotheism more concretely, that
is, its unfoldment in the form of Islam and Christianity. “The spiritual
equipage of Islam and Christianity,” he wrote, “is similar; their
spiritual contents, both in quality and quantum, are about the same. The
central piece of the two creeds is ‘One True God’ of masculine gender
who makes himself known to his believers through an equally favoured
individual. The theory of mediumistic communication has not only a
psychology; it has also a theology laid down long ago in the oldest part
of the Bible in the Deuteronomy (18.19-20). The Biblical God says that
he will speak to his chosen people through his chosen prophet: ‘I will
tell him what to say, and he will tell the people everything I command.
I will punish anyone who refuses to obey him’ (*Good News Bible*). The
whole prophetic spirituality, whether found in the Bible or in the
Quran, is mediumistic in essence. Here everything takes place through a
proxy, through an intermediary. Here man knows God through a proxy; and
probably God too knows man through the same proxy. The proxy is the
favoured individual, a privileged mediator. ‘No one knows the Son except
the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and anyone to
whom the Son chooses to reveal him,’ says the Bible (Matt.XI. 27). The
Quran makes no very different claim. ‘This day I have perfected your
religion,’ says the Allah of the Quran through his last prophet
(5.3).”^([31](#31))

He thought that the time had come for Hindus to evaluate Christianity
and Islam in terms of Hindu spirituality. “Hitherto we have looked on
Hinduism through the eyes of Islam and Christianity. Let us now learn to
look at these ideologies from the vantage point of Hindu spirituality -
they are no more than ideologies, lacking as they are in the integrality
and inwardness of true religion and spirituality. Such an exercise would
also throw light on the self-destructiveness of modern ideologies of
Communism and Imperialism, inheritors of the prophetic mission or
‘burden’ in its secularised version of Christianity and Islam. The
perspective gained will be a great corrective and will add a new
liberating dimension; it will help not only India and Hinduism but the
whole world.”^([32](#32))

Respect for Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianism, and revolt
against closed theologies was already growing in the world. “Dogmas are
under a cloud; claims on behalf of Last Prophethood and Only Sonship,
hitherto enforced through great intellectual conditioning, browbeating
and the big stick, are becoming unacceptable. Religions of proxy are in
retreat. More and more men now seek authentic experience. Men and women
are ceasing to be obedient believers and are becoming seekers. They no
longer want to be anybody’s sheep, now that they know they can be their
own shepherds. An external authority, even when it is called God in
certain scriptures, threatening and promising alternately, is
increasingly making less and less impression; people now realize that
Godhead is their own true, secret status and they seek it in the depths
of their own being. All this is in keeping with the wisdom of the
East.”^([33](#33))

Ram Swarup completed his evaluation of the semitic creeds by locating
them in their proper place on the map of the Samkhya-Yoga philosophy and
psychology which are shared in common by all schools of Sanatana Dharma.
He pointed out that the traditional commentators on Yoga had
concentrated on the yogic or *ekAgra samAdhi* and neglected treatment of
non-yogic *samAdhis*. It was, however, the non-yogic *samAdhis* which
held the key to an understanding of the psychic phenomena which do not
have their source in the yogic *samAdhi*. We shall quote him at some
length:

Considering that the two kinds of *samAdhis* are not unoften confused
with each other, it would have served the cause of clarity if both were
discussed and their differences pointed out. After all, the Gita does
it; in its last two chapters, it discusses various spiritual truths like
austerity, faith, duty, knowledge in their triple expression and sharply
distinguishes their *sAttvika* from their *rAjasika* and *tAmasika*
imitations.

The elucidation of non-yogic samAdhis or ecstasies has also its positive
value and peculiar concern. It could help to explain quasi-religious
phenomena which, sadly, have been only too numerous and too important in
the spiritual history of man. Many creeds seemingly religious sail under
false labels and spread confusion. As products of a fitful mind, they
could ‘not but make only a temporary impression and their life could not
but be brief. But as projections of a mind in some kind of *samAdhi*,
they acquire unusual intensity, a strength of conviction and tenacity of
purpose (*mUDhagraha*) which they could not otherwise have.

…We may say that even the lower *bhUmis* (*kAma-bhUmis*) have their
characteristic trances or *samAdhis*, their own Revelations, Prophets
and Deities. They project ego-gods and desire-gods and give birth to
*dvesha-dharmas* and *moha-dharmas*, hate religions and delusive
ideologies. All these projections have qualities very different from the
qualities of the projections of the yogic *bhUmi*.

For example, the God of the yoga-*bhUmi* of *PAtaNjala Yoga* is free,
actually and potentially, from all limiting qualities like desire,
aversion, hankering, ego and nescience; free from all actions, their
consequences, present or future, active or latent. Or in the language of
*PAtaNjala Yoga*, he is untouched by *klesha-karma-vipAka-Ashaya*. But
the god of the ecstasies of non-yogic *bhUmi* or *kAma-bhUmi* is very
different. He has strong likes and dislikes and has cruel preferences.
He has his favorite people, churches and *ummas* and his implacable
enemies. He is also very egoistic and self-regarding; he can brook no
other god or gods. He insists that all gods other than himself are false
and should not be worshipped. He is a ‘jealous god’, as he describes
himself in the Bible. And he ‘whose name is jealous’ is also full of
‘fierce anger’ (*aph*) and cruelty. He commands his chosen people that
when he has brought them to the promised land and delivered its people
into their hands, ‘thou shalt smite them, and utterly destroy them; thou
shalt make no covenant with them, nor show mercy unto them… ye shall
destroy their altars, and break down their images, and cut down their
groves… For thou art an holy people unto the Lord…’ (Deut. 7. I-6).

The Allah of the Quran exhibits about the same qualities. He is a god of
wrath (*ghazb*); on those who do not believe in him and his prophets, he
wreaks a terrible punishment (*azAb al-azeem*). In the same vein, he is
also a mighty avenger (*azeez-ul-intiqAm*). He is also a god of
‘plenteous spoils’ (*mUghanim kasIr*, 4.94). He tells the -believers how
he repulsed their opponents and caused them to inherit the land, the
houses and the wealth of the disbelievers (33.27). He closely follows
the spirit of Jehovah who promised his chosen people that he would give
them ‘great and goodly cities they builded not, and wells which they
digged not, vineyards and olive trees they planted not’ (Deut. 6.10-11).

No wonder this kind of god inspired serious doubts and questions, among
thinking people. Some of his followers like Philo and Origen allegorized
him to make him more acceptable. Some early Christian gnostics simply
rejected him. They said that he was an imperfect being presiding over an
imperfect moral order; some even went further and regarded him as the
principle of Evil. Some gnostic thinkers called him ‘Samael’, a blind
God or the God of the blind; others called him ‘Ialda baoth’, the son of
Chaos.

He continues to offend the moral sense of our rational age too. Thomas
Jefferson thinks that the ‘Bible God is a being of terrific character,
cruel, vindictive, capricious and unjust.’ Thomas Paine (1737-1809) says
of the Bible that ‘it would be more consistent that we call it the work
of a demon than the word of God.’

Hindus will buy any outrages if they are sold as Gods, Saints, or
Prophets. They have also a great weakness for what they describe as
‘synthesis’. In that name, they will lump together most discordant
things without any sense of their propriety and congruity, intellectual
or spiritual. However, a few names like Bankim Chandra, Swami Dayananda,
Vivekananda, Aurobindo and Gandhi are exceptions to the rule. To Bankim,
the God of the Bible is ‘a despot’ and Jesus’s doctrine of ‘eternal
punishment’ in the ‘everlasting Fire’ (Matt. 25. 41) is ‘devilish’.
Swami Dayananda remembering -how the Biblical ‘Lord sent a pestilence...
and there fell seventy thousand men of Israel’ (I Chr. 21.14), His
Chosen people, observes that even ‘the favour of a capricious God so
quick in His pleasure is full of danger’, as the Jews know it only too
well. Similarly, the Swami argues, in his usual unsparing way, that the
Allah and Shaitan of the Quran, according to its own showing, are about
the same.

But to reject is not to explain. Why should a god have to have such
qualities? And why should a being who has such qualities be called a
god? And why should he have so much hold? Indian Yoga provides an
answer. It says that though not a truly spiritual being, he is thrown up
by a deeper source in the mind. He is some sort of a psychic formation
and carries the strength and attraction of such a formation. He also
derives his qualities and dynamism from the *chitta-bhUmi* in which he
originates.

It will explain that the Biblical God is not peculiar and he is not a
historical oddity. He has his source in man’s psyche and he derives his
validity and power from there; therefore he comes up again and again and
is found in cultures widely separated. This god has his own ancestry,
his own sources from which he is fed, his own tradition and principle of
continuity, self-renewal and self validation.

Not many know that a similar God, Il Tengiri, presided also over the
life of Chingiz Khan and bestowed on him Revelations. Minhajus Siraj,
the mid-thirteenth century historian, tells us in his *TabqAt-i-NAsiri*,
that ‘after every few days, he (Chingiz Khan) would have a fit and
during his unconsciousness he would say all sorts of things... Some one
would write down all he said, put (the papers) in a bag and sealed them.
When Chingiz recovered consciousness, everything was read out to him and
he acted accordingly. Generally, in fact always, his designs were
successful.’

In this, one can see unmistakable resemblance with the revelations or
*wahi* of the semitic tradition.

In actual life, one seldom meets truths of the *kAma-bhUmi* unalloyed.
Often they are mixtures and touched by intrusions from the truths of the
*yoga-bhUmi* above. This however makes them still more virulent; it puts
a religious rationalization on them. It degrades the higher without
uplifting the lower. The theories of *jihAd*, crusades, conversions and
*da‘wa* become spiritual tasks, Commandments of God, religious
obligations, vocations and duties of a Chosen People. ‘See my zeal for
the Lord’, says Jehu, an army captain anointed as king at the command of
Jehovah. Bound to follow His will, he called all the prophets, servants,
priests and worshippers of rival Baal on the pretext of organising his
service and when they were gathered, his guards and captains ‘smote them
with the edge of the sword’ and ‘they brake down the image of Baal, and
brake down the house of Baal, and made it a draught house (latrine) unto
this day’ (2 Kings 10. 25, 27).”^([34](#34))

This characterisation of the Semitic creeds, their gods, their
scriptures and their prophets was bound to bring about a radical change
in the Hindu assessment of Christianity. More and more Hindu thinkers
and scholars are going to primary sources rather than remain satisfied
with the professions of the Christian missionaries. The dialogue
initiated by Ram Swarup in 1980 has been carried forward in a series of
publications from VOICE OF INDIA, a forum for presenting the Hindu point
of view. The publications cover the doctrine of Christianity, its
history, its heroes, its saints and its institutions.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Ram Swarup, introduction to *Mohammed and the Rise of Islam* by
D.S. Margoliouth, New Delhi, Reprint, 1985 and 1995, p. xix.

[²](#2a) Rigveda, I. 164.46.

[³](#3a) This part of the *Kalima* is now being translated as “there is
no god but God”, which is not only mistaken but also mischievous. Allah
has claimed unmistakably in the Quran that he is the god of the Muslims
alone; the Quran never presents him as God of mankind.

[⁴](#4a) Ram Swarup, Introduction to *Mohammed and the Rise of Islam*,
p. xvii

[⁵](#5a) *Ibid.,* pp. xvii-xviii.

[⁶](#6a) Ram Swarup, *The Word As Revelation : Names of Gods*, New
Delhi, 1980, p. 107.

[⁷](#7a) *Ibid.,* p. 108.

[⁸](#8a) *Ibid.,* p. 5.

[⁹](#9a) *Ibid.,* p. 109.

[¹⁰](#10a) *Ibid.,* p. 110.

[¹¹](#11a) *Ibid.,* p. 11 5.

[¹²](#12a) *Ibid.,* p. 110.

[¹³](#13a) Chhandogya Upnishad, 7.6.1.

[¹⁴](#14a) Ram Swarup, *The Word As Revelation*, pp. 111-12.

[¹⁵](#15a) *Ibid.,* p. 117.

[¹⁶](#16a) *Ibid.,* p. 116.

[¹⁷](#17a) *Ibid.,* p. 126.

[¹⁸](#18a) *Ibid.,* p. 127.

[¹⁹](#19a) *Ibid.,* p. 128.

[²⁰](#20a) *Ibid.,* p. 128.

[²¹](#21a) *Ibid.,* p. 129.

[²²](#22a) *Ibid.,* pp. 129-30.

[²³](#23a) *Ibid.,* p. 126.

[²⁴](#24a) *Ibid.,* p. 131.

[²⁵](#25a) *Ibid.,* pp. 133-34.

[²⁶](#26a) *Ibid.,* pp. 125-26.

[²⁷](#27a) *Ibid.,* pp. 131-32.

[²⁸](#28a) *Ibid.,* p. 132.

[²⁹](#29a) *Ibid.,* p. 133.

[³⁰](#30a) *Ibid.*

[³¹](#31a) Ram Swarup, Introduction to *Mohammed and the Rise of Islam*,
pp. xvi-xvii.

[³²](#32a) *Ibid.,* pp. xix-xx.

[³³](#33a) *Ibid.,* p. xx.

[³⁴](#34a) Ram Swarup, Introduction to *Inner Yoga (Antaryoga)* by
Anirvan, translated into English by S. N. Chatterjee, Voice of India,
New Delhi, 1988, pp. viii-xi.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
