+++
title = "22 20 A Hornet’s Nest"

+++
**20**  
**A Hornet’s Nest**

One wonders whether it is a virtue or vice, but the Christian
missionaries have been and remain compulsive record-keepers and
plan-publishers. By now there are literally hundreds of thousands of
publications providing details of what the Christian missions did or
plan to do, where, to whom, in which manner and with what resources in
money and manpower. “Each year,” says a recent publication on the
subject, “some 10,000 new books and articles on mission and
evangelization are published, involving seventy or so major
languages.”^([1](#1)) Besides, we have well-researched and thoroughly
documented studies produced mostly by Western scholars, many of them
believing Christians, on the spread of Christianity in the past. The
story is blood-soaked. In America, Asia and Africa, Christianity has
been an unashamed and active accomplice of Western imperialism.

The pious Christians who read this material do not question the validity
of the Christian Mission. Nor do they bother their conscience with the
morality of means employed by the soldiers of Christ. All they notice
and care for is that so many heathens were ‘saved’ in the past and are
expected to be ‘saved’ in the future. It never occurs to them that the
heathens may question the validity of the Christian Mission itself
and/or find fault with the means employed. They have a stock and ready
reply to such questioning and objections: “According to our scriptures
which are inspired, our divine saviour commanded us to teach and preach,
and we cannot disobey him.”

Now, anybody is free to write in a book what he pleases; all it costs is
paper and ink. He is also free to believe that whatever has been written
comes from a divine source; all he needs is renunciation of reason and a
large dose of credulity, Again, he is free to convince himself that he
is the better person and in a position to teach others; all he needs is
self-righteousness combined with a certain amount of dense smugness. The
trouble arises when he expects the others to agree with him and let him
mount an aggression.

The Oxford University Press had published in 1982 the *World Christian
Encyclopaedia* edited by David B. Barrett, “an ordained missionary of
the Church of England, served 29 years in Africa, since 1970 an Anglican
research officer.” Ram Swarup reviewed this book in *The Times of India*
dated 14 July 1985 under the caption ‘Thy Kingdom in the Third
World’.^([2](#2)) He gave credit to Dr. Barrett for being “a quantifier
and statistician *par excellence* “ because “since the beginning of
Christianity, every soul, dead and living, has been accounted for” and
“a statistical picture of the Last Day of Judgement, of the souls that
will be finally saved and finally damned” has been provided. But he
refused to accept Dr. Barrett as “an impartial historian or a
disinterested philosopher” because “he looks at everything from a
missionary viewpoint.” He cited the facts and figures compiled by Dr.
Barrett to show how “the poor countries of the Third World which have
been politically dominated till recently continue to be the special
targets of missionary activities.” The missions, he said, were
concentrating on Third World countries because Christianity was losing
heavily in Europe, North America, Australia and New Zealand. Dr. Barrett
had tried to cover up this retreat at home and aggression elsewhere by
stating that “the centre of gravity of Christianity is shifting from
Europe and America to the Third World.”

Christian readers of the newspaper were shocked. This was certainly a
novel way of looking at the Christian missions. Hitherto the prevalent
Hindu fashion had been to applaud the missions for the “great
educational, medical and humanitarian services rendered by them.” That
is how Mother Teresa had been made into a myth. One could, of course,
add in a footnote that it would have been better if the missions had
done “all that splendid work without attempts at conversion.” The
missions disavowed this “undeserved accusation” and the “controversy”
stood closed. This time, however, a dialogue looked like taking off.
Only *The Times of India* editor did not allow it. Instead he published
a few articles in praise of the Christian missions in order to redress
the balance.

A dialogue in the columns of *The Times of India*, however, developed
when Ram Swarup reviewed on March 13-14, 1988 another Christian
publication, *Mission Handbook: North American Ministries Overseas*,
published in the U.S.A. in 1986. The review was captioned ‘Christianity
for Export: God’s Legionaries’ and consisted for the most part of facts
and figures which were given in the publication and which told their own
story.^([3](#3)) It quoted towards the end another publication (1980) in
which a Christian missionary had asked the question as to why the
missions had failed with the Buddhists of Burma and the Hindus of India
when a single missionary had succeeded in converting 7000 animistic
Karens within a few years. Ram Swarup posed a counter-question: “Thanks
to the powerful missionary lobby in the United Nations, its universal
declaration of human rights (1948) states that every individual has a
right to embrace the religion or belief of his choice. But is there to
be no charter that declares that countries and cultures and peoples of
tolerant philosophies and religions who believe in live and let live,
too, have a right of protection against aggressive, systematic
proselytising? Are its well-drilled legionaries to have a free field?”
Little did he know that he had raised a hornet’s nest as was evident
from the Christian response published by *The Times of India*.

In his letter published on April 1, 1988, Mr. Kuruvilla Chandy of
Lucknow doubted “whether quotations have been verbatim and entire” and
regretted that “it is also not clear in all cases what are the sources
of the various ‘facts and figures’ given.” He said that Christian
missions need not “take cover under the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights” because “there exists a fundamental right to propagate one’s
faith.” The Constitution of India, he said, had also guaranteed this
fundamental right in its Article 25. Religious proselytisation, he
pointed out, was no different from that which “is constantly taking
place in the realm of politics and commerce” where “the use of fraud is
proverbial and even considered normal.” He also accused the Government
of India of practising proselytisation in favour of Hinduism by refusing
to extend to the converts from scheduled castes and tribes the
reservations and concessions that they enjoyed so long as they remained
Hindus.^([4](#4))

In another letter published on the same date, Fr. L. F. Jose of New
Delhi was “constrained to disagree with the tone and aim of the
articles.” He accused the reviewer of having “conveniently forgotten the
fact that Christianity is an Oriental religion and Christ and his
disciples were Oriental Jews.” He asserted that “Christianity came to
India even before Europe had heard about it” and that “the St. Thomas
Christians of Kerala have a two-thousand year old history.” Moreover,
the latter-day Catholic and Protestant missionaries had “realised their
folly and the thrust today is on ‘inculturation,’ etc.”

Mr. K. N. Ninan of Bombay did not bother about facts or figures or
logic. He went straight into the motives of the reviewer and pleaded
against publication of such articles. “Mr. Ram Swarup’s articles on
Christianity,” he said in his letter published on April 4, “show that he
has an axe to grind against Christians and Christianity. This has also
been evident from his previous regular, if sporadic, Christian-baiting
treatises published in your daily. How can you afford to waste such
precious space on crass irreverence born of frustration by a confirmed
Christian-hater? Does this not amount to alienating the peaceful
Christian community which has been doing invaluable work in the fields
of education, medical care and social welfare, and which work has
profited mainly the majority community?”^([5](#5))

In his letter published on April 7, Mr. John Vallamattam, President,
Indian Catholic Press Association, found it painful that such articles
should be published “at a time when there is so much talk of the need
for communal harmony and inter-religious collaboration.” He, however,
granted goodwill to the writer out of “Christian charity” and hoped that
the article would “help Christian communities to rid themselves of
whatever is questionable in them.” He promised to bring the article “to
the attention of the concerned authorities in the Churches.”

In his letter published on April 8, Mr. K. C. Thomas of Mugma (Bihar)
accused the reviewer of having “collected a lot of questionable data in
support of his view.” The review was likely to find support among the
“communal elements” in the majority community. “Export-oriented
enterprises,” he said, “are favoured by the government. Would our
learned columnist be satisfied if the same export policy was enforced in
the cases of Christianity and/or other minority religions in India? It
might please the majority fundamentalist who cries wolf saying ‘Hinduism
is in danger’.”

It was perhaps in keeping with the promise made by Mr. John Vallamattam
that Mr. T. C. Joseph wrote an article, ‘Is Christianity to Blame?’,
which was published on April 9. He thought that while Ram Swarup was
“generous with statistics” his knowledge of Indian Church history was
inadequate. The Church in India had not been helped by the British
rulers who had “adhered to a strict policy of religious neutrality.” It
was not Ram Swarup’s business to sympathise with the Latin Americans for
the loss of their ancient faiths; the Latin Americans knew better what
was good for them. The 6.2 million converts made in Africa every year
was “no big number in a land of 500 million people.” Nor was it
significant that Hindus and Janis had lost 324,500 members to
Christianity between 1970 and 1980; if Christianity was to make headway
in India, it needed 15 million converts every year for the next hundred
years. Christianity could not be blamed if “many of the lower castes”
found in it “the opportunity to opt for a religion that freed them from
the stigmas that stuck.”^([6](#6)) To see a Christian missionary behind
“a separatist movement somewhere in the country is only a search for
scapegoats.” Mother Teresa and the missionary organisations had “to
elicit compassion and solicit funds” by advertisements in the Western
media because “India or, for that matter, any country in the Third
World” was not “competent enough to look after its poor, sick or
illiterate.” The argument that “these services help in evangelisation”
was “wafer-thin.” He suspected that Ram Swarup had read “anti-Christian”
books. He concluded by advising Ram Swarup “to search for the truth, and
nothing but the truth, and read books of a different kind which too
abound.”

In his letter published on April 13, Mr. C. J. Chadwin of Chandigarh
expressed “dismay at your editorial policy in allowing the publication
of a skimpy and irresponsible article.” He said that “two odd quotations
lifted out of context from the Bible cannot purport to be the full and
exact position of the Church universal.” He admitted that in the past
imperialistic powers had misused the Christian missions to serve their
own interests. But that did not mean that “the basic aim of the
missionaries worldwide and that of the Christian faith is to subdue
peoples and cultures.” The Church was actively involved in the
“liberation of people in South America from dictatorships, in South
Africa from the racist white regime and all over the world in liberation
struggles of socially and economically oppressed people.” Mother Teresa
“never sought funds for conversion.” She was only showing the “love of
God in that dying and destitute whom we throw on the streets may have a
chance to live and die with dignity.”^([7](#7))

A Muslim from Indonesia, Mr. Ishtiyaque Danish, joined the dialogue at
this stage. In his letter published on April 13, he said that Ram
Swarup’s article had “failed to throw enough light on how the huge
amount of money is being used by the Christian missionaries.” He
continued, “No religion in the world permits or encourages its adherents
to buy converts to their faith. But this is precisely what the Christian
missionaries have been doing across the globe… I have no firm evidence
if missionaries are involved in conversion-by-dollar business in India
but this method is being practised in Indonesia on a wide scale. In an
article contributed to a Christian-Muslim dialogue consultation held in
1976, Prof. Muhammed Rasjidi had remarked that ‘the Church distributes
rice, clothes and money among the poor people and uses these things to
bring them closer to their mission. The Church lends money or natural
manures and seeds to impoverished peasants on condition that they send
their children to missionary schools… Distribution of water pumps, seeds
of cloves and coconuts etc. is also being used to serve the same
purpose… They (missionaries) shower gifts and provide certain facilities
to isolated tribes. Then they put up a show of a census and ask these
people to get themselves registered as Christians.’”

In a joint letter published on April 18, five Hindu readers from Delhi
commented that none of the Christian correspondents had “controverted
his \[Ram Swarup’s\] data or argument or even kept to the subject”;
instead, all of them had indulged in “irrelevant claims and unfounded
allegations.” They found Ram Swarup “highly informative and full of
perspective.” He embodied, they said, “a rare phenomenon in Indian
journalism, indeed, on the Indian scene.” He was “no hater of
Christians.” What had disturbed “certain well-organised, highly
articulate and influential but hostile quarters” was the fact that he
was “no hater of India and its age-long culture and religion and
history.” He had, however, “a vast audience which benefits by his
writings and welcomes them.” They looked forward to reading him more
often in the columns of *The Times of India*.

Another letter published on the same day was from Harish Chandra of
Delhi who said that history offered evidence opposite to the claims made
by the Christian correspondents. He cited Pitrim Sorokin who had said,
“During the past few centuries the most belligerent, the most
aggressive, the most rapacious, the most power-drunk section of humanity
has been precisely the Christian western world. During these centuries
western Christendom has invaded all other continents; its armies
followed by its priests and merchants have subjugated, robbed or
pillaged most of the non-Christians. Native American, African,
Australian, Asiatic populations have been subjugated to this peculiar
brand of Christian ‘love’ which has generally manifested itself in
pitiless destruction, enslavement, coercion, destruction of the cultural
values, institutions, the way of life of the victims and the spread of
alcoholism, venereal disease, commercial cynicism and the like.” Small
wonder, said Harish Chandra, that Christianity “was now trying to deny
its imperialist link and claim for itself a brand-new identity.”

Simultaneously, Anna Sujatha Mathai of Delhi called Ram Swarup’s article
“amazingly small-minded” and “petty visioned.” She wondered why it had
been given “the importance and space it did get.” She claimed that
Christianity stood for “loving your neighbour as yourself” while such
articles “only add fuel to the already raging fires of violence and
hate.” She hoped that “Ram Swarup, a Christian hater, may like St. Paul
who also hated Christians, one day be forced to face the blinding,
dazzling truth of Christ’s compassionate love.”

Mr. S. G. Mampilli of Delhi said in his letter published on April 19,
that the Constitution of India which gave protection to the Christian
missions for propagating their faith had given the same right to the
Hindus. Hindus, however, “are not willing to make sacrifices for sharing
the treasures of their religion with people of other religions.”
Missionary work, according to him, was “a holy vocation for people who
willingly choose it on the basis of their life-long commitment to
chastity, the spirit of obedience and poverty which they joyfully accept
and maintain till death.” Christ had suffered and died and risen again
from the dead “so that sinners may be saved from the circle of births,
‘Punarjanm’, as it is called in Hinduism.” Ram Swarup had “intentionally
ignored the positive side” in his “anxiety to expose the negative side
of missionary work.” Christianity had “an import aspect” besides its
“export aspect.” The people of India imported Christianity because “they
were not satisfied with social evils like the caste system,
untouchability, sati, child marriage, backwardness of women and so on
which have no sanction in Christianity.”

In his letter published on April 25, Judah S. G. Vincent of Delhi found
Ram Swarup very successful “as a Christian baiter.” He saw in Ram Swarup
a “putative scholar” who had written a “one-sided article on what is
obviously esoteric material” published by the “U.S. based Christian
organisation *World Vision*.” Christianity, he said, had a message for
“a caste-ridden, superstition-bound, self-flagellating society.” The
missionaries were delivering that message through “their efforts at
education, medicare and the like.” Mr. Danish was right in saying that
“it is abominable to buy converts.” But he should know that “quite often
the missionaries feel the need to support the nascent Christians
materially for the reason that indigent people from the backward classes
lose their special privileges under the constitution the moment they
shift their allegiance to Christ.” Thus, Mr. Vincent confirmed what Mr.
Danish had only suspected.

Finally, in an article published on May 3, Mr. Sarto Esteves advised
that “one should not go to a commercial handbook or a money-spinning
publication to know the doctrine and teaching of Christ.” Christianity
should be learnt from the Bible where Christ himself was speaking to
mankind. India should be glad that she had a Church organisation of 120
dioceses “manned by full-blooded, highly patriotic sons of India as
bishops” and topped by two Cardinals. “Over 12,000 male priests and
50,000 religious women were running “institutes of higher learning,
colleges, schools, hospitals, dispensaries, houses for the aged, the
dying, the deserted and the rejected, orphanages, leprosaria, and
asylums, to mention only a few.” Liberation theology was being
misunderstood. It only meant what Christ taught his followers long ago,
namely, “to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, shelter the homeless,
love one’s enemies, offer the other cheek also to the one who strikes
you.”^([8](#8)) This was the mission which “a minority which comprises
1.7 per cent of the total population of India” had undertaken.

Ram Swarup considered the points raised by the Christians and wrote a
reply, ‘Proselytisation as it is Practised’, which was published in two
installments on May 23-24. “I did not realise,” he said, “I was stirring
a hornet’s nest in reviewing the Mission Handbook. It invoked many
rejoinders, most of them harsh. It helps inter-faith dialogue which the
Church has recently invited.” He found it interesting, though novel,
that Mr. Kuruvilla Chandy had compared Christian proselytisation with
proselytisation in politics. That is exactly what it was, with the
difference that the Church had “always regarded it as a one-way
traffic.” It was to be remembered that so long as the Church was
powerful, the penalty for renouncing Christianity was death.

“Perhaps a creed,” continued Ram Swarup, “is best known by what it does
when its holds political sway.” He went on to cite some instances of
what Christianity had done in Rome, Great Britain, Germany, Baltic
countries, Mexico, etc. It was, therefore, wrong for Mr. Chandy to
regard Christian proselytisation as “normal to life” because it was “a
bigoted idea, a denial of God and his working in others.” Mahatma Gandhi
thought it to be “the deadliest poison that ever sapped the fountain of
truth” and saw “no spiritual merit” in professional missionaries. In
fact, for Gandhiji a missionary was “like any vender of goods”; he
wanted to stop proselytisation by legislation.

“Social work” by Christian missions, said Ram Swarup, had become a myth
and had to be examined. He cited how American Capuchin monks had seen
“spiritual advantages of famine and cholera” which brought to the
missions many orphans. They were immediately baptised so that “baptismal
water flows in streams, and the starving little tots fly in masses to
heaven.” Many of them did not survive. The book, *India and its
Missions*, had stated clearly that “a hospital is a readymade
congregation; there is no need to go into the highways and hedges and
‘compel them to come in’.” The Christian doctors and nurses were known
for employing many subterfuges “with perfect satisfaction” in order to
convert those who went to mission hospitals.

Apart from what missionary services were used for, the more important
point was “who pays for these services.” Ram Swarup cited Bishop Stephen
Neil who had written after examining missionary education that “about a
third of the cost of education was borne by private agencies, two-thirds
by the Government.” The Bishop had also observed that “even in
independent India… the old order has continued without radical
modification.” So the Indians were paying not only for “missionary
services” but also for maintaining the missionary apparatus which was
used for converting them.

Much was being made of the “sacrifices” of the missionaries and “their
love for Jesus and the natives in choosing their career.” This was
nothing more than “image-building” so that missionaries could become
acceptable. The fact, however, was that the missions offered “a
lucrative career” and people who joined them did so “in order to improve
their social and financial status.” Bishop Neil had observed that
“missionaries of the last century were over-dressed and by the standard
of the time lived in luxury, their stipend being £2000/- a year,” while
a great classical scholar and Regius Professor of Greek at Oxford,
Benjamin Jowett, earned only £ 54/- a year in 1855-56.

Coming to mission finances, Ram Swarup said that Europe and America had
remained the paymasters. The only difference was the recent policy of
sending “more cash and less people.” The new policy worked for economy
as well as effectivity. The native missionary cost far less than his
European or American counterpart and was less conspicuous. But he was
also much more fanatic. “Not many white missionaries could outdo their
brown counterparts.” A Christian missionary of Indian origin but working
in South Africa had written to President Botha that “the country would
lose God’s divine protection if Hinduism were allowed to flourish.”

Ram Swarup found it difficult to understand why Christians felt hurt if
Mother Teresa was viewed as just another missionary working for the
promotion of Christianity. There was little doubt that she was “a true
daughter of the Church in having her mind and heart closed to the
religions of the countries of her labour and even adaptation.” The other
day when she was visiting the Vatican some Europeans wanted her to tell
them about Vedanta as she was living in India. She had rebuked them for
“betraying Christ.” A comparison of her ways with those of Sister
Nivedita told the truth. Sister Nivedita had helped India to “rediscover
herself.” She had given “national pride” to the Indian people. Mother
Teresa, on the other hand, was never tired of presenting India as a land
of poverty, disease and death. That was why the West was heaping her
with money and honour. Sister Nivedita, “was not even remembered in the
West, although the social work she did in the field of education,
childcare and poor relief was no less commendable.”

Ram Swarup saw no sense in the Christian hope that like St. Paul he
might also stop being a “hater of Christians” and come to the “dazzling
truth of Christ’s compassionate love.” He was no “hater of Christians.”
He was only asking them to look at their religion a little more
critically and evaluate it in a more humane manner. Nor was St. Paul
known for “compassionate love.” Conversion to Christianity had made him
“a greater persecutor, on a larger scale and a menace for centuries to
come for other religions of the world.” A wish for anyone to emulate St.
Paul should not be expressed even by one’s enemy.

Ram Swarup had been accused of reading “endless number of books
available with an anti-Christian view” and advised to “read books of a
different kind.” He said he was “hardly aware of any anti-Christian
books.” On the other hand, he had read “the Bible, early Christian
Fathers, Christian Catechisms, Christian encyclopaedias, Christian
directories, orthodox accounts of Christian missionary activities,
histories of Protestantism and the Catholic Church held in high esteem
by them \[the Christians\].” He had found this literature “consistently
anti-pagan” and did not know “what to think of a religion which teaches
in and through its scriptures and its other literature written by its
most devout, scholarly and pious sections such systematic hatred of all
other religion, and believes in a divine injunction to supplant them.”

Christians, said Ram Swarup, should not divide books on Christianity in
only two categories - pro-Christian and anti-Christian. There was a
third category consisting of “critical and historical studies of the
Bible and Christianity.” They were “the most durable and solid” and had
“proved the most damaging to Christianity.” Similarly, “the work of
scientists like Copernicus, Galileo, Linaeus, Buffon, Laplace, Lyell,
Darwin and others” undermined the structure of Christian thought” which
had a “limited conception of the universe.” What, however, proved most
subversive for Christianity was the “West’s discovery of the East.”
Science had only discredited the dogmas of “virgin birth, resurrection
and miracles.” Eastern spirituality discredited “sole sonship, single
revelation, special covenants, proxy atonement, exclusive salvation,
chosen fraternity, single life, authorised saviours and mediators, etc.”
The deeper Western thinker and seeker had found “inferiority,
transcendence and universality” in Eastern thought. He had found in
Eastern spirituality “not commandments of some arbitrary deity but
truths of his own innermost being” and the “principle of tolerance,
coexistence, benevolence and reverence which was new to him.”

This particular dialogue came to a close with Ram Swarup’s rejoinder.
But only for the time being. It is bound to be resumed again and again
till Christian theologians give up the dogma that Christianity holds a
monopoly of truth and Christian missions stop the subversion of other
religions and cultures in the name of ‘Christian compassion’.

It may be noted that some of the Christian correspondents objected to
Ram Swarup’s article being published in *The Times of India*. The plea
sounds strange, to say the least. The Christians in this country own and
control a large-sized press which includes several daily newspapers and
many periodicals. The language which is used in this media vis-a-vis
Hinduism is not always decorous; quite often, it is intemperate.
Besides, the Christians get ample space in the press which is supposed
to be owned and controlled by the Hindus. It is only once in a while
that an article critical, of Christian dogmas and/or missions, gets
through. That, too, when the editor concerned finds that the facts cited
and the conclusions drawn deserve the attention of his countrymen. The
Christians who object to such articles being published at all have to
think calmly and coolly whether their attitude reflects tolerance or
otherwise. They have been telling us for many years now that they want
and are prepared for a dialogue. We hope that the word “dialogue” in
their current dictionary does not mean a monologue, as it did in past.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) David B. Barrett and James W. Reapsome, *Seven Hundred Plans to
Evangelize the World*, Birmingham, Alabama, U.S.A., 1988.

[²](#2a) The review article is included in *Catholic Ashrams, Sannyasins
or Swindlers?*, New Delhi, 1994, Appendix III, pp. 215-23.

[³](#3a) The review article is included in *Ibid.,* as Appendix IV, pp.
224-32.

[⁴](#4a) While converting Hindus from scheduled castes and tribes, the
Christian plea was that the ‘Hindu caste system’ did not allow them to
improve their social and economic status. But the converts found out
very soon that conversion to Christianity had in no way improved their
position. In fact, they found themselves in a worse plight after leaving
their ancestral society. The Christian missionaries forgot their earlier
cliches about the ‘Hindu caste system keeping some castes and tribes
down and out’. They started a campaign that the benefits of reservations
and the rest available to Hindu Harijans should be extended to
‘Christian Harijans’ as well. The campaign is bearing fruit. According
to *The Times of India* dated 28 August 1995, “A consesus among
political parties is emerging in favour of reservations for the 12
million dalits who form over a half of the country’s Christian
population and the government of India is under increasing pressure to
amend Para Three of Presidential order of 1950…”

[⁵](#5a) The plea that information which is inconvenient to Christianity
should not be published comes easily to Christian scribes and scholars.
Christianity has had a long history of suppressing freedom of
expression, and criminal persecution of those who do not toe the line of
this or that church. In fact, the Christian bark becomes all the more
ferocious if this part of Christianity’s dark history is brought to
public notice. It is very difficult for minds trained in totalitarian
ways to appreciate facts and figures which go against their case. They
do not like it at all that the skeletons in their cupboard be brought
out and exposed to public gaze.

[⁶](#6a) See footnote 4 above about the lower caste converts being
‘freed’ from the stigmas sticking to them while they were members of
Hindu society. It is not unoften that ‘Christian Harijans’ are seen
taking out demonstrations in protest against their plight in the various
Christian churches. They held a demonstration when the Pope visited
Madras in 1986.

[⁷](#7a) Christians never ask or allow to be asked the basic question as
to how the people in Asia, Africa and South America became socially and
economically depressed or the destitutes whom Mother Teresa is trying to
‘help’. But history tells us that these people who were free and
prosperous were reduced to this state by Western Imperialism of which
the Christian missions were the most willing and vociferous accomplices
everywhere. Break a person’s bones and then come back with bandages and
some gruel - that is the logic. Mother Teresa happens to be the foremost
in this dirty and despicable Christian game.

[⁸](#8a) The salesmen of ‘Liberation Theology’ never tell us that Jesus
Christ himself sold his own brother, Judas Thomas, as “a slave skilled
in carpentry”, and that all Christian churches in Europe, Africa and the
Americas were actively involved in slave trade till the early years of
the nineteenth century.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
