+++
title = "03 CHAPTER ONE - NEGATIONISM IN GENERAL"

+++
## CHAPTER ONE - NEGATIONISM IN GENERAL

Negationism means the denial of historical crimes against humanity. It
is not a reinterpretation of known facts, but the denial of known facts.
The term negationism has gained currency as the name of a movement to
deny a specific crime against humanity, the Nazi genocide on the Jews in
1941-45, also known as the holocaust (Greek: fire sacrifice) or the
Shoah (Hebrew: disaster). Negationism is mostly identified with the
effort at re-writing history in such a way that the fact of the
Holocaust is omitted.

The negationists themselves prefer to call themselves revisionists,
after all they think that there is nothing to deny or *negate*, and that
the *known facts* of history are a fabrication which will be exposed
when history is given a second look or *revised*. Many commentators use
the two terms interchangeably, and it has become impossible to use the
word *revisionism* (once used as a Maoist term for Khrushchev's
destalinization) except in the sense of *negationism*. Only a few
purists, like the Flemish scholar Gie van den Berghe (working at the
Institute for the History of World War 2 in Brussels), insist on the
distinction between negationism alias revisionism, and the legitimate
revisionism. Revisionism stricto sensu is then defined as the normal
activity of historians, viz. the reassessment of given historical facts.

For instance, when a country has won a war, its official historians will
often write a version of the history of the war in which the dates and
figures are correct, but into which a very slanted interpretation is
woven (with all the guilt and the barbarity being ascribed to the
opponent): it is then the duty of historians to re-analyze the facts and
give a new and more balanced interpretation. Such revision of the
established story is often controversial, as it is usually an attack on
the version preferred by established political interests. But normally,
after some turbulence, the revisionists' critique is either rejected as
too extreme, or incorporated in a more advanced and more balanced
official version of history. This way, revisionism stricto sensu is part
of the normal progress of scientific history-writing. By contrast, in
negationism, facts are not re-interpreted but denied.

As the term *revisionism* has become ambiguous, we will not use it here.
The pollution of language with unclear terminology is a problem closely
related to that of history falsification, so in this context ever more
than elsewhere, we prefer clear terminology. We will therefore speak of
*negationism* on the one hand, and *re-interpretation of history* on the
other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 1.1. BONAFIDE RE-INTERPRETATION OF HISTORY

Before we describe the problem of negationism, let us first look at the
bonafide revision of the history of Nazism and the Holocaust, in order
to avoid confusion between the intellectual crime of negationism and the
proper task of historians to re- investigate and re-assess known and
undisputed historical facts. The history of Nazism is a complex one, and
it is only natural that historians do not take received wisdom and
dominant interpretations for granted. Even if some negationists with a
political axe to grind would deny facts, sincere historians still have a
professional duty to study these facts more closely sine ira nec studio
(without aversion nor preference) and to amend interpretations which on
closer analysis are no longer sustainable.

One point of discussion among historians, already since the early
fifties, has been the degree of intentionality of the Nazi genocide on
the Jews, on the extent to which the Holocaust had been pre-planned. The
intentionalist theory says that the Nazi leadership knew from the very
beginning (early 1920s) that, once it got the chance, it would
exterminate the entire Jewish population living within its domains. The
functionalist theory says that the decision to send the Jews to the gas
chambers was only the culmination of a process which had started with
far less drastic measures, but in which each new phase made the next and
uglier phase thinkable as well as technically within reach.

Today, the intentionalist explanation has been largely abandoned for the
functionalist one (though the remaining intentionalists may tell you the
opposite). The gas chambers had not been planned years in advance, but
were the culmination of a succession of two strings of events (a
possible third contributor will be dealt with later).

The one escalatory process goes from general anti-Jewish propaganda
through cancellation of Jews' citizenship (1935), exclusion of Jews from
professional and economic life (1938), encouraged emigration of Jews,
violence against Jewish establishments by Nazi thugs, internment of Jews
together with political opponents in work camps, herding of Jews in
occupied territories into ghettoes, pogroms with the aid of local
militias, deportation of German Jews and political opponents to camps in
the occupied territories (because German public opinion couldn't stomach
too much repression under its own eyes), killing these prisoners on a
less systematic scale or letting them die through hardships, and finally
the industrial-scale extermination in the gas chambers.

It is established that as late as 1940, the Nazi *final solution*
(Endlosung) consisted in the removal of all Jews from German-held
territories, either to Palestine (in co-operation with the Zionist
movement 1937-39) or to an area in the colonial world, notably
Madagascar. But Britain did not want to let large numbers of Jews into
Palestine, nor did any country agree to take in large numbers of German
Jewish refugees, and when Germany lost the Battle of Britain in 1940, it
became clear that the colonial world was going to remain out of reach.
So, something else had to be tried.

The other tributary to the final extermination campaign was the forced
sterilization of carriers of hereditary diseases, followed by the
*euthanasia* programme which, between 1939 and 1941, killed 70,000
handicapped and mentally deranged people as a matter of *racial
purification*. it had to be stopped because of massive protest from the
German public opinion and the Churches, but it had given the Nazis a
taste of how to extreminate on an industrial scale, and also taught them
that the only politically feasible way to do it, even in wartime, was
under maximum secrecy.

The decision to resort to the total extermination of the Jews was
announced by Hermann Goering on 31 July 1941 and finalized in detail at
the Wannsee conference on 20 january 1942. A small extermination camp
had already been started one month earlier in Chelmno. The decision to
physically liquidate the Jews had not yet been taken in 1922 or even
1933. The Germans who had voted for the Nazis had voted in many cases
for anti-Judaism, but not for the Holocaust. That at least is the
functionalist assessment of the historical material, corroborated by a
lot of research since the early fifties. The intentionalist theory,
which says that the Holocaust had been the Nazi action programme from
the start, is still popular in anti-German stereotyping but has little
to recommend itself among historians.

A second case of bonafide re-assessment of the history of Nazism and the
Holocaust, concerns the question of whether the Holocaust has a unique
status in history, recently highlighted in the so-called
historikerstreit (German: *"struggle among historians"*). Among German
historians, a lively debate was started in 1986 when Ernst Nolte
questioned this uniqueness.

There are two different aspects to this uniqueness question. The first
concerns the comparative assessment of the Nazi crimes with such a
comparison and deride it as a trick to minimize and banalize the Nazi
crimes. Other historians, and not only Nolte, maintain that the
comparison holds in most respects. Stalin's massacres of the kulaks, of
(suspected) political opponents and their families, of the educated
classes among subject nations (Poles, Estonians), etc., were
wellplanned, large-scale, systematic, merciless and ideologically
motivated. The number of Stalin's victims exceeded that of Hitler's
(when the German army entered the Soviet Union, it was welcomed as a
liberator in many places, but it lost that credit by treating the Slavas
as Untermenschen, *less-than-humans*). More importantly, Stalin's
massacres largely preceded Hitler's: in the 1930s alone, he had between
15 and 20 million people killed, a number of victims per decade
literally unprecendented in world history. When in 1950 the leftist
intellectuals Sartre and Merleau-Ponty joined the debate on the
concentration camps and the bloody repression in the Soviet Union, they
acknowledged that Hitler's camps owed a lot to Stalin's camps.

So, the *possible third contributor* mentioned above, which should be
considered when we investigate the determinants of the Holocaust, was
the inspiring example of Stalin's massacres on a scale which Hitler
tried (but failed) to emulate. Of course the Nazi crimes cannot be
explained as a simple reaction to and imitation of Stalin's (and
Lenin's) crimes; but there is no doubt that the new horizons in
organised mass murder which Stalin had opened have contributed to the
very thinkability of the Holocaust. They also created an intense fear of
Communism, the sense of an all-out struggle for life against this
Bolshevik barbarity, which in turn made extreme steps against all who
could be accused of any kind of association with Communism (including
the Jews, via *"the Jew Karl Marx"*) acceptable to many Germans; and
which convinced many Europeans of the need to collaborate with the Nazis
as a comparative *lesser evil*.

It was already in about 1950 that historians had sought a common
denominator for Nazism and Stalinism, which was found in the concept of
totalitarianism. The pro-socialist spirit of the times did not receive
this concept very well, and in circles where double standareds for
Hitler and Stalin are still upheld, you will be told that the concept of
totalitarianism was a failure. The Historikerstreit was, in a sense, a
new episode to the totalitarianism debate, but focusing more on events
and actions than on ideology and structures. However, the German
anti-Communists weakened their case by drawing an exaggerated parallel
between Nazi Germany and Communist East Germany: equating Stalin's
brutality and authoritarianism with Hitler's is defensible, but equating
Honecker with Hitler and the Berlin Wall with Auschwitz is of course
exaggerated.

There is a second aspect to the uniqueness debate, highlighted in public
forums in the U.S. since the seventies: there is an argument over the
claim made by many Jews (like the Nobel-prize winning writer Elie
Wiesel) that the Holocaust is an unspeakably unique, un-analyzable and
incomparable event. This attitude is closely linked with the (outdated)
intentionalist theory: the unique thing about the Jewish genocide as
compared with other mass-murders is that there was an ineffable
diabolical will behind it. Nazism embodied the fullest manifestation of
an age-old intention of the world to destroy the Jews. Every attempt to
historicize the Holocaust, to explain it with universal socio-political,
economical and cultural factors, is a sacrilege, a breach of taboo: the
factors which might explain other massacres do not apply here, the Nazi
holocaust was nothing but pure naked Evil. This claim to uniqueness in
suffering is the observe side of the claim to being God's chosen people.
In fact, as large sections of the Jewish community outside Israel are
losing their religious fervour (parallel to the secularization of the
Christian communities), the Holocaust memory has started to replace the
Torah (the five books attributed to Moses) as the cornerstone of Jewish
identity.

This claim to uniqueness has become more insistent as international
sympathy for Israel waned. After the 6-day war in June 1967, Israel had
come to be regarded as a considerable military power imposing its will
on occupied territories, not a David but a Goliath. With the Yom Kippur
war of 1973, sympathy continued to decrease, and Arab oil power forced
Western governments to become friendlier towards the Arab states and
more aloof from Israel. The Israeli invasion of Lebanon and the
suppression of the Palestinian revolt (intifada) brought Israel a
continued decrease in international sympathy. Almost in direct
proportion to this shift in the international attitude to the state of
Israel, the Holocaust gets more and more emphasized as the foundation
myth and justification of Israel and of its policies. Another factor in
the increased sacralization of the holocaust is a cultural and political
shift within Israel, where the Zionist founders generation with its
forward-looking no- nonsense project of building a modern state is being
replaced by more traditionalist tendencies which keep on cultivating the
memories of persecution.

Efforts to study the Holocaust in the historical context easily get
branded as a lack of respect for the victims and their next of kin, as
an attempt to banalize the Holocaust, or as a veiled attempt to deny it.
Other genocides can be called unique in their own way, but did not have
the same absolutely evil quality that Auschwitz had. Auschwitz is a
turning-point in history, changing our ethical view of mankind, our
esthetics (*"can one still write poetry after Auschwitz?"* - Sartre) and
metaphysics (*"It is stupid and reprehensible to continue philosophizing
after Auschwitz just like before..."* - Lyotard). It was not a
historical but a metaphysical and religious event, a kind of reverse
theophany (God's manifestation in the stream of history), or rather
diabolophany (devil-manifestation). According to Rabbi Emil Fackenheim,
the Holocaust was the only example of Absolute Evil.

A dispassionate historian cannot subscribe to this uniqueness claim. The
Holocaust is *merely* one in a series of genocides. Without anyhow
denying the Holocaust, we should put it in the perspective of other
crimes against humanity (nor just crimes against Jewry). And we should
keep in mind that all people who suffer, who are pushed into suffering
with their entire being and have little occasion to contemplate other
people's suffering, tend to over-estimate the comparative horror of
their own suffering.

Within one century after Columbus' arrival, the entire native American
population of the Caribbean islands was exterminated, probably 8 million
people. In continental *Latin* America, only 12 million people survived
after a century of colonization - while the population in 1492 is
estimated at up to 90 million. True, many died because of new diseases
which the colonizers had involuntarily brought with them, and many died
not by massacre but under the hardships of slavery (which also happened
to many prisoners in the Nazi work camps), but the number of literally
massacred people still amounted to millions. In North America too, the 2
million native inhabitants of Patagonia (southern Chile and Argentina)
were gradually but systematically killed to the last, as were all the
inhabitants of Tasmania in a single campaign, and most of the
aboriginals of Australia: in these cases, the genocide was entirely
intentional.

The number of Africans killed in the age of the slave trade and colonial
conquest has been estimated at up to 50 million. It has been said that
Europeans found the Holocaust so gruesome because the things which they
had considered acceptable in the case of black *savages* had now been
committed on white Europeans. In the conquests of America and Africa,
the same psychology was at work as in Auschwitz: the inferior races had
to make way (or Lebensraum, *living space*) for the superior race. In
some cases the massacre was *functional*, the result of an unplanned
escalation. In others however, the massacre was entirely *intentional*
and pre-planned.

Between 1915 and 1917, the Turks massacred nearly 1.5 milion Christian
Armenians, nearly the entire population of Western Armenia, or almost
half of all the then living Armenians. Another million survived
deportation thanks to the timely defeat of the Ottoman empire: the
Turks' goal was the total extermination of the Armenians, nothing less.
In relative though not in absolute figures this is worse than what
Hitler did to the Jews. Western Armenia has been entirely cleared of its
original population, and the remaining church buildings are used by the
army as targets for artillery practice.

Even outside the Islamic and the European sphere, genocides are not
unknown: the 19th-century Zulu emperor Shaka purposely exterminated
subdued populations in the order of magnitude of a million. In
antiquity, the Assyrians, like early Stalins, both massacred and
deported entire nations.

Of the Gypsies, at least 400,000 were killed in the same annihilation
camps as the Jews, and some more Gypsies were killed in *ordinary*
massacres. It is remarkable that the Gypsies are hardly ever mentioned
in connection with the Nazi extermination campaign, as are the estimated
6 million Russians who died in Nazi captivity (apart from another 20
million Russians who died in war circumstances). Then again, it is only
natural: all people who have suffered, complain of (or at least notice)
a general lack of interest from outsiders in their experiences. The
remarkable thing is rather the enormous attention which has been given
to the genocide committed on the Jews.

This attention is not out of proportion, and is in principle a good
thing; but its justification, viz. *"beware not to let this happen
again"*, is in stark contradiction with the unicity claim. It is
precisely because non-demonic, purely human factors may, in a given
historical configuration, converge to cause a genocide, of which the
Nazi Holocaust is merely an outstanding example, that we have to study
past genocides like the one in Auschwitz in order to avoid similar
events in the future. If Auzchwitz had been a totally unique event
beyond human understanding, there would be no fear of repetition and no
need to study it.

It would be a bit harsh to say it before a Jewish audience, but it is
nonetheless an incontrovertible fact: one of the earliest genocides has
been described and ideologically motivated in their own sacred
Scripture, the Tenakh (acronym from Torah + Naviim + Ketuvim, i.e.
Moses' Regulations, Prophetic books, and Writings; known to Christians
as the Old Testament). The massacres of neighbouring nations and all
kinds of *idolaters* by the prophets and established kings of the
Promised Land were not even the worst. The worst was in the very
beginning, when the Israelite people conquered this Land which they
claim Yahweh had promised them.

In the books Deuteronomy, Numbers and Joshua, we read how Moses and his
successor Joshua receive orders from their god Yahweh to exterminate the
entire population (women, children and even animals included) of the
cities in the Promised Land, then known as Kanaan (Deut.2:34, 20:12-17),
as well as in all cities where idolatry was practised (Deut.13:13-17).
In cities outside Kanaan, they could take booty and slaves, but the men
had to be killed. At Yahweh's explicit command, all the men, women and
male children of Midian (outside Kanaan) were killed, and the virgin
girls and the cattle distributed among the Israelites (Num.31:7- 18).
Inside Kanaan, the Israelites had no mercy, and the book Joshua
describes how the populations of Jericho, Ai, Makkeda, Libna, Lakis,
Eglon, Hebron, Debir and its vassal cities, were exterminated
(Jo.6:21-27, 8:24-29, 10:28-39). Joshua created Lebensraum for the
chosen people by exterminating the Kanaanites, with God on his side:
*"This way Joshua conquered the land: the hill country, the suthern
desert, the lowlands, the coastal strip, and he killed all the kings. He
did not let anyone escape and he destroyed every living being, just like
Yahweh the god of Israel had ordered."* (Jo.10:40)

Many Bible scholars believe that this story is highly exaggerated: the
Israelite conquest of Kanaan took place some 7 centuries before the
Bible text was edited, and its description may have been *adapted* to
suit the ideological needs of the Israelite people and its priestly
class at the time of writing. Probably Moses had led a fairly small
group which had to settle amid existing populations, on whom the cult of
Yahweh (and with it, the integration into the Israelite nation) was
imposed only gradually. Nonetheless, the story as it is, and which is
revered as revealed Scripture, does contain an ideology of genocide, no
matter what lofty ethical or religious insights may be present in other
parts of the Bible.

It would be unfair to hold the present-day Jewish community guilty of an
effective commitment to this ideology of God- ordained
self-righteousness at any cost, including genocide. Even if there is an
amount of self-righteousness in the Israelis' attitude in the occupied
territories, it is nothing but gross rhetoric to say that *Israeli
occupation is the new Nazism*, as was claimed in a UN resolution, now
repealed). Even the crassest fundamentalists are not calling for a
Joshua-style terror campaign: the Jews regard Joshua as part of their
history, not to be disowned, but not to be repeated in the modern world
either.

Today, Israel is the most democratic, humane and tolerant society in
West Asia. If it claims defensible borders and sufficient territory,
this is a legitimate secular claim, especially if one considers the most
likely alternative, viz. the incorporation into the Islamic world with
its retrograde, financial and dictatorial regimes which threaten to
destroy Israel. The Arab world, itself the result of ruthless conquest,
and which continues to expand at the expense of internal minorities like
the Kurds, Assyrians (Aramaic-speaking Christians) and Berbers, is in no
position to criticize Israel's desire for safe territory for its dense
population.

Nevertheless, even if the God-ordinated genocide attributed to Moses and
Joshua has not been emulated by the Jewish people, its scriptural
sanction has certainly played a destructive role in history. One cannot
deny that the Biblical injunctions to destroy Pagans by all means has
contributed to the extreme self- righteousness against Pagans which
Christianity has displayed duirng its most expansive phases.

The extermination of native populations in America and Oceania by
Christians could not have taken place on the same scale if those
populations had not been Pagans. Modern Christians claim that not the
missionaries but the uneducated and *un-Christian* gold-seekers were
responsible for the plight of the native Americans; but even if we
disregard the destructive role played by many misionaries, the fact
remains that even the most illiterate Christian adventure remembered one
thing from his Christian upbringing, viz. that Pagans are inferior to
Christians and that in dealing with them, different ethical standards
apply. Intra-Christian wars were never that extreme, and the worst wars
in Christian Eruope before the secularization of politics in the
18th-19th century was precisely religious wars against Pagans or
heretics: the war of the Teutonic Knights against the Baltic Pagans
(ending in the annihilation of Paganism by the 15th century), the
Crusade against the Manichean Cathar sect in southern France (1209-29,
an intentional genocide), the *"thirty years' war"* between Catholic and
Prostestant powers (1618-48, killing 5 million Germans, one third of the
population).

Islam is another zealous successor to Moses' heritage: its destruction
of Pagan populations and cultures was always committed in the belief
that the same God who had Moses' enemies wiped out, had now ordained the
Islamic trail of conquest and destruction. This conviction immunized
mujahedin against doubts arising in their conscience.

The occurence of genocide in Jewish Scripture has of course been pointed
out by people who want to justify their anti-Jewish feelings or
policies. The latest example is the Croatian president, Franjo Tudjman
who has been trying to explain to the world why the Croatian government
during World War 2 had killed so many Jews. According to newspaper
reports, he has written a book in Croatian in 1989, titled Wastelands:
Historical Truth, in which he refers to the Bibical narrative and
comments that for the Jews, *"genocidal violence is a natural
phenomenon... It is not only allowed, but even recommended"*. This may
win him some sympathy among supporters of the Palestinian cause, but it
is quite misplaced: the anti-Jewish violence of the last centuries and
especially of the Nazis and their Croatian allies had nothing to do with
the gruesome way in which Moses and Joshua conquered the Promised Land.
The contents and orientation of the Jewish religion have fundamentally
changed since the days of Moses, and the Jews have practised *live and
let live* for many centuries, during which they contributed immensely to
the economic and intellectual life of their host countries.

Genocide is not *natural* to any any individual or nation. The behaviour
of human beings is conditioned not so much by their blood or ancestry or
nationality, but by their thinking. Genocide is the outcome of an
ideology. It could happen to Moses' Israelites and to Hitler's Germans,
to the Caliph's Turks and to the colonizing Europeans, because they
believed that genocide was justified as a means to a superior goal. Each
of the genocidal movements believed it was a kind of chosen people,
destined to rule a specified part of the world (as in the case of
Christianity, Colonialism, Islam and Communism).

While there are differences of method and quantity, it must be clear now
that the difference between the Nazi genocide and other genocides is not
absolute and metaphysical. So, the comparative assessment of Hitler's
and Stalin's massacres, and the comparative assessment of the genocide
on the Jews and the genocides on the Red Indians, Black Africans,
Tasmanians, Armenians, Gypsies and other nations, are legitimate objects
of study. They don't need suspect political motives. On the contrary, it
is the refusal to address these topics of history, the desire to prevent
such lines of study, that demonstrates political compulsions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 1.2 DENYING THE HOLOCAUST

A wholly different matter from re-interpretation of known historical
facts, is the denial of these facts. In Europe we have the negationism
of a handful of historians and extreme-right groups concerning the Nazi
extermination campaign against the Gypsies and the Jews, which took
place between 1941 and 1945. Their claim is that this Nazi extermination
campaign is in fact a concoction. The widespread belief that the
Holocaust did take place, would merely be the work of a conspiracy.

There is, according to the negationists, no dearth of motives for
floating the *concoction* of the Holocaust. The two most important ones
concern the Communists and the Jews.

In order to legitimate their own horrible regime, the Communists had to
print Fascism (a term often used when Nazism is meant) in the most
terrible colours. It is true that they always throw the swearword
*Fascist* at everyone: from Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn to the Dalai Lama,
every decent human being who stands in the way of Communism gets branded
as a Fascist. Now, according to the Negationists, the Communists had to
invent gruesome crimes for Fascism, and to make the sting of the
swearword *Fascist* sharper. A case in point, they argue, is the
massacre of Polish officers at Katyn: blamed on the Nazis by the Soviets
(an allegation adopted by the other Allies, so that as late as 1989 the
British Foreign Office still denied that evidence for Soviet
responsibility existed), but in fact committed by the Soviets
themselves. If the Communists could falsely accuse the Nazis about
Katyn, why not about Auzchwitz?

But more than the Communists, it was the Jews who, according to the
negationists, had every reason to invent the *Holocaust myth*. Look at
its effects: the immediate outcome of the successful spreding of the
*Holocaust myth* was that in 1948 the United Nations could not deny the
Jews their new state Israel, and that this new state could at once claim
huge reparation payments from Germany. Today the Holocaust memory is the
justification of Israel's political claims to *safe, defensible borders*
- which effectively means the annexation of the *occupied territories*.
The last two decades, Western support for Israel has become less
unconditional, and to reclaim this support the Holocaust memory has been
made more insistent, with the *orchestrated* flood of books and films
about the Holocaust.

So, according to the negationists, the victims were in fact the
aggressors. With fakes photographs and false testimonies by tutored
*eyewitnesses* the Jews framed the Nazis on a huge and horrible crime of
genocide which had never been committed. After all, the declaration of
war by France and Britain against Germany in 1939 had been arranged by
the Jewish conspiracy which controlled finance (and therefore politics)
in those countries. And the Zionist leader Chaim Weizmann had
immediately declared that in this war all the Jews would be on England's
side. So, the war itself had been forced on Germany by the Jews, and the
Holocaust myth was the next element in this Jewish conspiracy aimed at
sucking Germany's blood and resources. That is very briefly the
negationists' position on why this Holocaust story was made so popular.

The negationist position is not widely believed, in fact it is widely
detested as the motivated history-distortion which it really is. In
France and Germany, publishing negationist writings is punishable by law
(in Germany, denial of the massacre of Germans in ex-German territories
in 1945 was equally made punishable). Negationism can boast of only a
few academics in its ranks, most academics will have no truck with it,
and some have published thorough and precise refutations of negationism.
Most of the negationist publications are pamphlets of a pitiable
intellectual calibre. Yet, a few academic-looking institutes for
*"revision of the history of World War II"* have been set up, notably
the Institute for Historical Review in California. And at least a few
negationist academics and writers are clever polemists and have managed
to create a semblance of respectability for negationism in some circles.

The methods of the negationists are intellectually quite objectionable,
they do all the things which are in the *"don't"* column of
methodological vademecums. For instance, they commit unbelievable feats
of *"quoting out of context"*. I realize that it is often a cheap excuse
in polemical forums to allege *quoting out of context*: it is done when
you cannot escape the conslusions which your opponent has drawn from
your own side's statements. By invoking (without specifying) the
all-redeeming *context*, you can claim that the analyzed statement
really meant something else than your opponent had assumed in making his
analysis. Nevertheless, the false allegation can only work because the
genuine product, quoting out of context, does exist. The negationists
shamelessly change the meaning of sentences by plucking them from their
contexts. Whenever one of their opponents, in the middle of a systematic
refutation of negationism, dares to concede that *"there are
contradictions in the testimony of ex-prisoner X"*, or that *"no records
are extant from concentration camp Y"*, they quote this one line and go
on to conclude that this opponent *"has had to revise his earlier belief
in the Holocaust under the impact of new findings"*.

For example, they eagerly quote the German historian Martin Broszat's
statement that there were no gas chambers designed for largescale
killing in the German Reich. Yes, that is what he said, and he was
probably right: no matter how gruesome otherwise, the camps inside
Germany, like Buchenwald and Bergen-Belsen, did not contain such gas
chambers. For, Broszat continues but the negationists omit, *"the mass
destruction of Jews by gassing was mostly done in the occupied
territories"*.

Negationist pamphlets are often very unashamed to announce from the
beginning that they are not meant to do history, but merely want to take
an *unprejudiced* look at the allegations of Nazi genocide. Some of
their more pretentious publications have a lot of academic-looking
references and quotations (referring mostly to other negationist
*authorities* and to the pamphlet liteature), as well as out-of-context
quotes from original Auschwitz testimonies and research, in which
witnesses a charge are turned into witness a decharge. Negationist
publications also contain a lot of plain lies, apparently counting on
the public's lack of time and means to check sources.

In every document they know how to select a line in their own favour. If
a judge convicts them because of their negationism, they clamour that it
is outside the judiciary's competence to judge historical methods and
theories (apart from seeing it as proof of the omnipresent Jewish
conspiracy); but when a judge refrains from passing judgement on their
methods and theories, they explain it as a vindication of negationism.
When the leading French negationist professor Faurisson was convicted
several times on charges of slander and incitement to racial hatred, but
not because of his history distortion, he claimed that henceforth nobody
had the right to denounce his method, and that *"it is now permitted to
declare that the gas chambers have not existed"*.

Their easiest technique of deception consists in simply keeping all the
evidence for the Holocaust out of the view of the readers, or in denying
its existence. The numerous testimonies by camp survivors and Nazi
officials (of whom some to appease their conscience, had already leaked
the truth to the outside world during the war) are simply not mentioned
at all, except if seemingly gross contradictions or mistakes can be
shown in them, so as to create the impression that the Holocaust *myth*
is based on the rantings of a few paranoid misfits.

They challenge the established historical certainty of the Holocaust not
with precise questions and challenges to competent historians, but with
stunts and bluff aimed at the broader public. Thus, in 1979 the
Institute for Historical Review promised $ 50,000 to whomever could
*prove* that people had been gassed in the Nazi camps. The small print
said that candidates for the prize must have seen someone being gassed,
must submit an autopsy report of a victim gassed with Zyklon-B gas.
After one year, it announced triumphantly that the prize could not be
awarded as no one had come forward with the proof. Actually, the items
demanded by the Institute are available, but most self- respecting
historians have decided to boycott the negationists completely, as even
a public trial of strength would only give them publicity (apart from
the fact that most relevant original documents were in pre-glasnost
Soviet and Polish hands). In my opinion, it is better to face the
negationist challenge head-on, and to confront them with the evidence
they defiantly ask for.

The chief argument of the negationists is that the evidence given for
the Holocaust is flawed. There are indeed some flaws in the available
evidence for the Holocaust. To start with, there is comparatively little
of it. It most camps the Nazis had thoroughly destroyed all the evidence
by the time the Soviet and Anglo-American forces moved in. Moreover, the
evidence available is in coded language, because the Holocaust was
conducted as a secret operation: hardly anywhere in the Nazi documents
is it written explicity that people have been gassed. Nevertheless, the
remaining evidence is still overwhelming: testimonies by camp guards and
Nazi officials, given during trial or as a voluntary act; testimonies by
transport workers, chemical engineers and people otherwise connected
with the material realization of the Holocaust; diaries by prisoners,
survivors in all kinds of forums after the liberation. The code to the
secret language of Nazi documents has been revealed by Nazi officials.

The other flaw in the available evidence, and which is always the
negationists' crowning argument, is the contradictions and inaccuracies
of the camp survivors' testimonies. For instance, people have claimed
that fellow prisoners had been gassed in camps in which no gas chambers
ever existed. Or, the authentic diaries of some prisoners give a very
different picture from the version which they gave in interviews after
the war. Of course, if one does not select merely the flawed pieces of
testimony, but keeps an eye on the general body of evidence, such
inaccuracies, contradictions and in some cases even lies, are only what
one can except when people testify to what they have experienced of a
real event. These things can be explained with our general knowledge of
human psychology: e.g., there is a kind of envy among people who have
suffered when they find that people who have gone through more
spectacular suffering get all the attention, and so they make their own
story a bit more interesting. Even after an ordinary traffic accident,
people's versions differ, yet there is no doubt about some basics, such
as the actual occurrence of the accident. Digging up inaccuracies in a
few testimonies in order to deny the entire body of evidence is the
safest way of lying: you pronounce correct judgements about some of the
parts, and merely by acting as if these few parts constitute the whole,
you implicitly tell a huge lie about the whole.

Finally, the negationist position is sought to be given some credibility
by discrediting the forum where the Holocaust was officially put on
record: the Nurnberg trial. Jurists now knowledge that the Nurnberg
trial violated some rules of justice, esp. by thwarting the rights of
the defence, and by judging on the basis of retro-active laws created ad
hoc. When German officers who had committed crimes against huminity in
odedience to orders, justified these with the universally valid rule of
military discipline *Befehl ist Befehl* (*an order is an order*), it was
ruled that military orders should not be obeyed when they violate
certain human principles (in emulation of this ruling, German courts
have recently convicted East German soldiers who had obeyed the order to
shoot people who tried to cross the Berlin wall; the mixed feelings over
this judgement have brought the dissatisfaction with the Nurnberg trial
back to mind). Worst of all, the Nurnberg trial was a cynical farce to
the extent that some of the parties sitting in judgement were just as
guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity, starting with the
Soviet Union.

And yet, it is obvious that all these flaws in the judicial treatment of
the Holocaust and of those responsible for it, do not make any
difference to the question whether the Holocaust actually took place.
The negationists will always try to pick on their opponents'
presentation of the facts, to pull the attention away from the facts
themselves.

In their attempts to convince public opinion, the negationists currently
benefit from a few circumstances.

Firstly, there is a feeling that the Holocaust is over- exploited. In
certain Jewish circles an excessive cultivation of the Holocaust memory
seems to have taken place. Therefore the Holocaust memory is seen by
some as an instrument of Jewish self-aggrandizement, and as the bedrock
of Israeli self-righteousness. This perception is especially strong in
pro-Palestinian circles.

Similarly, there is an impression of self-rightneousness in high-profile
anti-Nazi spokesmen. Some statements by the French Nazi hunter Serge
Klarsfeld have created irritation, e.g. that the leftist lawyer Jacques
Verges was *"a shame for his profession"* by accepting the offer to
defend the war criminal Klaus Barbie (while defence of criminals by
lawyers is the former's right and the latter's job). Klarsfeld's action
in Germany in 1992 against restrictions on the massive immigration of
Romanian Gypsies was equally considered misplaced and self-righteous:
any country has a right to its own immigration policy, and Germany had a
much more generous refugee policy than any other country (it accepted 2
lakh refugees from Yugoslavia, France less than 1,000). This type of
self-rightousness is perceived as a consequence of the Holocaust
*credit*, and so, many people would like the Holocaust talk to stop for
a while. That does not amount to an endorsement of negationism, but the
negationists take heart from any change of public mood that weakens the
indignation over the Holocaust.

In this connection, there is also a perception that the
*Jewish-controlled press* reduces the death toll of Nazism to the Jewish
victims, omitting the Gypsies and the many millions of Polish, Ukranian
and Russian victims in work- camps and battlefields; and also omitting
the victims of Allied war crimes (apart from Stalinism, these comprise
the bombings of Dresden, Hiroshima etc., and the several hundreds of
thousands of German soldiers starved in Allied camps even after the end
of the war, plus the crimes committed by real and fake resistance groups
after the war). This way, in those circles where anti-Judaism in mild or
strident form had been common, the old irritation with the Jews finds
itself confirmed when the Holocaust memory is raked up once too often.
The sacralization of the Holocaust paradoxically feeds negationism.

Considering what the Jewish people has gone through, I still find it
unacceptable to say that Jews *exploit* the Holocaust memory. It is not
of the Jews but of the leftists that one can say stay are exploiting the
Holocaust memory. After the fall of Soviet Communism, the trend to fill
the media with reminders of the Holocaust, coupled with warnings that we
should not let it happen again, has reached an unprecedented intensity.
Never before have we seen so many documentaries of the Holocaust on TV.
Worse, leftist journalists now routinely show film material of trains to
Auschwitz while talking about present-day rightist parties that have
emphatically distanced themselves from the rightism of the 1930s: a
Goebbelsian use of the Holocaust.

The reason is obvious: after the loss of face which Gorbachov and
Yeltsin have inflicted on them, they need an anti-Fascist fever as a new
legitimation and as a distraction of the public's attention. The trial
of the Communist Party in Moscow occasioned one revelation after
another, e.g. about the Soviet financial support to front organizations
in the West (such as the *peace movement*), but reporting has been
scant. From our press coverage, you would get the impression that
economic inefficiency was Communism's only crime. So many survivors of
the Gulag camps can finally speak out, but instead we get to see
Auschwitz survivors.

The collaborators with Stalinism in our press will go to any length to
keep attention away from their own sins, and they have no scruples in
using even the Holocaust victims as a cover. The public indignation with
this shameless manipulation of the Holocaust memory by leftists is
entirely justified. Fortunately (and unlike the opposition to the
so-called Jewish Holocaust exploitation), this has not led to any signs
of willingness to go to the other extreme, viz. to tolerate negationism.
Still, the Holocaust negationists enjoy these transparent acts of
desperation by the Gulag concealers.

A second factor which favours acceptance of negationism on some scale,
is the *martyrdom* suffered by some negationists. The leading
negationist Faurisson has been beaten up by a group of Jewish
youngsters, sending him into hospital for weeks. Of course, an idea is
not worth more simply because some fool has suffered for it, but the
aura of martyrdom still has its effect. More generally, there is a sense
of unfair treatment by the media and the judiciary.

For example, the French extreme-right leader Jean-Marie Le Pen has been
convicted for saying on TV in 1987 that the gas chambers were merely *a
detail in history*. Even his rightist colleagues trying for
respectability disowned him: the Flemish Vlaams Blok leader Filip
Dewinter announced that any party member found propagating negationism
would be thrown out of the party, and the German Republikaner leader
Franz Schoenhuber emphatically said that the Holocaust must not be
minimized or denied, and that a renewed German self- respect should not
be based on the denial of this horrible episode. However, Le Pen's
supporters have pointed out that in the same interview he had clarified
that by *gas chamber* he had only meant the method used for killing
(which is indeed a minor issue), not the killing itself. In that case,
it is not strictly true that he was guilty of negationism. However, in
other contexts he has been very ambiguous about the issue, and most
French negationists look up to him as their champion.

Because of the propaganda value of martyrdom, it is not surprising that
there are indications of provocation: the negationists seem deliberately
to provoke Jewish organizations and Holocaust survivors to file
complaints, for the sake of publicity and for creating a martyrdom aura
with the Jews once more in the role of the villains.

A new factor that may increase the audience of the negationists, is that
with the fall of Communism, we now get to hear the voice of the
Central-and East-European peoples, most of which have quite a record of
collaboration with the Nazis. In the 1920s and 30s, the leader principle
was in, and most of these countries had their own authoritarian rulers.
When faced with a choice between Hitler and Stalin, they opted for
Hitler. Many of these pro-Hitler leaders and militiamen were slaughtered
by the Communists, making them national heroes whose memory has been
cherished all through the Communist winter. Now that national history is
being revived, these nations do not want to be stigmatized as
accomplices in the Holocaust, because to them, collaboration with Hitler
had other motives than the extermination of the Jews. On the other hand,
their regimes mostly did practise their own brand of anti-Judaism, and
when the Jews were rounded up, they did not exactly obstruct these
Holocaust preparations. Still, for a fair assessment of the Hitler-
Stalin period, these nations would prefer to see some other dimensions
highlighted than just the Holocaust, to which it is too often reduced.
Moreover, the anti-Fascist propaganda which they were fed under
Communist rule had equally de- emphasized the Jews and emphasized the
Communists as targets of Nazi persecution. Some Holocaust-denying voices
have already been raised in these countries.

In spite of somewhat favourable circumstances and of their own clever
manipulations, the negationists are bound to fail. Thus, in 1991 the
Spanish Supreme Court has convicted Leon Degrelle, a veteran pro-Nazi
leader from Belgium living in exile in Spain, for his describing the
Nazi genocide as *"a Jewish fabrication"*, and similar negationist
statements. Spain has no law against negationism, but Violeta Friedman,
a Jewish-Hungarian survivor of the Nazi camps (in which her parents were
killed) invoked the ordinary laws against slanderous publications. Lower
courts ruled that an individual cannot claim to be the victim of
slander. But the Supreme Court ruled in her favour, and prohibited
further public denials of the Holocaust.

Similarly, in the 1991 elections for the post of governor of Louisiana,
the Republican candidate David Duke had been an advocate of negationism.
Now he disclaims this position, but certain sins remain unforgivable for
very long. President Bush, even though himself a Republican, advised the
voters to elect the Democratic candidate, because: *"I think that
someone who has denied the Holocaust, should not ever be allowed to take
a leadership position."*

The president did not deny Mr. Duke the freedom to voice his negationist
position, nor did he try to prevent his standing for elections, but he
made it clear that he rejected this shameless falsehood of negationism,
even at the cost of his own party's immediate interest.

These incidents should make it clear that negationism is simply not
accepted. It is useful to keep this determined rejection in mind as a
standard when considering other negationisms. Some of them are
championed by governments and intellectuals even though they are just as
objectionable as Holocaust negationism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 1.3 LEFTIST NEGATIONISM

In the late 1970s, the negationists found an unexpected ally when some
French leftists, grouped around Pierre Guillaume and his
publishing-house La Vieille Taupe, took up their defence. Within the
Left wing of French (let alone European) politics, this is an
insignificant fringe group, but the reasons for their support to
negationism are interesting.

The more immediate reason for leftist negationism is the current leftist
support to the Palestinian cause. The sacralization of the Holocaust as
the foundation myth of the Israeli state goes hand in hand with attempts
to strengthen the struggle against Israeli policies by denying the
Holocaust. Even quite apart from negationism, the extreme Left has been
the first to break the taboo on estimating the Jewish death toll in the
Holocaust at less than 6 million. After glasnost, the authorities in
Poland have declared that according to their first-hand information, the
death toll in Auschwitz was only 1.5 million, less than 1 million of
them Jews. The earlier official version had been 4 million, while Jewish
organizations had assumed it was some 2 million. At any rate, if the
Polish authorities have given correct figures, and the Auschwitz number
is decreased, then the total Holocaust death toll must also be decreased
to less than 6 million. The most reliable sources now agree on around
5.3 million as the total count of Jewish victims of Nazism. But somehow
no one dares to amend the established number of 6 million, for fear of
being branded a negationist. It was in the Belgian Marxist-Leninist (and
strongly pro-Palestinian) weekly Solidair that I read for the first time
that *"5.1 million Jews"* had been killed by the Nazis.

But here we are not dealing with small corrections in the figures, but
with a fundamental denial of the Holocaust itself. Unlike most Marxists,
the ones under consideration have taken their support to the Palestinian
cause as far as denying what they consider the connerstone of the
*"greater Israel"* ideology, viz. the holocaust memory.

The deeper reason for leftist negationism is that the extreme hostility
between Nazism and Jews regardless of their class, is in conflict with
Marxist theory. Of course, rivalry and even war between capitalists
(Jewish vs. German capitalists, German vs. French-British colonial
capitalists, etc.) does fit the theory. But the Nazi plan to destroy all
the Jews is a different matter, outside the grip of Marxist theory.
Marxists define Fascism as merely an extreme phase of capitalism, just
like imperialism and colonialism were necessary phases of capitalism.
Already in 1953, some Trotskyites had made the analysis that the
Holocaust was a extremely useful propaganda instrument for
Anglo-American capitalism to differentiate itself from its fascist twin-
brother. Thanks to the Holocaust, the capitalists could impress upon the
minds that there was a radical difference between Fascism, which had
committed the Holocaust, and *democracy*, which had fought Fascism and
stopped the Holocaust. This covers up the reality that Fascist and
*democratic* capitalism are merely two faces of the same monster. The
people's struggle should be directed against the Fascist phase of
capitalism (which amounts to collaboration with the non-Fascist phase of
capitalism), but should be against capitalism as such, without getting
confused by intra- capitalist family struggles between Anglo-American
and Axis capitalists.

In a sense, the fact of the holocaust escaped Marxist theory as
understood by the La Vieille Taupe group. So that was too bad for the
fact: it had to be denied. As Alain Finkielkraut has commented, the
Holocaust was *"an event too many"*, and the dogmatic Marxists chose
*"for doctrinal faithfulness and against the complexity of the facts"*.

Interestingly, these leftist negationists integrated the more
conventional Marxist explanation for anti-Judaism, viz. the scapegoat
theory. They accept that until 1945 the Jews were a scapegoat held up by
the capitalists in order to channel the proletariat's discontent away
from its proper target, capitalism (in accordance with this view, Franz
Neumann had predicted in 1942 in his analysis of Nazism that the
extermination of the Jews was excluded because of their political
importance as scapegoat). But in and since 1945, it is the fascists who
have been turned into a kind of scapegoat: they are blackened and
covered with contempt in order to channel discontent away from its
proper target, viz. capitalism as the culprit for everything, towards
this one particular form of capitalism, which was already neutralized
and no longer useful anyway. The Holocaust is merely a dummy created by
capitalism to distract socialist combattivity and to instill in the
supporters of Anglo- American capitalism a sense of moral superiority.

This leftist denial of the Holocaust fact is apparently an aberration
from what was originally a justifiable (within Marxist theory) critique
of the use of the Holocaust fact as an alibi for Anglo-American
capitalism.

A cornerstone of the leftist-negationist argument is the testimony
immediately after the war, and the books written later by Paul
Rassinier, a socialist who had survived the Nazi camps, though
handicapped. This embittered man had depicted the Holocaust as nothing
but a propagandistic concoction. As an authentic leftist and victim of
Nazism, he was the perfect witness for the negationist position. Those
who can keep the proper over-all perspective, will be able to make the
unpleasant but inescapable judgement that Paul Rassinier had projected
his own experience in Buchenwald (where no Jews were gassed) as a
general description of the events in the Nazi camps. I do not want to
judge too harshly on a man who went through such suffering, but the
armchair historians who selectively highlighted his version because it
was useful to them, are a different matter. Lifting a few convenient but
untypical testimonies out of the enormous corpus of evidence is a
wellknown method of distorting the picture.

For the rest, the leftist-negationist argument is a pitiable list of
contradictions and bad reasoning. For instance, one of their stalwarts,
Vincent Monteil, writes that *"a large-scale genocide is impossible
without gas chambers, and therefore no genocide has taken place"*: even
if we allow for his presupposition that the gas chambers have already
been *exposed as a myth*, it is quite stupid to assume that in the
absence of gas chambers, those who intend to commit genocide could not
find alternative tools (which would declare most historical cases of
genocide impossible).

Leftist negationism regardng the Nazi holocaust is of course only a
foonote in the much more general negationism practised by most leftists,
hard and soft, regarding the crimes of Communist regimes. So many
*fellow-travellers* visited the Soviet Union, closed their eyes for
inconvenient facts, wilfully believed only what their official guide
told them, and propagated a rosy picture of Stalin's brave achievements.
Many social-democrat leaders from the West regularly went to Moscow for
consultations, and started friendship associations with Communist
countries, to spread a more *unprejudiced* picture of their regimes.
Even today, some of them declare that they don't regret this stab in the
back of those countries' oppressed populations When in 1989 the Soviet
authorities finally admitted Stalin's guilt in the Katyn massacre, I
have not heard any of the Soviet supporters outside the Soviet bloc
apologizing for propagating the Katyn lie until reecently.

A well-known early case of Communist negationism put on trial, was the
Kravchenko affair. In 1944 Viktor Kravchenko had escaped from the Soviet
Union, and in his book *"I chose freedom"* (1946) he exposed Stalinist
repression. French Communists decried his testimony as a CIA concoction,
but Kravchenko charged them with slander. In court, testimonies by Gulag
(Russian acronym: *"chief bureau of camps"*) camp survivors were
countered by fellow-travellers, who alleged that any claims
contradicting their own impressions were mere Cold War propaganda. But
Kravchenko won his case.

In 1949, David Rousset, who had survived the Nazi camps, invited other
camp survivors to support his appeal to have the Soviet camps
investigated as well. When he published the Soviet *"code of forced
labour"*, it was too much for the communists, and they accused him of
having fabricated all his information. Rousset alleged slander and won
his case. In his standard work on negationism, *"De Uitbuiting van de
Holocaust"* (*"The Exploitation of the Holocaust"*, from which I have
borrowed much of the information for this chapter), the Flemish scholar
Gie van den Berghe observes about the Rousset trial: *"The mass of
evidence could not convince the Gulag deniers. They used the same
arsenal of arguments which the negationists use today...Testimonies of
escaped prisoners were rejected as mystifications, and fellow-
travellers effortlessly concluded, from the fact that they had not seen
the Gulag camps, that these could not exist."* What makes this communist
negationism worse, is that it took place even while, in the camps of the
Gulag archipelago, the crime was still being committed

The leading leftist intellectuals Jean-Paul Sartre and Maurice
Merleau-Ponty joined the public debate surrounding the Rousset trial.
They acknowledged that Stalin's camps had inspired Hitler who merely had
to add the technical novelty of the gas chambers. Yet they refused to
denounce the Soviet camps because the Soviets acted in good faith,
deserved the benefit of the doubt, and were in any case the lesser evil
compared to a counter-revolution in the fatherland of socialism. They
denounced Rousset as a man blinded by hatred and objectively feeding
Cold War propaganda.

As Sartre's position (to which he stuck even when Merleau-Ponty grew
away from Communism, and even after he himself broke with the Parti
Communiste) shows, some people don't feel the need to deny crimes
against humanity becase they consider them justified. This is not
abnormal if you have the proper viewpoint, like Sartre's formula:
*"Every anti-Communist is a dog"*. Till today, die-hard Communists
defend Stalin's, Brezhnev's, Mao's and Pol pot's massacres. Often they
combine this with a minor negationism, alleging that the figures have
been exaggerated and at least some of the crimes fabricated by the CIA.

Thus, in his analysis of the Gorbachov revolution: *"USSR, de Fluwelen
Contrarevolutie"*, Ludo Martens, president of the minuscule Belgian
Marxist-Leminist party, writes that Stalin's crimes were partly
inevitable mistakes, partly Western concoction and fantasy, and partly
justified. For this unrepentant Stalinist, Stalin's terror against the
Kulaks was a necessary and justified class struggle. In his party paper
Solidair, he has argued that the organized famines in Ukraine had been a
piece of Hitlerian propaganda. He used a familiar negationist technique:
create suspicion about one of the sources reporting the facts (viz.
Randolph Hearst's news agency, which had signed an agreement with Hitler
for exclusive rights to sell international news), keep other sources out
of the picture, and suggest that the facts have only existed in this one
source's version.

Another stalwart of the same party, Dr. Kris Merckx, goes one step
further. In reply to an article about the Marxist double standards by
the philosopher Prof. Etienne Vermeersch, he denies that Stalin
committed massacres: *"Etienne Vermeersch...writes about the **mass
murderer** Stalin. Immediately after World War 2, this gossip was only
believed among Nazi collaborators... In those days, people still knew
that the first stories about **millions of people killed by Lenin and
Stalin** had been launched by a certain Adolf Hitler. In 1926... Hitler
wrote: **In Russia the Jew went around with truly fanatical ferocity. He
killed about 30 million people, partly by inhuman torture, partly by
organized famine.** These and other lies have not withstood the test of
World War 2. The Soviet nations have inflicted the decisive defeat on
the Nazis.. because they identified with the socialist regime and were
willing to bring the greatest sacrifices for it. This would not have
happened if the regime had meant **terror and oppression** for them. And
yet, in our media and schools, people speak of the **mass- murderer
Stalin** without blinking."*

The editors of the paper (Humo 19/11/1992) reply: *"Whatever nonsense
Hitler may have written about the Soviet Union in 1926, at that time
Stalin was only just beginning to build his reputation of paranoid
dictator... His forced collectivization and the great purification
(which reached its peak in 1934-38) created a wave of terror in the
Soviet Union. Reducing Stalin's disgraceful reputation to Hitler's
mendacious demagogy, is itself a crass case of demagogy, and an insult
for the many (including sincere communists) who later bacame Stalin's
victims."*

About the heroism of the Soviet people's patriotic resistance in spite
of Stalinism: *"It is true that Stalin had reduced his terror to a
milder level, and his share in victory should not be minimized, but the
Nazis' defeat does not erase his crimes. The great combattivity of the
Soviet nations need not - considering the Nazi atrocities in Russia - be
reduced to the general popular reverence for Stalin that you suggest. By
your logic, Napoleon's Russian defeat proves that the people all
venerated the Czar. You are right in remarking tht Prof. Vermeersch's
list \[of crimes against humanity\] is not complete, but then, neither
is yours. That is all the more deplorable because Stalin still has a
model role in your vision of the future. At the last May Day
celebration, the Marxist-Leninist party president Ludo Martens has said
in so many words that the choice of the future will ultimately be one
between **Hitler** and **Stalin**."*

It should be borne in mind that the number of people killed by the
Soviet regime between 1917 and 1985 is estimated at between 34 million
(on the basis of official figures) and 67 million (according to
Alexsandr Solzhenitsyn). In the same order of magnitude we find
Tse-tung's number of victims (some 30 million), during the communist
take-over, the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution. Till
today, there is a Chinese Gulag archipelago in the occupied territories
of Tibet (including Chinghai), East-Turkestan and Inner Mongolia. Over a
million Tibetans have died because of Communist massacres and organized
famines; forced sterilizations (which the 1948 UN convention on genocide
considers a full-blooded act of genocide) have taken place on a
proportionately large scale. But this is hotly denied or at least
strongly minimized by the regime and its supporters abroad.

Like the Holocaust negationists, our Communist negationists prefer to
de-emphasize the real issue, and to draw the attention towards
fault-finding with the victims, and towards the aggressor's glorious
achievements. Thus the old system in Tibet was an obscurantist,
archfedual, even cannibalist theocracy, and the Tibetans have been lucky
to be forced into enjoying the benefits of Maoism. While the communist
version of pre-communist history (defended abroad by A.T. Grunfeld in:
The Making of Modern Tibet) is a grim caricature, it is true that
Tibetan society needed social as well as material modernization; but
this does not justify the occupation of the country, any more than it
would justify the European colonization (which had equally been
advertised as a generous act of helping the natives to modernize).
Non-colonized Japan adopted modernization much faster and more smoothly
than any colonized country, and left to itself, the modernization which
had already been started by the 13th Dalai Lama would certainly have
picked up momentum over the years and done a lot more good to Tibet than
any colonization could. At any rate, none of these considerations anyhow
justifies the gradual genocide which the Chinese occupiers have been
carrying out in Tibet.

Like the Holocaust negationists, our Communist negationists are very
inventive when it comes to explaining away inconvenient facts. In 1989,
when journalist and Tibet-lover Frans Boenders had reported how he had
heard a long round of shooting from his hotel room in Lhasa, the
president of the Belgo-Chinese Freindship Association dismissed the
report, saying that Mr. Boenders, because of his lack of familiarity
with local culture, had mistaken festive fireworks for gunfire. Some
months later, a defecting Chinese official revealed that 1988-89 had
been a time of intense repression in Tibet, including a razzia with 460
people killed in April 1989.

So far, the collapse of Soviet Communism has not triggered any audible
soul-searching among its erstwhile supporters. The small minority which
sticks to Marxist orthodoxy, thinks it has nothing to apologize for.
Among those who had believed in Communism (like myself, briefly) but
turned away from it long before Gorbachov, many have spoken out clearly
and forcefully against this criminal system (e.g. the actor-couple Yves
Montand and Simone Signoret, and the nouveaux philosophes like Andre
Glucksmann). But among those who stayed with Communism until the
accomplished facts overtook them, the attitude is more one of quietly
passing on to the middle-ground of social and political life, with a
minimum of comment on this counter-revolution which Marx had not
foreseen. In Europe, these ex-Communists are presently trying to hijack
the Green (ecologist) movement, dropping some of their Marxist rhetoric
in the process, but still retaining a lot of the Marxist agenda (even
while Communist rule has brought about the biggest ecological
disasters).

The ones least influenced by the collapse of Communism are the
soft-leftists, such as *Christians for socialism* and liberation
theologians: even after Gorbachov, they kept on passing resolutions
demanding the abolition of private property, and organizing *peace
demonstrations* directed solely against the US, as if they had never
heard of Li Peng or Saddam Hussein. On the negationist front they will
not deny historical facts too openly but they continue to quietly ignore
them. Just like before Gorbachov, when they paid their respects to the
Soviet system and ignored the persecution of their co-religionists as a
minor aberration,they still refuse to pay attention to the decades of
persecution, and they still denounce anti-Communist statements as
anti-progressive *Cold War rhetoric*,etc. Lazy-minded people who have
acquired a leftist bias after long-term uncritical consumption of
propaganda, will not shake off their thought-habits until the same
stigma attaches to Communism as to Fascism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 1.4 ISLAMIC NEGATIONISM

One party which could have an interest in Holocaust negationism, is the
Palestinian people. I do not know of an official negationism in the
Palestinian Liberation Organization, but in conversation with
Palestinians abroad I have heard negationist positions more than once.
Even if Palestinians do not want to deny the Holocaust, at lest they
argue that this topic should take a back seat for a while, because now
it is being kept alive artificially in order to underpin Israel's claim
on the Palestinian homeland.

In the Arab world at large, there has occasionally been official support
for negationism. In 1976, the Saudi representative at the U.N. denied in
a speech that the Holocaust had occured. Hussein Sumaida, the young
Iraqi spy who recently defected, has written in his memoirs how in
school he had never learned of the persecution of the Jews by the Nazis,
but all the more about the *Jewish conspiracy* and about the great
realizations of Hitler's Third Reich.

I would not make too much of the great admiration which Fascism had
evoked among the Muslims, as among many Third World populations. It is
true the Baath Party in Syria and Iraq was modelled on Mussolini's
Fascist Party. Sir Mohammed Iqbal has written a eulogy for Mussolini.
The Yugoslavian Muslims collaborated with the fascist regime in Croatia,
and their grand-mufti exhorted them to serve in the Fascist Ustasha
militia. Muslim nations (Tatars, Kalmuks, Balkars, Chechens, Ingoosh) in
the Soviet Union fought alongside the Nazi invader. The grand-mufti of
Jerusalem made a pact with Hitler, if only because he too had wanted to
get rid of the Jews once and for all. But let us assume that all that
happened because they didn't realize the ultimate consequences of
Nazism, or because colonized people had no reason to believe the
anti-Fascist war propaganda put out by the colonial powers, themselves
veterans of many a massacre. Even then, there is a lot of post-war
writing in the Islamic world which restates the Nazi propaganda against
the Jews, and for that, there is no longer an excuse.

In the first 1989 issue of Islamic Order, a quarterly published in
Karachi, there is an article by Ausaf Saied Vasfi, titled Beware Arafat
Beware. It is published *"courtesy Radiance, Delhi"*, which means at
least two English-language Islamic papers have published it; and it is
by no means the only article of its kind which is currently being fed to
the Muslim public. The article states that the sources of Zionism are
chiefly these two: the Talmud and the Protocols of the Sages of Zion.

The Talmud is of course the chief Jewish scripture, a comment on the
Tenakh (Old Testament), and forms a decisive reorientation of the Jewish
religion: a pluralistic interpretation of the Biblical texts,
recognizing that each interpretation (including the literal one) is
always a limited human attempt to understand the unlimited profundity of
God's word, and allowing for different levels of understanding (literal,
hermeneutical, allegorical, mystical). In the Talmud, Judaism transcends
in substantial measure its exclusivistic orgins (which would
unfortunately be re-actualized by Christianity and Islam), and develops
the typical emphasis on intellectual investigation which will make the
Jewish community such a cradle of powerful minds.

But the starting thing about Mr. Vasfi's article is that he presents the
Protocols of the Sages of Zion as a source of Jewish inspiration,
apparently ignoring the well-known fact that it was nothing but a
forgery made by the Czar's secret police in order to underpin the theory
of a Jewish conspiracy to control the world. In all seriousness, he
tries to prove the Jewish world conspiracy with quotes from the
Protocols, like this one: *"And the weapons in our hands are limitless:
ambitions, burning greediness, merciless vengeance, hatred and malice...
It is from us that the all- engulfing terror proceeds... By these acts
all states are in torture... We will not give them peace until they
openly acknowledge our international Super-Government and with
submissiveness."*

Mr. Vasfi lists the occasions when Jews have been banished from
countries, and comments with a rhetorical question: *"The question is:
why?"* And then he recounts the story of the successive confrontations
between Mohammed and the Jews of Medina, which proves the Jews'
propensity to mischief. And they have remained mischievous: the Kemalist
revolution in Turkey which brought down the khilafat *"was planned and
executed by the International Jewry"*, and *"the entire Bolshevik
Revolution in Russia was engineered by the Jews"*. It should be made
clear that such sweeping allegations are nothing but the well-known
stock-in-trade of anti-Judaism.

In late 1992, Western negationist groups had announced a negationist
conference, due to take place in Sweden. The Swedish government
prohibited the initiative. Among the participants: the Lebanese
Hezbollah and the Palestinian Hamas, two Iranian-backed Islamic
organizations.

Saudi Arabia is the chief sponsor of negationist activity in the West.
The American negationist author William Grimstad has been exposed as
being on the Saudi secret service's payroll. In 1981, his books,
including Antizion and The Six Million Reconsidered, were sent, along
with other negationist literature, to one thousand British political and
business leaders, by the Rabita, the Islamic World Council, from
Pakistan. The Iranian embassies are also distribution centres of
negationist and anti-Jewish material

In her otherwise meritorious book *"The Holocaust Denial"* , the British
leftist authoress Gill Seidel concludes a list of Islamic-sponsored
negationist initiatives with the remark that *"of course there is
nothing intrinsically anti-Semitic to Islam as a religion"*. That is
evidently the Marxist perception propagated by Maxime Rodinson, but it
is historically inaccurate. Mohammed had all the Jews in his domain
banished, enslaved or killed. After that, the Jews outside Arabia were
allowed to survive under a number of humiliating conditions. They were
kept down and exploited, and there were frequent progroms, as described
by Bat Ye'or in her book *"The Dhimmi"*. They were the target of Islamic
hatred simply because they rejected Islam, but also for a more specific
reason: they had deleted from their revealed Scripture all references to
Mohammed, the future and final prophet.

Apart from the complicity of Muslims in Holocaust negationism, there is
a far more pervasive participation of Muslims in a different negationism
which concerns Islam directly. In Turkey most people, from the top down,
deny the genocide on the Armenians during World War 1 (Which Hitler
invoked as a precedent of successful, unpunished genocide). The general
who led the operations against the Armenians has a statue in Ankara.
This genocide had been declared a jihad by the last caliph, who had
fullest authority to make such declarations.

In 1974, the Turkish representative in the U.N. Human Rights Committee
demanded the scrapping of the paragraph (in the preparatory report on
the prevention and punishment of genocide) referring in diplomatic terms
to the Armenian genocide. As Turkey is a cornerstone of the NATO
alliance, it manages to get a lot of passive Western support for its
attempts to whitewash its own past. The paragraph was scrapped, and the
document now only refers to the Nazi genocide. But in recent years, both
the U.N. and the European Parliament have adopted resolutions condemning
the Armenian genocide, which the Turkish government has angrily kept on
denying.

In the next chapter we shall see that the Armenian genocide was by far
not the only crime against humanity committed by Islam, nor the only one
which is now being hotly denied in a campaign of negationist propaganda.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
