+++
title = "02 1.1 Before the Masjid, the Mandir"

+++
# 1. Summary of the historical question

## 1.1 Before the Masjid, the Mandir

The historical starting point of the Ram Janmabhoomi issue is the
contention that the Babri Masjid structure in Ayodhya was built after
the forcible demolition of a Hindu temple on the same spot by Muslim
soldiers. In the first part of my book Ram Janmabhoomi vs. Babri Masjid,
a Case Study in Hindu-Muslim conflict,[¹](notes.htm#note1) I have dealt
extensively with the arguments given pro and contra this contention. The
case can be summarized as follows.

There is archaeological evidence that a temple, or at the very least a
building with pillars, has stood on the Babri Masjid spot since the
eleventh century. Of course, because of the structure standing there,
the archaeological search has been far from exhaustive, but at least of
the existence of this 11th century building we can be
certain.[²](notes.htm#note2)

When the building was destroyed, we do not know precisely, there are no
descriptions of the event extent anywhere. Mohammed Ghori's armies
arrived there in 1194, and they may have destroyed it. It may have been
rebuilt afterwards, or it may only have been destroyed by later Muslim
rulers of the area. so it is possible that when Mir Baqi, Babar's
lieutenant, arrived there in 1528, he found a heap of rubble, or an
already aging mosque, rather than a magnificent Hindu temple.

However, it is very unlikely that the place was not functioning as a
Hindu place of worship just before the Babri Masjid was built. As is
well known, fourteen pillar-stones with Hindu temple ornamentation have
been used in the construction of the Babri Masjid. Considering the
quantity of bricks employed in the building, one cannot say that these
fourteen pillar- stones were used merely to economize on bricks:
quantitatively, they simply didn't make a difference. These remnants of
Hindu architecture were more probably use in order to display the
victory of the mosque over the temple, of Islam over Paganism. That was
in keeping with a very common practice of Muslim conquerors, who often
left pieces of the outer wall of the destroyed temple standing (as was
done in the Gyanvapi mosque in Varanasi, replacing the Kashi Vishvanath
temple), or worked pieces of idols into the threshold of the newly-
built mosque, so that the faithful could tread them underfoot.

Since the actual practice in the case of the Babri Masjid conforms to
this general pattern, we may infer that in all probability the Masjid
was built in the same material circumstances in which the pattern
normally applied, viz. just after the demolition of a Pagan place of
worship. This is all the more probable considering that no alternative
explanations for the presence of these Hindu pillar-stones have been
offered, not even by those historians who would have an ideological and
argumentative interest in doing so.

In methodological terms, our conclusion that the use of Hindu remnants
in the mosque building indicates an immediately preceding temple
demolition because such a sequence fulfills a common pattern, is based
on the principle of coherence. This principle as a ground for historical
inference does not given absolute certainty, but at least a good measure
of probability. But conversely, a contention that violates the principle
of coherence without being supported by hard evidence, thereby becomes
very improbable. As we shall see, the advocates of the Babri Masjid
cause, including a team of 25 JNU historians, have disregarded the
coherence principle in central points of their argumentation.

In their well-known and oft-quoted statement on the Ayodhya controversy,
the JNU historians have rejected the contention that there was a temple
on the disputed spot before the Babri Masjid was built
there.[³](notes.htm#note3) This is a wildly improbable contention. There
is a general cultural pattern that would have made people build a temple
there, a very important one.

If you go to Ayodhya and walk to the Masjid/Janmabhoomi, you will find
yourself walking uphill, even after passing the Hanuman Garhi which
itself is on a little hill. Relative to the flatness of the entire Ganga
basin, the disputed split is quite an elevated place, and it overlooks
Ayodhya. Now, either prince Rama was a historical character, born in the
castle of the local ruler, which would logically (i.e. strategically)
have been built on this elevation, and then his birthplace temple would
also have to be there. Or we do not assume Ram's historicity (without
necessarily excluding it) and we also do not assume that he was born
there, which is the JNU historians' position, and then the question is
reduced to whether people would have refrained from building a temple on
this hilltop.

Ayodhya is a place of pilgrimage and temple city of long standing. The
JNU historians themselves cite evidence that it housed important temples
of the Buddhists, Shaivas and Jains. In such a temple city par
excellence, it is virtually impossible that the geographical place of
honour would have been left unused. The contention that there was no
temple on the Babri Masjid site goes against all we know of ritual
patterns in the lay-out of sacred places the world over: it violates the
principle of coherence.

That the Babri Masjid replaced a pre-existent centre of worship, is also
indicated by the fact that Hindus kept returning to the place, where
more indulgent Muslim rulers allowed them to worship on a platform just
outside the mosque. This is attested by a number of different pieces of
testimony by Western travelers and by local Muslims, all of the
pre-British period, as well as from shortly after the 1856 British
take-over but explicitly referring to older local Muslim sources. A
number of these documents have been presented by Harsh
Narain[⁴](notes.htm#note4) and A.K. Chatterjee[⁵](notes.htm#note5). That
they are authentic and have a real proof value, is indirectly
corroborated by the attempts made to make two of them disappear, which
Harsh Narain and Arun Shourie independently
discovered[⁶](notes.htm#note6).

Most of these sources explicitly declare that the Babri Masjid had
replaced an earlier Hindu temple, and even specify that it has been
Ram's birthplace temple. But whatever their historical explanation for
this unusual phenomenon of Hindus insisting on worshipping in a mosque's
courtyard, they testify to the existing practice. And these Hindus were
going into a mosque courtyard for specifically Hindu worship -- not for
common Hindu-Muslim worship of some local Sufi, as you find in some
places, but for separate Hindu worship of Lord Ram. The JNU historians
completely fail to explain this well attested fact.

The attachment of the Hindus to the Babri Masjid spot cannot reasonably
have originated in the period when the mosque was standing there. For
the sake of argument, we might opine that perhaps a great miracle
happened on the spot, sometime later than 1528: but in that case, there
would be a tradition saying so. No, the Hindus' attachment to the spot
clearly dates back to pre-Masjid days, and stems from a pre-existent
tradition of worship on that very spot. Since this near inevitable
assumption is corroborated by all relevant documents and by the local
Hindu tradition, and is not contradicted by any authentic source giving
a different explanation, we might as well accept it.

However, while the inference that there was a pre- existent tradition of
worship on the spot is necessary for explaining the Hindus'
centuries-long attachment to the place, it may not be sufficient. There
are many destroyed temples to which Hindus have not kept returning. They
simply built a new temple somewhere else, and even when Muslim power
ended, they stayed with the new arrangement and forgot about the
destroyed and abandoned temple. If they were so attached to the place,
it is probably not because the erstwhile temple had made it important,
but because the place had an importance of its own, and retained its
special character even regardless of there being a temple in place or
not. This assumption is coherent with the unanimous and uncontradicted
testimony of Hindu and pre-colonial Muslim and Western sources, that the
place was believed to be Ram's birthplace.

When in December 1990 the Chandra Shekhar government asked both parties
to collect evidence for their case, a small group of scholars, on being
invited by the VHP, traced some more strong pieces of documentary
evidence. At the same time, dr. S.P. Gupta and Prof. B.B. Lal came out
with unambiguous archaeological and iconographical proof that a
Vaishnava temple has stood at the site until it was replaced with the
Babri Masjid. By contrast, the Babri Masjid Action Committee could only
muster a pile of newspaper clippings, articles and book extracts by
partisan writers who gave their anti-Mandir opinion, but no evidence
whatsoever. The Hindu team of scholars had no difficulty in
demonstrating, in a rejoinder, the utter lack of proof value of the
AIBMAC *evidence*. The VHP documents Evidence for the Ram Janmabhoomi
Mandir and Rejoinder to the AIBMAC Documents are the definitive
scholarly statement on the Ayodhya dispute.

There is one architectural argument which has not been used in the VHP
evidence bundle, though it seems quite pertinent to me. The central dome
of the Masjid is slightly deformed, and it is supported by a front wall
that forms a sort of screen before part of the dome. The reason seems to
be that the builders had to adjust the upper part of the Masjid to the
walls and pillars of the pre-existing Mandir, which they were
incorporating rather than razing them flat and starting totally anew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 1.2 Methodological Errors

In order to save their contention that the Babri Masjid was not built on
a Hindu place of worship (let alone a specially sacred place), several
Babarwadis have resorted to questioning the validity of the documents
attesting the Hindu worship in the Masjid courtyard during the period of
Muslim rule. Their claim is that all those authors, as well as the Hindu
worshippers who they described, were mistaken : they had unknowingly
swallowed a false rumor which from about 1800 onwards the British had
consciously floated in order to create Hindu-Muslim riots, which they
hoped would help them in eventually annexing Awadh, the state of which
Ayodhya was a part. This hypothesis is quite an amazing construction.

First of all, four of the sources are pre-1800. The Western travelers
William Finch and father Tieffenthaler visited Ayodhya in 1608 and 1767
respectively. A document by a Faizabad Qazi proving that Hindus used the
mosque courtyard for worship and wanted to take over the Masjid itself,
and a letter by Aurangzeb's granddaughter encouraging the Muslims to
assert their hold over ex- Hindu shrines at Varanasi, Mathura and
Ayodhya, were written in the first half of the eighteenth century.

Secondly, the Babarwadis want us to believe that the local Hindus
decided to set up a puja tradition in a mosque courtyard and thereby
constantly risk a lot of trouble with the Muslim population and rulers,
just because some foreign paleface came to tell them that in their
elaborate Ram tradition one little piece of information was missing,
which he then promptly furnished : Ram had been born right there on that
mosque spot. This is not at all coherent with all that we know about
religious traditions in general and brahminical pilgrimage traditions in
particular : it arbitrarily assumed an extreme gullibility, an
astonishing lack of serieux concerning the native sacred tradition among
the very guardians of that tradition, and an uncharacteristic openness
to utterly non-expert foreign opinion (even today they will have nothing
of the chronology imposed on Indian history by scholars).

Thirdly, that the British concocted a story of temple demolition and
replacement by a mosque, because that would create riots, presupposes
that they had to break a state of communal harmony, which existed in
spite of the fact that the country was full of demolished temple
demolitions failed to create trouble, why concoct one? Or why not start
with exploiting to the full the trouble- making potential of the
non-concocted temple demolitions? The postulated rumour is not known to
be part of a British tactic attested anywhere.

But all right, sometimes very improbable and uncharacteristic scenarios
turn out to be true,. So even while the hypothesis of the British
concoction of a Ram temple destroyed by Babar is grossly incoherent with
our general knowledge relevant to the issue, I would be willing to
consider it if they manage to come up with a single positive indication
: a letter by a British officer mentioning the creation of this rumour,
for instance. But the 25 eminent JNU historians, quoted by every
secularist in India, and other academics like Gyanendra Pandey or R.S.
Sharma, have not come up with a single piece of evidence. In the
numerous and voluminous archives of the British Raj that are still
extant, they have not found anything. They have not even come up with
any similar British ruse in any other part of India. Therefore, the
hypothesis that the destruction of a Hindu temple and its replacement by
the Babri Masjid is merely a rumour created by the British as part of
their *"divide and rule"* policy, has to be rejected as both extremely
improbable and totally unsupported by evidence.

The British concoction hypothesis is not only untenable. It is so far
off the mark, so totally out of tune with the known historical and
cultural context, so totally unsuggested by any relevant document, that
no unbiased historian would ever have come up with it. It warrants a
suspicion against the pretended objectivity and scientific temper of the
secularist participants in this debate.

In methodological terms, we could say that the pro-Babri case, including
the JNU professors' statement, violates the principle that *"entities
should not be multiplied beyond necessity"*, also know as *"Occam's
razor"*. Against every element in the very coherent hypothesis of the
pre- existent Ram Mandir, they have to invent a counter- hypothesis,
altogether a long string of separate ad hoc hypotheses, of which it
remains to be proven that they add up to a coherent scenario. What is
more, while the Ram Mandir hypothesis is coherent with well-established
behavior patterns (of general city building, of Hindu devotion, of
Muslim conquest, of British colonial policy), and postulates little more
than that the general pattern applied in Ayodhya as well, the JNU
historians continually have to postulate uncharacteristic courses of
events.

Thus, in postulating that the Babri Masjid was built on empty land, they
implicitly postulate that the Ayodhya people for some reason made an
exception to the custom of building something important on the place
which by its elevation was the place of honour in their city. This
special entity which the JNU historians implicitly create within their
theory, and of which they should accept the burden of tracing the
existence in reality.

For another example, in postulating that the Hindus did not have a
pre-1528 tradition of worship on the Janmabhoomi spot, they are forced
to create within their scenario a reason why the Hindus suddenly engaged
in the strange behavior of defying the Muslim rulers by starting a
strictly Hindu worship right in a mosque's courtyard. They implicitly
postulate a highly unusual event that made the Hindus behave so
uncharacteristically. This event is another entity they create, and of
which they should show the historicity.

When you analyze and explicate all the implications of the secularist
historians' version of the Babri Masjid story, you find that they in
fact postulate a great many unusual entities. And they create them
purely in the air : not a trace of evidence of a reason for leaving the
place of honour in Ayodhya unused, no evidence for an event that made
the Hindus start worship in the till then unimportant mosque courtyard,
no evidence for a British rumour campaign. If the (explicitly or
implicitly) postulated scenario elements were found to correspond to a
real historical entity or event, then they would not be a multiplication
of entities beyond necessity. But so far, the anti-Mandir scenario is
dependent on a multiplicity of entities postulated ad hoc, beyond
necessity. Beyond necessity, because there is a coherent alternative
scenario that integrates all the available information : the Ram Mandir
hypothesis.

The argumentation developed by anti-Mandir polemists like Syed
Shahabuddin, Mrs. Surinder Kaur [⁷](notes.htm#note7), and the JNU
historians, is simply unbecoming of educated people. This postulating of
very improbable theoretical possibilities without any coherence is not
really the scholarly defense of an alternative Ayodhya scenario, it is
just a diversionary tactic made up to put the pro- Mandir people on the
defensive. As the historian Sita Ram Goel has said, it is a typical
strategy of unscrupled lawyers. For instance, in the Indira Gandhi
murder trial, the facts were amply clear, and all that an honest defense
lawyer could do, was to pleas circumstances in order to avert the death
penalty. But no, they constructed a fantastic scenario, bringing in a
conspiracy involving Indira's son Rajiv, totally unfounded, but enough
to jeopardize the prosecution case for a little while, by forcing it to
prove what it had considered evident and already sufficiently proven. Of
course, lawyers are paid by clients to try such un- truthful tactics, so
we may perhaps forgive them. In the case of historians, or even for
politicians claiming high ideals, this is unacceptable.

Incidentally, the same methodological mistake is made, though less
blatantly, in the discussion of Ayodhya's ancient history. The
contention that the Ramayana is just fictional, postulates a non-typical
cultural phenomenon which needs an explanation, a reason (i.e. a
theoretical entity). After all, what great epic in any ancient culture
is known to have been purely fiction? Western scholars long thought that
Homer's epic on the Trojan war was pure fiction, until Heinrich
Schliemann started digging and found Troy. So long as no independent
indications for the Ramayana's purely fictional character are given, it
is more logical to assume that, like most ancient epics, it has a
historical core with a lot of fabulation around it.

But the ancient history is not what concerns us here. It is far more
difficult to get at conclusive evidence regarding Ram's existence, era,
abode etc., but fortunately it is not important for the political issue
which historians are called upon to help solve. Once it is established
that there was a Ram temple on the spot, and that there is a genuine
tradition that considers it Ram's birthplace, then the am Janmabhoomi
should get equal respect with other sacred places, like the Kaaba, of
whom nobody asks whether Mohammed's claim that it was built by Abraham,
is at all historical. The question is only whether it is indeed a Hindu
sacred place, not why it is one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 1.3 Who built Babar's mosque?

An entirely different aspect of the Babri Masjid's history is whether it
really was built by Babar (or his lieutenant Mir Baqi) at all. The JNU
historians have chosen to cast some doubt on this assumption, which so
far had seemed evident because it is confirmed by the Persian
inscriptions on the building, itself. Another secularist, Sushil
Shrivastava, has made much of the matter, and opines that the
inscriptions are a later forgery (on the ground that the calligraphic
style is anachronistic), and that the structure was built under
Khwaja-i-Jahan in the fourteenth century[⁸](notes.htm#note8). His
justification for this dating is the architecture of the building,
especially its imperfect domes, which in his opinion must have been
built before the dome architecture was perfected under the Delhi-based
Turkish sultans in the fifteenth century.

Of course, this architectural anachronism, it at all substantiated, can
easily be explained in other ways, starting with the general fact that
architectural innovations spread only gradually. Moreover, Mr.
Srivastava's somewhat unexpected theory leaves its proponent with the
task of explaining how and why the mosque came to be associated with
Babar. On the other hand, it would take the last bit of force out of the
(already discredited) argument that Babar cannot have demolished a
temple on that spot as sources of the Moghul period do not mention the
temple demolition : the *"Babri Masjid would have been a
long-accomplished fact by the Moghul period, but it could just as much
have replaced a Hindu temple under an earlier ruler"*.

In fact, the two contentions that the Mosque was built before Babar, and
that it was built on a forcibly demolished temple, have been combined by
R. Nath. when he read in the Indian Express that pages of his own book
History of Mughal Architecture had been included in the pro-Babri and
anti-Mandir evidence of the BMAC, presented to the government of India
on December 23, 1990, he sent in a reply, in which he stated that he was
completely sure that the Masjid had been built on a temple, and that
inspection on the spot had confirmed him in this conviction. On the
other hand, he argued that the mosque cannot have been built by Babar or
Mir Baqi, because in their brief stay in this area they had to wage a
difficult struggle against the Pathans, and had no time for building
mosques. Rather, the earlier Muslim rulers of the area could have
demolished the temple and replaced it with the mosque. Mir Baqi at most
renovated it, and does not claim more than that this happened *under
Babar's reign* (rather than *at Babar's command*, though this
translation is disputed).

But theories about the exact date of the Babri Masjid construction are
not really to the point, except in so far as they can or cannot be
coordinated with other data. At any rate, the Muslim habit of destroying
Hindu temples and replacing them with mosques, often using some of the
temple materials as a display of victory over Paganism, has remained
unchanged during the entire Turko- Afghan and Moghul period. Whether the
temple was destroyed by Mohammed Ghori in 1194, or by Babar, or by a
ruler in between these two, or even by more than one of them (since
Hindus were tireless rebuilders if given a chance), this all makes no
difference to the facts pertinent for the Hindu case: one, there was a
temple there since at least the eleventh century, attested by
archaeology : two, the use of temple materials in the Babri Masjid
entirely fulfills a set pattern of temple destruction followed by
replacement with a mosque; three, Hindus continued to worship on the
spot to the extent possible, as witnessed by travelers and locals,
something they would never have done except on a specially sacred spot
and in continuation of a pre-Masjid tradition.

In keeping with the internationally accepted standards of methodology
and inference in scientific history-writing, we may conclude that all
the indications available confirm the traditional belief, consensually
held by the local Muslims as well as Hindus, that the Babri Masjid was
built in replacement of a Hindu temple where Ram worship used to take
place.

In fact, this conclusion is merely a restatement of what was a matter of
consensus until a few years ago. This time it is supported by a bundle
of evidence, but it had been known all along. It is only recently that
politically motivated academics have manufactured doubts concerning this
coherent and well-attested tradition. And it is not on the strength of
arguments, but exclusively through their grip on the media, that they
temporarily managed to create the impression that the Hindu case was
built on *myth* and *concoction*.

As Lenin, Goebbels and other masters of lies knew, it is sufficient to
repeat a big lie often enough, to make it pass as truth. So, the truly
outstanding feature of the Leftists' and Muslim fanatics' campaign of
distortion has been its shameless persistence. No matter what hard
evidence they got confronted with, the Romila Thapars and R.S. Sharmas
just kept on lambasting the Hindu side for *distorting* history and
*concocting evidence* and for merely *bluffing* in the face of
*"incontrovertible evidence that no Ram temple ever stood on the site"*.
While they had not given any such evidence nor replied to the pro-Mandir
evidence (they have kept on willfully ignoring B.B. Lal's affirmation of
strong archaeological evidence, and have not addressed the massive
documentary evidence at all)[⁹](notes.htm#note9), they kept up the
offensive and absurdly accused the other side of not facing *the
evidence*. The way the anti-Mandir falsehoods have been given wide
currency in 1989-91 will make an interesting case study for future
scholars. A classic in propaganda.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
