+++
title = "07 6.1 Hindu Society"

+++
# 6. Communalists and their communities

## 6.1 Hindu Society

In many press reports, it has been said that the Ayodhya conflict is a
conflict between *the Hindus* and *the Muslims*. Upon closer inspection,
that may not be entirely accurate.

JNU historian Bipan Chandra has often stated that the religious
community is really a fictional entity which in people's consciousness
only blurs the real-life categories like socio-economical class. The
sense of being a member of a religious community such as *the Hindus* or
*the Muslims* is merely *false consciousness*, fostered by leaders who
want to use the masses for their own social and political ambitions.
While I do not subscribe to this Marxist view, I do recognize that in
many cases the claim of *communal* leaders of being their entire
community's mouthpiece, is false.

Thus, it is very doubtful that the agitation against the 1985 Supreme
Court ruling in the Shah Bano case, i.e. against a Muslim divorcee's
right to alimony, was an expression of the wishes of the 50% women in
the Muslim community. And the Congress government's decision to give in
to this agitation was reprehensible not only for being a case of
*minority appeasement*, but also for treating the vocal group of
fanatical Muslims as the real representatives of the Muslim community ,
and ignoring the countercurrent of women's organizations and
intellectuals (including cabinet minister Mohammed Arif Khan).

So in the Ayodhya case, to what extent can we say that the agitation on
both sides is supported by the communities concerned?

On the Hindu side, I find it striking how almost every person I
questioned, has shed all shame of expressing his support for the Ram
Janmabhoomi cause. Many people who in 1989, when questioned by this
foreigner, still took care not to sound too involved (by calling it a
false problem, a creation of the politicians, or by adding to their
basic support to the cause a criticism of the VHP people etc.), now
simply say : *"Well, I am a Hindu. Of course I think the Mandir should
be built."* The shooting of several hundreds of Kar Sevaks on November 2
has of course radicalized many half-hearted supporters.

Most of the people who panic about *secularism in danger* and write grim
articles against the Janmabhoomi campaign, are only Hindus in name. Many
of them are practicing communists, and most of them belong to the
Western- educated elite who are convinced that Hinduism is India's
biggest problem. They are still a rather small minority among the
Hindus. What is harder to assess, is how many *"Backward"* Hindus, who
have supported V.P. Singh and Mulayam Singh Yadav in their championing
of the Backward Caste cause and the Mandal Report implementation, at
heart supported these leaders on the Ayodhya issue. Most of my contacts
with Indians have been in an urban setting, so my impression about the
rural public opinion is not first-hand. But for what it is worth, I
share the opinion of some journalists that many rural people who support
the Mandir, would vote for Mulayam or V.P. Singh anyway, because of
their stand on Mandal; which conversely means that the electoral support
by Backward Hindus for the Janata Dal should by no means be taken as a
head count of anti-Mandir opinion.

If both the Janata Dal (S) and Congress were so afraid of elections
after V.P. Singh's fall, it was because they knew that this time many
people were going to vote for the Mandir party, and against the
undecided and Masjid parties. Even after some papers reported that many
villagers who declared they would vote for either Janata Dal because
they wanted the Mandal recommendations to be implemented, eventhough
they were just as much in favour of the building of the Mandir, the
*secularist* parties did not want to take chances.

The support base for the Mandir is larger than the BJP electorate. It is
a fact that Advani's Rathyatra brought out far more people than
Mulayam's rallies for secularism, even when all the communist and Muslim
fundamentalist organizations systematically attended the latter, and
even while the state machinery had been used to mobilize for them. There
is simply no honest doubt that the Ram Janmabhoomi movement had become a
genuine mass movement, the biggest in Indian history, and not just an
artificial creation for the BJP's political gain.

The reason why most of the common Hindus could be mobilized for the Ram
Janmabhoomi cause, is not that the Hindus have become so fanatical. On
the contrary, it is because they perceive that the building of the
Mandir and the relocating of the existing structure is a very reasonable
and justifiable project. They all know that Muslim rulers have brought
immense suffering over the Hindu population for destroyed, no fanatic
needs to tell them that. And they have heard that the disputed place is
in use as a temple since 1949, that it is functionally not a mosque at
all, so the rule that any other community's place of worship should be
respected just doesn't apply. They do not see why anyone should object
to their replacing the existing structure with proper Hindu temple
architecture. They consider it an entirely internal affair of the Hindu
community, and they perceive the attempts to stop them as yet another
aggression against Hinduism by its enemies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 6.2 The Muslim community

On the Muslim side, the picture is less solid. And it is less solid,
because it does indeed take fanaticism to uphold the Babri Masjid cause.
The Muslim leaders' position is, in effect, that Hindus cannot take back
any of the thousands of places of worship that have been stolen from
them, but that they themselves can take possession of a flourishing
Hindu temple, standing on a spot which the Hindus consider sacred,
simply because it has been a mosque more than fifty years ago. The
common Muslim, even if not informed about all the details of the matter,
senses that this position is not equitable. That is why many ordinary
people in the Muslim community are quite ready to leave the disputed
site entirely to the Hindus, in exchange for more communal peace and a
guarantee that no functioning mosques will be demanded for take-over by
the Hindus.

The most outspoken defender of Muslim agreement to the building of a new
Mandir on the disputed site and shifting of the Babri structure, has
been Indian Muslim Youth Conference president Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi. He
declared : *"It is the duty of every nationalist Indian to protect the
birthplace of Lord Rama to save India's honour, prestige and cultural
heritage.... Anti-national and communal activities of Muslim
fundamentalists are a blot on the entire community... It is the duty of
all nationalist Muslims to expose such designs and accept the
truth."*[⁵³](notes.htm#note53)

He led a number of his organization's members into participation in the
kar Seva, and some of them even into Mulayam's jails. It is also
reported that two journalists, S.A. Naqvi and Tanveer Haider Usmani,
president and vice-president of the Kanpur Press Club, *"were arrested
here today, together with some other Muslims, when they were going to
Ayodhya for the proposed Kar Seva"*.[⁵⁴](notes.htm#note54) In this
category are also the numerous Muslims belonging to the BJP and even to
the Shiv Sena, including mr. Advani's chauffeur during the Rathyatra,
and BJP-leader Sikander Bakht, who flagged off the Rathyatra at the
Somnath temple.

But there are also many anonymous Muslims, some of whom I talked to in
teastalls or on trains, who are, in different degrees, willing to make
the asked-for concession to the Hindu attachment to the disputed site.
And some Muslims write to the papers to express what they think of it.
Mr. M.N.H. Siddiqui from Lucknow proposes that *"Muslims themselves
should shift the mosque... Ram temple should be constructed in that
place and Muslims should volunteer to contribute something to it as a
gesture of goodwill... Amendment be made in the Constitution to the
effect that the status quo of 1947 be
maintained..."*[⁵⁵](notes.htm#note55)

Abdul Moin from Lucknow writes :*"All Muslims agree that namaz cannot be
offered if the mosque is built on disputed land or by demolishing the
temple... What is the harm if the mosque is shifted brick by brick to
some other place? For a building can be shifted but not a birth place...
We should agree to shift the mosque to some other place and thereby
maintain peace and brotherhood in our country and show the world our
secular credentials."*[⁵⁶](notes.htm#note56)

Ahmed Zakaria is quoted by Farzana Versey as saying : *"There is
absolutely no question of our identity being submerged. The Babri Masjid
committee does not represent all Muslims. How can two or three people
decide ?"* And Farzana Versey, apparently summing up mr. Zakaria's
opinion, adds : *"The issue is not the mosque. Most Muslims would not
mind giving it away, but what after that ?"*[⁵⁷](notes.htm#note57) There
is some apprehension that a concession will be a sign of weakness and
will make the Hindus more aggressive. But the acceptance of the Hindu
character of the disputed site is in itself not deemed unreasonable.

Replying to another letter-writer, mr. Azhar Ahmed Ansari from Meerut
writes : *"He is mistaken in believing that the Muslim minority values
the existing structure in Ayodhya. The fact is that the Muslim masses
set no store by this dilapidated edifice since its utility as a mosque
is extremely doubtful with the presence of numerous idols... Although
most of the icons are mutilated, they nevertheless remain what they are
: an anathema to Islamic theology, ruling out namaz in their presence.
The Muslim masses have begun to understand this situation as also the
fact that no namaz has been offered here in the memory of any living
person. As many as 18 Muslims hailing from Ayodhya and Faizabad have
submitted an affidavit before the High Court bench hearing the Ram
Janmabhoomi case, that the Babri Masjid is of no use to the followers of
Islam since it contains icons."*[⁵⁸](notes.htm#note58)

Mr. Rafat Sayeed does not like to be pressured into handing over
mosques, but *"as the mosque has been made out to be a symbol of an
unpleasant past and humiliation, as Abu Nadeem suggests, let an
exception be made and the masjid shifted and rebuilt in an orderly
manner under expert guidance."*[⁵⁹](notes.htm#note59)

Mr. Shad Kidwai advises his fellow Muslim : *"I Invite all thinking
Muslims to gift the Ayodhya mosque to the Hindus... Our magnanimity at
this critical juncture will usher in an era of understanding and will, I
am convinced, evoke an equally warm response from all thinking Hindus.
But Muslims should justifiably demand a constitutional guarantee that
the nature of all religious places as on August 15, 1947, will not be
allowed to be altered."*[⁶⁰](notes.htm#note60) A similar proposal has
been made by Rasheed Talib[⁶¹](notes.htm#note61), which seems to have
earned him the wrath of some Muslim leaders.[⁶²](notes.htm#note62)

And finally, there is none other than Asghar Ali Engineer, who has
written : *"The Muslims, in my opinion, should show magnanimity and
\[make\] a noble gesture of gifting away the
mosque..."*[⁶³](notes.htm#note63)

The proposals made by these Muslims are not far removed from the one
made by L.K. Advani on 13 August 1990.[⁶⁴](notes.htm#note64) He
suggested that Muslims leave the site to the Hindus, and promised that
in return he would persuade the VHP leadership to even renounce its
demand for the hand-over of the disputed sites in Mathura and Varanasi.
Advani's own supporters were not too happy with his proposals. One of
them said : *"You are saying to the Muslims: give us Ayodhya and then
you can take the rest of India."* The VHP later declared that it could
not agree to this give away of two sacred places, and BJP leader Rajmata
Vijaya Raje Scindia said that mr. Advani had no authority to make such
concessions on behalf of the Hindus. While the demand for the return of
all the thousands of places of worship forcibly taken by Muslims is
voiced only by an extremist fringe in the VHP and Bajrang Dal, the
attachment to the three places specially dedicated to Shiva (the Kashi
Vishvanath in Varanasi), Krishna (his Janmasthan in Mathura) and Rama is
non-negotiable for most activist Hindus.

Even so, while Advani offered to renounce all claims, no matter how
justified, to any disputed place beyond this one Ram Janmabhoomi, his
offer was spurned by Syed Shahabuddin. He said that first raising the
demand to three temple hand-over as a compromise was just an old
merchant's trick. As if the demand for the return of these sacred places
is new and just a bargaining chip : the Hindus have rebuilt and
reclaimed the Krishna and Shiva temples (as well as other demolished
temples) many times, until Aurangzeb imposed the structures standing
there till today. After independence, the demand for the handover of
these three places was made in Parliament on September 1, 1961 by the
Jan Sangh leader Balraj Madhok (who was to reiterate it in the same
forum in 1968), even before the VHP came into
existence.[⁶⁵](notes.htm#note65) The demand for three temples was itself
already very modest compared to the thousands of temples-turned-mosque
which the Hindus could claim (it was, moreover, coupled with an offer to
pay for the building of three fine mosques nearby). So, Shahabuddin's
reply had in reality nothing to do with bargaining chips and merchants'
tricks.

The real reason for refusing any deal on the disputed temple sites was
more probably this. Since the Quran does not say that Muslims should
make compromise with the Kafirs, Shahabuddin and other Muslim leaders
who have a *"Muslim India"* in mind, could not but refuse every
concession. It reminded the Hindus of that scene in the Mahabharat : the
Pandavas offer the Kauravas the whole country except for five villages,
whereupon the Kauravas declare they would not grant them even a speck of
land the size of a pinhead. Of course, as Krishna pointed out to the
Pandavas, with such self-righteous and intransigent fanatics, no
compromise is possible. They have to be defeated.

This boundless self-righteousness on the part of certain Muslim leaders
is bound to confirm the negative image that Islam has in the Hindu mind.
The continued Muslim intransigence represented by a Shahabuddin
genuinely angers many Hindus. And when the confrontation, which
communalist leaders keep preferring to any kind of compromise,
materializes into riots, it is the common Muslim, not the communalist
leader, who is bearing the consequences. If only for his own safety, if
only for some peace with his neighbours, the common Muslim is not averse
to compromise. He is willing and able (with the open-mindedness which is
a remarkably strong trait in the common people in India) to see the
Hindu side of the controversy.

But these conciliating voices in the Muslim community have not been
heard at all. Not by the V.P. Singh government, which has treated BMAC
leader Abdullah Bukhari as a high-powered cabinet minister (the
*"Sarkari Imam"*). Not by the government of Chandra Shekhar, who is
closely linked with BMMCC leader Syed Shahabuddin. Certainly not by
Mulayam's Uttar Pradesh Ministry, counting among its members BMAC
co-founder Mohammed Azam Khan. Nor even by Rajiv Gandhi's Congress
Party, whose spokesman M.J. Akbar uses the secularism plank as just
another forum for the anti-Mandir and anti-Hindu
campaign.[⁶⁶](notes.htm#note66)

What is far worse is that the secularist intelligentsia have joined the
politicians' effort to black out the conciliatory current within Muslim
opinion, and have broadcast that very perception which is basic to the
fanatic leaders' stand, viz. that *"Islam is in danger"* and that
absolutely no concession to *"Hindu communalism"* can be tolerated. The
whole jeremiad of Muslims being a poor and persecuted community, of
communal peace (i.e., for the ordinary Muslim, his own safety) standing
or falling with the Babri Masjid, of Advani being a fascist out to
destroy the Muslims, all this press hysteria was exactly what the Muslim
communal leaders wanted the common Muslim to hear and believe. The
opinion of some Hindu authors[⁶⁷](notes.htm#note67), that secularist
rhetoric is effectively a some screen behind which the Muslim
communalists can steal a march, stands vindicated.

Fortunately, human nature is stronger than even Islamic fanaticism. When
Chandra Shekhar formed his Cabinet, he kept several portfolios to
himself, intending to give them to somewhat controversial friends. Who
would be among the lucky ones ? The answer came in the form of a letter
by Syed Shahabuddin, published in Indian Express on December 13, 1990.
He wrote: *"The law protects the Babri Masjid even if it was constructed
on the site of a temple after demolishing it, but in the interest of
communal amity, as a one-time exception, the Muslim community is ready
to make the offer as a moral gesture, in accordance with the
Shariat."*[⁶⁸](notes.htm#note68) Here also, the question is legitimate
whether he can really speak for *"the Muslim community"*. Nonetheless,
it is fortunate that Syed Shahabuddin seems to prefer a ministerial post
to the lost cause of Babri Masjid.

However, one Muslim's temporary human weakness could not suffice for
bringing the entire Muslim side to accepting the Hindu rights to the
Janmabhoomi spot. With two rivaling Masjid Committees around, any
concession would only be branded as a betrayal by the other committee.
So, actually making a concession was very difficult, but even if made,
it would not bring conciliation, since the other committee would not
endorse it and continue threatening *agitation* if the Babri structure
were touched.

So, even when after 2 November 1990 nobody in his right mind presisted
in denying the Hindus the right to their sacred place, a decisive
fraction in the Muslim leadership (supported by a decisive fraction in
the secularist intelligentsia) continued to insist on confrontation. The
arrangement which had seemed to be in the making, was forgotten and Syed
Shahabuddin resumed his more familiar hard-line tirades. As with the
Kauravas, no compromise with the Muslim fundamentalists.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
