+++
title = "31 "

+++
<div align="right">

**28.  S. Omkar**

</div>

I refer to the document “Time For Stock Taking”. I am surprised that the
Sangh Parivar has been popularizing these eight slogans. Obviously, the
leaders of the Sangh Parivar have not read either the Bible or the
Quran. If they had read them, they would not be making such ridiculous
statements. **With friends like these, Hindus do not need enemies.**

*1. What is the harm in adding Jesus and Muhammad to the 33 crore Hindu
gods and goddesses?*  
I do not know where this number 33 crore came from because even a
language rich in vocabulary such as Sanskrit does not have 33 crore
words. In any case, all the Hindu deities are different representations
of the one God, and believing in one does not involve denial of others.
Jesus and Muhammad do not fall in the category of deities. Also,
according to the New Testament and the Quran, if one does not believe in
Jesus or Allah (together with Muhammad) respectively as the only
saviour, then one is doomed to eternal hell. If one believes in Jesus or
if one believes in Allah (with Muhammad), then it is not permissible to
worship any other deity. Therefore, Jesus and Allah (with Muhammad)
cannot be included in Hindu deities.

**Will the Muslims or Christians agree to include a Hindu deity as part
of their worship?**

*2. All religions (including Islam) lead to God.*  
Why is it that only Hindus are asked to make this statement which
indirectly implies that all religions are the same? Christians call
Hindus heathens and some Christian preachers refer to Hindus as “devil
worshippers”. Muslims refer to Hindus as kafirs and the Allah of the
Quran exhorts Muslims to convert or kill all non-Muslims. The openness
of Hinduism does not mean that we should teach our children the myth
that all religions are the same when they are not. Also, if we do not
criticize the faults of Islam and Christianity (obviously Muslims and
Christians are not going to do so while they continue criticising
Hinduism), then Hindu children get a mistaken notion that only Hinduism
has faults. There is nothing wrong in telling the truth.

This type of statements which even Hindu preachers make (without having
read the Bible or the Quran) soften Hindus for conversion to
Christianity and Islam. If all religions are the same as only Hindus are
taught, then what is the harm in conversion to another faith? Of course,
no other religion makes this statement. They teach that only their
religion is the right one, that all other religions are wrong, and that
they must convert everyone else by hook or crook or even kill them.

*3. Islam is good but Muslims are bad.*  
Muslims are the product of Islam and behave the way they do because of
what Islam (Quran) teaches them. One of the basic tenets of Islam is
Jihad i.e. waging war against all non-Muslims with a view to converting
or killing them. There are many verses of the Quran in which Allah asks
Muslims to wage wars against non-Muslims. The manner in which Hindus and
Sikhs of Pakistan were killed and expelled at the time of partition was
no accident. Muslims of Pakistan were following the teachings of Islam.
Muhammad himself had treated the Jews of Arabia in exactly the same way.

I am not making any comments on the other five items. I endorse Mr.
Godbole’s comments and ask the misguided Hindus to read the Quran, the
Sunnah, and the Bible before they make ridiculous statements of the type
mentioned in this document.

**Finally, while I am giving my name and address for your information,
it is to be clearly understood that they are not to be published or
revealed in any form. If this is not acceptable, then you may not
publish my comments under my name.**  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is a Hindu settled abroad. He has asked us not to reveal his
real name and address. We have given him a pseudonym.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


