+++
title = "65 "

+++
<div align="right">

*The Sunday Observer*  
New Delhi, 9-15 April 1995  
**6. Khurana’s go-slow on migrants**  
**issue irks hawks**  
Shubhendu Parth

</div>

NEW DELHI, APRIL, 8 - Delhi Chief Minister Madan Lal Khurana has decided
to go slow on the issue of deporting illegal Bangladeshi migrants from
the National Capital Territory \[NCT\] region, belying expectations that
his government would take a cue from its counterpart in Maharashtra,
where his Bharatiya Janata Party is ruling in alliance with the Shiv
Sena.

According to sources in the BJP’s Delhi unit, the move has been dictated
by the forthcoming Lok Sabha elections in 1996. Bangladeshi nationals,
estimated to number three lakh, form a major part of the electorate in
some parts of East Delhi, having been settled there with the sole motive
of creating a vote bank. A Delhi administration official who had
supervised electoral enrolment in one of the NCT constituencies said on
condition of anonymity that even a few BJP leaders were involved in this
racket.

The go-slow instruction has also been prompted by a recent Supreme Court
directive asking the state administration to independently hear each and
every individual suspected of being a foreign national.

However, the decision has enraged that section of the BJP leadership
which is closely linked to the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh and the
Vishwa Hindu Parishad. B.L. Sharma ‘Prem’, member of Parliament from
East Delhi, reacted strongly by saying Khurana had no power to take such
a decision. “The decision has to be taken by the central leadership,” he
thundered.

The MP, one of the BJP’s most vocal politicians, has for long been
demanding the deportation of Bangladeshi Muslims from the capital. “The
problem should be solved once and for all,” he said, “even if force has
to be applied.”

Unfortunately for ‘Prem’, the party’s central leadership too is
uncertain what to do. In fact, its ‘soft’ stand on Shiv Sena chief Bal
Thackeray’s call for the eviction of illegal Bangladeshi migrants has
created much confusion in the BJP ranks. ‘Prem’ himself acknowledged as
much, and said that as a committed party worker he would abide by the
collective decision.

The BJP sources said that though the deportation of illegal migrants was
one of the party’s main electoral slogans in November 1993, it has been
unable to do much after forming the government in Delhi because the NCT
does not have an independent home department and the issue is being
handled by the Union home ministry.\*  
 

**Footnotes:**

\* We have misplaced and not been able to find in our collection in a
significant report according to which, soon after becoming the Chief
Minister of Delhi State, Madan Lal Khurana recommended in so many words
that the Muslim infiltrators should be equipped with Green Cards for
staying and working in India, and helped to become Indian citizens in
due course.  It was left to some Congress leaders to protest that Green
Cards were never and nowhere given to illegal immigrants, and that no
country in the world can afford to give Green Cards when the number of
immigrants runs into millions. Khurana’s saying and doings over a number
of years leave the impression that he is more of a calculating machine
than a man with a moral sense, political or otherwise. His clowning for
keeping himself visible, never stops. There is no political sin under
the sky which he is unwilling to commit in order to gain a temporary
advantage. The alliance he has sought and succeeded in patching up are
fatal for Hindu society.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


