+++
title = "05 PRELUDE TO GENOCIDE OF HINDUS AND SIKHS N.-W. FRONTIER PROVINCE MASSACRIES AND THE PUNJAB MUSLIM LEAGUE AGITATION"

+++
**PRELUDE TO GENOCIDE OF HINDUS AND SIKHS**

N.-W. FRONTIER PROVINCE MASSACRIES AND THE  
PUNJAB MUSLIM LEAGUE AGITATION

In the North-Western Frontier Province a Congress Ministry came into
power after defeating a Muslim League Ministry on the floor of the
Provincial Legislature.  The Muslim League regarded this Province as one
of its especial preserves, for the population was overwhelmingly
Muslim.  But the freedom-loving Pathan character under the guidance of
Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan and his brother, Dr. Khan Sahib, had preferred
the Congress way over the League way, which was known to be working in
collusion with the British bureaucracy, and which moreover, was
dominated by reactionary feudal elements-the nawabs and title-holders
and the fanatical mullahs.  When the Muslim League Direct Action
campaign was started, the League leaders naturally thought of stirring
up trouble in the North-Western Frontier Province, and thus turning the
tide against the Congress ministry, which would naturally pursue a
policy of cementing the good relations between Muslims and non-Muslims. 
As early as July 28, 1946 as narrated earlier, trouble of quite serious
nature had occurred in Hazara district-an area which was particularly
susceptible to Muslim League propaganda.  Hazara is not properly
speaking a Pathan area; it is Punjabi-speaking, and not Pushtu, and in
its political character takes more after the Punjab, to which it is
cognate, than to the rest of the Frontier Province, which is trans-Indus
in respect of geography.  Local Muslims, along with fanatical marauders
from the tribal areas, whom loot and the desire for attacking
‘infidels’-be they Hindu, Sikh, Christian or any other-would always
bring hurtling down the valleys, looted and burnt Hindu and Sikh shops
and terrorized the Hindu and Sikh population of the Hazara district. 
Gurdwaras were attacked, their inmates killed and the holy. places
themselves desecrated.

The firm hand of the Congress Government of the Frontier Province for a
time kept the communal situation under control.  The League was busy
intriguing-and there is no doubt that in this intrigue for disturbing
the peace of the province, it had the active assistance of the local
British bureaucrats.  The attitude of the British bureaucracy was made
perfectly clear in the got-up attacks on Pandit Nehru’s party, when he
made his tour of the tribal areas as Vice-President of the Interim
Government of India.  This alliance between the League and the British
bureaucracy was in evidence everywhere all through the years 1946 and
1947 in stirring up attacks on non-Muslims in the Muslim-majority areas
of India.

Calcutta and Noakhali did not bring any condemnation from the League of
these criminal attacks on minorities.  Far from it-in the League Press
the attempt was made to shift the responsibility, where there
occurrences were admitted at all, on the Hindus.  The Muslim League did
not, to begin with, join the Interim Government.  The Congress got
associated five eminent and capable Muslims in the Interim Government,
to fill for the time being the seats which by agreement, the Muslim
League should have occupied.  One of these Muslim members of the Interim
Government, Dr. Shafaat Ahmed Khan was murderously attacked at Simla by
some League hirelings, a few days before the Interim Government was to
take office.  This attack was only part of the League campaign of murder
and assault on all who dared to differ from its policy.

In the Hazara District, which was selected by the Muslim League as the
venue of its operations against Sikhs and Hindus in July, 1946 and later
in December of the same year, the Muslim population is 94.94%. As a
matter of fact, in the entire province the Muslim percentage in the
population was as high as 91.79. In such a province the life of the
minorities is not worth a day’s purchase, if the majority decides to
make things hot for them.

On 7. 12. 1946 in the villages of Batal, Uggi, Sum Ilahi Mung and Garhi
Jallo, very serious and unprovoked attacks on Hindus and Sikhs
occurred.  In Batal 11 Hindus and Sikhs were killed, and 11 were
wounded.  Hindu and Sikh houses were looted.  The bazar of Uggi was
attacked and Hindu and Sikh shops were set on fire.  In this village 5
Hindus and Sikhs were killed.  In Sum Ilahi Mung, an attack was made on
the Hindu and Sikh evacuees from the two previously mentioned villages,
and 14 were killed, with 27 injured.  In Garhi Jallo stray killing of
Hindus and Sikhs continued, and the Gurdwara of the place was burnt
down.

The trouble spread to other parts also of Hazara District.  On
18.12.1946 in Garhi Habibullah, in Mansehra Tehsil, one Hindu was
abducted and later found killed.  In Havelian and Lahore (Hazara),
commencing on the same date anti-Hindu-Sikh rioting continued well on
into January, 1947.  A massacre of Hindus and Sikhs in Havelian was
averted only by the timely arrival of the military; but stray killing of
Hindus and Sikhs continued for weeks.  By the end of December, 1946
conditions in the Havelian area had deteriorated so far that all Hindus
and Sikhs of this area had to leave their homes and property at the
mercy of the Muslim marauders, and seek safety of life and honour in the
Punjab.

At a place called Daddar in Hazara District, on 11.12.1946, 40 Hindu and
Sikh evacuees from the surrounding area were waylaid by Muslims; 10 of
them were killed and the rest were seriously wounded.  All were deprived
of their belongings.

By the end of December, in Hazara it became a general uprising against
Hindus and Sikhs, who were killed and robbed, and their houses burnt and
sacred places desecrated.  This ‘holy’ war was carried into the village
of Mohri, Dival, Akhroota, Pipal, Jaba, Gohra, Phulgara, Dhanak, Muhari,
Karchhan, Malach, Dakhali Sair, Bafa, Sihalian, Samadhra, Jabori,
Sankiari, Balakot and Bhata.  In all these and other places Hindus and
Sikhs were killed, their houses looted and burnt down, Gurdwaras and/or
Hindu temples desecrated, Hindu and Sikh evacuees from places of danger
waylaid and attacked and the entire Hindu and Sikh population forced to
seek refuge in the Punjab.  As, however, the numbers involved were not
very large, and moreover, neither the Frontier Congress Government nor
the Congress-Panthic-Unionist Coalition Government of the Punjab wanted
to excite the Hindus and Sikhs of the Punjab, this serious campaign of
extermination against the Hindu and Sikh minorities was given the
minimum of publicity, and the general public never had a notion of the
serious magnitude or import of what was happening, or that another
Noakhali was being enacted at the other extreme of India.  The features
of Noakhali, or for the matter of that, of all Muslim attacks on
minorities, were repeated here-mass murder, looting, burning,
desecration, collusion between the police and officials and the
marauders, with the Muslim League working as the guiding hand in
pursuance of its Direct Action Programme, behind what was happening.

In some of these places wholesale massacre of the minorities occurred. 
In Bhata 116 Sikhs were burnt alive, and several shot dead.  In Malachh
115 Hindus and Sikhs were killed.

As has been said above, the general public in the Punjab had no notion
of the real scale of what was happening in Hazara.  Why at this time the
Muslim League did not try to stir up trouble in the Punjab, had a very
good reason behind it from the Muslim League point of view.  While in
the Frontier Province, the League could count on the 92 per cent.
majority of Muslim population and the comparative ignorance and
fanaticism of the local Muslim population, along with the bait of loot
which would draw tribesmen from the neighbouring hill-tracts; in the
Punjab the Hindu and Sikh minority was as strong as 44% and so could be
expected to give back to the attackers as good as they got, and in
certain districts to completely rout and smash them.  Moreover, the
Coalition Government, at that time in power in the Punjab, although
perched on a very shaky eminence, yet it knew that its very existence
depended upon its maintaining communal peace with all the resources in
its power.  Once communal trouble broke out, the coalition would break
down, with altogether unforeseenable consequences for the province.  So,
they maintained peace with the last ounce of their energy.  When
large-scale trouble broke out in Calcutta on the Direct Action Day, the
Punjab maintained peace-though a tense and precarious peace.  On August
29, 1946, which was Id, trouble was widely expected in the Punjab. 
Feverish apprehensions were entertained of another Calcutta being
enacted in Lahore; and the other Punjab towns too were awaiting the day
with anxiety.  But so strict was the vigilance of the Punjab Coalition
Government, and so well did the Muslim police and officials understand
that their Government meant business when it instructed them to maintain
peace at all costs, that not a single incident was allowed to occur
anywhere.  It was well-known that arms and incendiaries had been
collected by the Muslims in the Punjab, as in other provinces, by
August. 1946 and only the proverbial button awaited to be pressed for
horrors such as were later witnessed in Calcutta to be enacted.  But
August passed off peacefully and indeed, as long as the Coalition was in
power, disaster was staved off in the Punjab.  But mass-attack on the
minorities occurred with a vengeance as soon as the Coalition resigned
on March 2, 1947.

The Punjab continued to be tense all through the latter part of 1946 and
early 1947.  The Muslim League wanted to capture power in the Province,
but its intentions were now known to be so fascist, so totalitarian, and
its programme and policy so completely to be the enslavement, nay
elimination of minorities, that the League Party in the Punjab Assembly
although the largest single party in the House, could not get even a
single Hindu or Sikh M. L.  A. to give it support.

Not finding it possible by any professions of friendship or any
assurances to create confidence among the minorities, the League tried
its method of Direct Action in the Punjab to capture power and to
subjugate the minorities.

THE MUSLIM LEAGUE AGITATION IN THE PUNJAB, 1947

The Muslim League was on the look-out for an opportunity to wage their
war on the Coalition Government in the Punjab, which had so far
succeeded in maintaining peace-albeit a kind of ‘armed truce’-in the
Province.  The League gave all the provocation it could to the Coalition
Government, and to the Hindu and Sikh minorities.  The Muslim National
Guards recruitment proceeded with very increased speed during all the
months after the Direct Action Resolution of the Muslim League was
passed.  So great and ubiquitous was the organisation of the League
Private Army, the Muslim National Guards, that every Muslim mohalla,
every small town, sometimes every considerable village, had its own
National Guard contingent and its commander, called Salar.  One would be
surprised to find the organization existing very often in unlikely and
out-of-the-way places.  The Guard collected arms and petrol-almost
everywhere.  They received secret instructions from head-quarters, and
had a quasi-military, fascist kind of organization, with the rule of
implicit obedience to the orders of the leader.  An idea of the numbers
and of the formidable threat which the Muslim National Guard constituted
to the peace of the Punjab, can be formed from the fact that in the city
of Amritsar alone the National Guard razakars (volunteers) numbered
9,000, while in Lahore this number was estimated to be in the
neighbourhood of 10,000.

Since the Muslim National Guard were assuming such alarming proportions
the Coalition Government of the Punjab, on January 24, 1946 declared the
Muslim National Guards and along with it, the Rashtriya Swyam Sewak
Sangh, a private Hindu army, unlawful associations.  While this was
done, the Punjab Government in a *communique* made it clear that no
Government could tolerate the existence of private armies, which
constituted a grave menace to the existence of the State.

Declaring unlawful the Muslim National Guard perturbed the League
leaders a good deal.  It meant the weakening of the League’s power of
coercion of minorities.  Mr. Ghazanfar Ali, later a member of the
Interim Government on behalf of the League, called this banning “an
attempt to ban an important part of the activities of the Muslim League
itself.”

Search of the Muslim League office in Lahore was resisted.  Those
resisting were arrested and they included Khan Iftikhar Husain of
Mamdot, President of the Punjab Provincial Muslim League, and later
Premier of West Punjab.  Some more of the important League leaders of
the Punjab were arrested.  The search of the Muslim League office
revealed 1,000 helmets and badges with signs of swords, pistol and
dagger.

The Muslim League began defiance of the law by taking out processions
and holding meetings all over the Province, in contravention of the
Safety Ordinance, which had prohibited all meetings and processions.

Although soon after arrest the League leaders were released and the
Muslim League meeting in Lahore in defiance of the Safety Ordinance was
allowed to be held, yet the League decided to continue the agitation it
had launched against the Punjab Government.

The League agitation continued for 34 days-a period during which the
tempo of the movement became more and more violent, and from being
ostensibly a movement for fighting the attack on the civil liberties of
the population in the form of the Safety Ordinance, it became openly a.
movement for the conquest of the Hindus and Sikhs of the Punjab.  The
speeches made on the day the movement was launched left no doubt as to
what its real aim was.  On January 27, 1947 Mian Iftikharuddin said at a
Lahore public meeting of Muslims:

“We have come here to tell you that if you can carry on the fight with
the same determination and discipline as had been displayed during the
past three days, not only will you have achieved victory in the Punjab,
but you will also have reached nearer to your goal of Pakistan.”

That Pakistan was to be brought nearer by this agitation, and that
Pakistan was the device for enslaving the Hindus and Sikhs to the
Muslims, were the true premises for determining the character of the
League agitation.  That the Muslim League was in alliance with the
overwhelmingly large Muslim police of the Punjab and the Muslim
officials, is beyond a doubt.  In meeting this agitation there was none
of that vigour with which the Congress movements in India have been
sought to be crushed by the British Government-nor was there the
discipline inculcated among Congress workers by the Congress creed and
by Mahatma Gandhi and his personality.  The agitation was allowed to
drift on. Few arrests were made; the burden of the Government
*communiques* in those days in describing the movement was “No arrests
were made.” Those that were made, were described as “temporary”, that
is, the arrested persons were released before the *communique* was out
The League agitators, on the other hand, in this first movement which
was not directly a riot had little quarrel with the police, which was
sympathetic towards it. -

Some well-meaning people among the non-Muslims in the Punjab were
deceived as to the real character of this Muslim League agitation. 
Hopes were entertained that now at long last the Muslim League too, like
the Congress, had adopted the way of Civil Disobedience, and that it was
fighting a battle in the way of peaceful agitation for the vindication
of certain civic rights, such as freedom of association, etc.  That this
estimate of the real character of the movement was a mistake, was soon
made evident by certain ugly incidents, which must have shocked those
who thought that the proverbial leopard of the Muslim League had changed
his spots.  The League which had to its credit several years’ campaign
of hate, of the two-nation theory, of its Direct Action, Calcutta,
Noakhali and the N.-W. F. P. attacks on the minorities, could not
transform its character formed all through its above mentioned
activities over years.  In the Punjab Agitation the usual slogans raised
by the League crowds were: ‘Lar ke lenge Pakistan’; ‘Khun se lenge
Pakistan’; ‘Dena hoga Pakistan’; ‘Leke rahenge Pakistan’ etc.  All these
slogans, as the Sikh leaders rightly pointed out, were really attacks
directed against the Hindu and Sikh minorities, who to a man were
opposed to the establishment of the Islamic State of Pakistan, and to
enslave whom to the rule of the Muslim-majority this state was sought to
be established.  The Sikh leaders felt deeply perturbed over the growing
strength of the League Agitation, and over the week-kneed and
pusillanimous attitude with which the Punjab Government was dealing with
this movement of extremely dangerous potentialities.  That the movement
was extremely dangerous for the peace and well-being of the Province,
was demonstrated within about only a week after its termination, in the
shape of the terrible and unprecedently widespread March, 1947 attacks
on the Hindus and Sikhs of the Punjab.  Well in the middle of February,
1947, when the movement was about three weeks old, attacks had begun to
take place on Hindus and Sikhs-not widespread, but nevertheless
symptomatic of the true character of the movement, and of what it was
going to become, if allowed to continue a little time longer.  What the
Chief Secretary of the Punjab Government, who incidentally was a Muslim,
and is occupying at present a position of great responsibility under the
West Punjab Government in Pakistan, says on this agitation, is highly
illuminating:

“The agitation which the Muslim League commenced on the 24th of January
has continued until the time of drafting this report.  It has affected
all districts in the province in varying degrees and in places there
have been situations of some seriousness.  The campaign is one of
deliberate disobedience and defiance of law conducted with a definite
undemocratic political motive.

“So far there has been no sign that the Muslim leaders at large or in
jail have been persuaded to a sense of responsibility or to
reasonableness.  In the circumstances the early restoration of the
Province to its normal life cannot confidently be expected.

“The crime situation continues to be unsatisfactory with criminals
taking advantage of police preoccupation in dealing with disturbances
created by politics.  The law and order field may be further and
adversely affected if the Muslim League puts certain of its threats into
action.  These include interference with communications and a campaign
of non-payment of taxes.  So far as taxes go, there has been no
translation of the threat into action, but there has been interference
in the running of trains advocated and practised by the more extreme
among the League’s adherents.  Persons taken in the commission of
offences of this kind are being dealt with under Ordinance XXVIII of
1946 in order that sentences awarded may have a deterrent effect.”

“The Muslim League agitation continued in the Punjab until the 26th of
February when it was called off as the result of a settlement reached
between the Punjab Government and the President of the Provincial Muslim
League.  The settlement was timely, for in its concluding days the
agitation took a decided turn for the worse and acts of individual and
mass violence were committed in several districts.  In three places,
Amritsar, Jullundur and Ambala, the police were forced to resort to
firing to control unruly, violent crowds and there were casualties on
both sides, some of them of a serious kind.

“Since their release from jail, the League leaders have been active and
the League’s committee of Action has met.

“A decision has been taken to observe the 2nd of March, as Victory day.

“Many were shocked by the vulgarity of the League’s tactics and
behaviour, the agitation undoubtedly attracted the sympathy of most
Muslims who are not nationalist in their political opinions.

“Among Hindus and Sikhs resentment at the agitation is growing and,
particularly in the case of the latter in an ominous degree.  On the
12th of February in the second statement he has issued against the
agitation since it started, Master Tara Singh declared that it was
communal in its essentials and has as its purpose the domination of the
Punjab by Muslims.  He called on the Sikhs to prepare themselves to face
the Muslim League onslaught and towards this and to reorganize the Akal
Fauj.

“Of the three communities the Sikhs are undoubtedly the most perturbed
at the shape political events are taking.  Their apprehensions that the
Centre will not be able to withstand the demand for Pakistan and the
Muslim League agitation have drawn them further from the League, making
any understanding between the two now unlikely and have driven them more
to the thought of a separate Sikh-Hindu State made up of the Punjab
districts where Muslims are in a minority and the Sikh States.”

Sikh leaders publicly protested against the pro-Pakistan and provocative
slogans of the Muslim League, such as ‘Khun se lenge Pakistan’, ‘Dena
hoga Pakistan’ and ‘Leke rahenge Pakistan’; etc.  On 15.2.1947 and
21.2.47, on which tension among the communities was mounting high, the
Muslim League was adopting a bullying, menacing and hooligan character,
encouraged no doubt by the mild and almost indulgent attitude towards
it.  The police merely watched Muslim mobs of ten thousand or more going
about, threatening to disturb the inter-communal atmosphere with their
provocative movement.  Even when the Muslim crowds were very violent as
they were first at Amritsar and later at Lahore-invading courts and
destroying files, no police action followed.  That this same police
force could deal sternly and revengefully with the non-Muslim movements,
even though the latter might be perfectly non-violent in character, was
demonstrated by the repeated police firing on Hindu and Sikh students on
the 3rd of March in Lahore, when these students only took out a
procession to demonstrate their protest against the impending formation
of a Muslim League ministry in the Punjab.

That the Muslim League agitation grew more and more violent after the
middle of February, way shown by a number of incidents.  There were
several train hold-ups at Amritsar, at Ludhiana, Gujranwala and other
places.  Lawlessness was on the increase, and the police took no more
than the minimum, and in this case, wholly insufficient steps to meet
the situation.  On the 14th February, faces of non-Muslim tonga drivers
were blackened by Muslims at Amritsar, as they refused to join a hartal
organized by the Muslims, including Muslim tonga drivers, against the
arrests of Muslim League leaders.  That the non-Muslim tonga drivers
were perfectly justified in refusing to make common cause with the
Muslims in a matter which concerned Muslims alone and not tonga-drivers
as such, did not prevent their disgrace at the hands of these Muslims
tonga-drivers.  A similar incident on the same day occurred at Lahore. 
This further enraged the Sikhs and made them ponder over the rising tide
of Muslim arrogance and bullying tactics being used against Hindus and
Sikhs.

That the League agitation was only the first beginning of the organized
Muslim attempt to attack and subjugate, in the interest of establishing
Pakistan, the Hindu and Sikh minorities of the Punjab (and not long
after of the N.-W. F. P.) is amply proved by the following news-items
and commentary, extracted from *The Civil & Military Gazette* of Lahore,
a paper by no means anti-Muslim in its general policy.

In its editorial of February 12, 1947 when the League agitation had run
for near upon three weeks, and evidence of its violent character had
already shown itself prominently, the *Civil* made this very clear and
penetrating analysis of the character and dangerous potentialities of
the Muslim League agitation.

“Its (the League’s) agitation…… is dangerous…… to the peace of the
province and the constitutional security of Government in the Punjab as
far as can be seen - into the future.  Tempers are daily wearing
thinner…… and time is not far off when bullets may replace tear-gas
bombs. (The League leaders) would do well now to pause and take stock of
the position, examining the ominous trends of the policy to which they
are committed and weighing possible gains against certain and apparently
inescapable losses.

“The attitude of the Punjab Government will, of course, be conditioned
by the decision of the Provincial Muslim League, but it must face up to
the problems created by a decision to continue the agitation and prepare
plans for implementation in that event.  The present policy of drift (of
the Government) is playing into the hands of the agitators and it is
preparing the way for goondaism………”

“An attempt to wreck the Frontier Mail near Rawalpindi was made by
Muslim League *saboteurs* on Monday (i. e. 17.2.47). Instances are
multiplying of the demonstrators planting the League flag on railway
engines and damaging railway property.” (*C. &. M. Gazette*-18.2.1947)

“On Friday evening (i. e. 14.2.1947) Sikhs and Hindus held a meeting (at
Amritsar) in view of the violent conduct of the Muslim League
processions earlier in the day.  Considerable indignation was expressed
at the conduct of Muslim Leaguers in blackening the faces of two Sikh
and one Hindu tonga-drivers that day who refused to participate in the
day’s hartal.

“There were many largely attended and rowdy processions in Sialkot City
but no arrests were made.  At Gujranwala there are definite signs of
rowdyism, and processions for the last two or three days have not been
well -behaved .” (*C. & M. Gazette* - 18.2.1947).

In Amritsar, Sialkot, Ludhiana, Bhalwal, Gujranwala, Gujrat and other
places violent activities were indulged in by the League processions on
18.2.1947.

In all these places tear-gas and lathis had to be used by the police
against the processionists.

The 24th February, which was one month from the launching of the
agitation, was a very violent day indeed, and it incidentally revealed
the League agitation in its true colours, as the forerunner of the
March, 1947 war on the Hindu and Sikh minorities.  *The Civil & Military
Gazette* report of the day is as under:-

“The Muslim League agitation assumed dangerous proportions in Amritsar
where the police had to open fire on several occasions on Monday (i. e.
24.2.1947).

“A Sikh constable was beaten to death by a wild mob in the civil lines,
the Additional District Magistrate was brutally assaulted…… and a
murderous attack was made on a Sub-inspector by a demonstrator who was
killed by police fire. . . .” *C. & M. Gazette*-25.2.1947)

Firing had to be resorted to by the Police on this day in Rawalpindi. 
The Lahore Courts were raided and files tempered with.  At Kasur there
was violence too.

Regarding the murder of the Sikh police constable at Amritsar, certain
details of it are very revealing.  The Muslim mob asked the police to
withdraw, which the police did.  This helpless Sikh constable was
beseiged by the Muslim mob, and stoned to death in a most brutal
manner.  The Muslim members of the police party, among whom there were
only a few solitary non-Muslims, did nothing to rescue their comrade
from the clutches of the murderous mob.  The lesson of it was clear-that
a Sikh had been murdered, solely because out of a party of policemen he
was the only Sikh.  In Congress agitations the police used to be
attacked, seldom physically though, as *the Police*, as the instrument
of foreign rule, and no discrimination was made between its Hindu,
Muslim, Sikh or Christian personnel as such.  But here was a case of
such discrimination.

This incident amply proved that Sikhs in particular, and Hindus and
Sikhs in general, were in for trouble at the hands of Muslims.  This
most dangerous character of the situation drew two statements on
February 26, 1946 from important Sikh sources-one from the Assembly
Panthic Party and the other from Master Tara Singh.  The Panthic
Assembly Party, at which Master Tara Singh was present by special
invitation, appealed to the Muslim League to “Stop these unlawful
activities, which are bound to have serious repercussions if continued
any further” and asked the Punjab Government to ‘adopt a firm attitude
and take speedy action in dealing with this menace to the peace of the
Province.’

Master Tara Singh in a separate statement pointed out that the Muslim
League agitation was meant to overawe the Sikhs into agreeing to
Pakistan.

That this agitation was meant as part of the Muslim League campaign for
the establishment of Pakistan was further made clear by the arrogant
speeches made by the Muslim Leaguers on the occasion of the League
“Victory Day” on March 2, 1947 to mark the release of the Muslim League
leaders from jail as a result of negotiations in which the Muslim League
achieved nothing, except the release of the imprisoned Muslim Leaguers. 
Bashir Ahmed Akhgar, speaking at Amritsar, said that this agitation was
only the stepping-stone of the struggle which the Muslims would have to
launch for the achievement of Pakistan.

On the 4th March, 1947 a Muslim Sub-Inspector of Police appeared before
Hindu and Sikh students and other demonstrators at Lahore, who had
gathered to express their opposition to the impending formation of a
League Ministry in the Punjab, and told them to disperse, as their
agitation was futile and Pakistan in any case must be established.  This
was the kind of mentality of the Muslim-dominated police force of the
Punjab, upon whom had fallen the responsibility of dealing with the
attack of the Muslim population on the Hindu and Sikh population of the
Punjab in March, 1947.

Several factors at this time entered into the situation and made it
critical and brought matters to a head in the Punjab very fast.  The
British Prime Minister, on the 20th February, 1947 made an authoritative
statement of policy on behalf of the British Government in which he
said:

“His Majesty’s Government wish to make it clear that it is their
definite intention to take necessary steps to effect the transfer of
power to responsible Indian hands by a date not later than June, 1948.

“………His Majesty’s Government will have to consider to whom the powers of
the Central Government in British India should be handed over on due
date, whether as a whole to some form of Central Government for British
India or in some areas to the existing Provincial Governments or in such
other way as may seem most reasonable and in the best interests of the
Indian people”.

This statement brought the prospect of power very near the imagination
of the Muslim League leaders who were now anxious more than ever to
wrest power in the Punjab, so that by the time the transfer of power
occurred, in June, 1948 or earlier, the Muslim League should be already
firmly in the saddle in the Punjab, to receive power from the British
Government and to consolidate the Western *bloc* of Pakistan.  Come what
may, thought the League leaders, none but a League ministry must
function in the Punjab from now on.  And it was to create such a
situation that the Muslim League intensified its activity many times
over, and when it failed to form a ministry, it let loose the horror and
terror of the March, 1947 and subsequent riots over the Punjab.

Sir Khizar Hyat Khan, Premier in the Punjab Coalition Ministry, although
his ministry had survived the League agitation, had yet received such a
drubbing at the hands of the Muslim League as must have made his heart
sick.  The foulest and filthiest abuse was uttered daily in all places
where the League agitation was conducted, for Sir Khizar and his Muslim
colleagues, while the non-Muslim ministers came in for severe
castigation minus the abuse.  Probably Sir Khizar’s relations and others
close to him felt like advising him to get out of this situation in
which he had fallen foul of the majority of his coreligionists.  The
statement of His Majesty’s Government quoted above must have made him to
ponder and to think of relinquishing office.  So, on the 2nd March, 1947
Sir Khizar Hyat Khan resigned office, and his ministry naturally came to
an end.  Sir Khizar took this step, as he said he thought it incumbent
to leave the field clear for the Muslim League to come to some
arrangement with the other parties.  On the next day, that is the 3rd
March, 1947 the Governor of the Punjab invited the leaders of the Muslim
League Assembly Party to form a ministry.  But by that date a strong
wave of protest against and opposition to the formation to a Muslim
League Ministry, committed to the division of India and the
establishment of Pakistan in the Punjab, arose among Hindus and Sikhs.
The Hindu and Sikh students of Lahore took out a big procession to
demonstrate their resolve not to tolerate a Muslim League Ministry. 
This perfectly non-violent procession was fired on by the Muslim Police,
which had stood hooliganism and law-breaking from Muslim mobs for over a
month in the Province.  Meetings, demonstrations and processions of
Hindus and Sikhs continued in Lahore and Amritsar and some other towns. 
The situation was growing serious.  Opposition to the Muslim League was
rising, with the result that in its efforts at Ministry-making, the
Muslim League Assembly party did not get a single Hindu or Sikh
supporter.  The Governor found that he could not allow a purely Muslim
League ministry, without any support whatever from Hindus and Sikhs, to
be formed in the Punjab.  The Muslim League having lost the confidence
of Hindus and Sikhs due to its past conduct of several years and its
creed of hate and violence, got no support from them.  The Governor
suspended the constitution, and the Punjab from March 5, 1947 was to be
governed directly by the Governor under section 93 of the Government of
India Act.

The report of the Chief Secretary of the Punjab Government, a Muslim,
who has been quoted before, is highly significant as descriptive of the
Muslim League attitude during this fateful period in the history of the
Punjab, as being the prime cause of the occurrence of the Riots, from
March 5 onwards.  According to the Chief Secretary’s report:

“One of the most remarkable features of the situation has been the speed
with which events moved.  On the 2nd of March, following the settlement
with Government, the Muslim League celebrated a “Victory Day”.  No
communal clash accompanied the observances but they afforded evidence of
Muslim arrogance and intensified the fear and hatred of other
communities, and increased their determination not to be subjected to an
unwanted domination.  On the same day the Premier announced the
resignation of the Coalition Ministry in a statement to the effect that
he was taking the step because he felt His Majesty’s Government’s
announcement of the 20th February, made it incumbent to leave the field
clear for the Muslim League to come to some arrangement with the other
parties.  On the 3rd, His Excellency the Governor invited the leader of
the Muslim League Party to form a Government.  On the 4th March disorder
commenced.  On the 5th March, in the presence of the Muslim League’s
failure to form a Government, proclamation was issued under Section 93
of the Government of India Act transferring all responsibilities to the
Governor.

“On the afternoon of the same day, and inevitably, communal rioting
broke out accompanied by cases of stabbing and arson.  By the 6th of
March, both Amritsar and Multan were gravely affected and much damage
had been caused to life and property.  Since that date, with news of
grave events radiating from Lahore, there has been bloodshed and burning
in many districts, and rural areas have paid the price levied by
insensate fury as well as towns.  Many of the gravest incidents have
taken place in the districts which form the Rawalpindi Division where
Muslims are in the majority.  In the Rawalpindi and Attock districts in
particular there is every reason to think that casualties have been
heavy.  Up to the 15th March the known victims of internecine strife
numbered 1,036 killed and 1,110 injured.  The figures in both categories
are almost certain to be very much greater when there has been more
accurate counting after the madness has passed.”

According to the Chief Secretary:

“The prospect is not improved by the brutality of some of the acts
committed by the majority community (Muslims) in the areas most
effected.  When details of these acts become known as inevitably they
will, the danger of retaliation will arise in a degree fraught with much
danger,”

On piecing together all the factors present in the Punjab situation in
early March, 1947, we find:

\(a\) The Muslim League agitation had as its aim the over-throw of the
Coalition ministry, and clearing the way for the achievement of
Pakistan,

\(b\) H. M. G. Statement of February 20, 1947 declaring that power would
be transferred in India in default of one Central Government, in some
areas to the existing Provincial Governments, made it imperative for the
League to capture power and to establish its own Government in the
Punjab at all costs, so that such a Government should be able to receive
power independently of a Central Government of India;

\(c\) The “Victory Day” of March 2, 1947 was used by the League for
marking provocative speeches, and whipping up the passions of the Muslim
masses against all who might oppose Pakistan;

\(d\) Not being able to get the cooperation of a single Hindu or Sikh
inside Provincial Assembly, the Muslim League decided upon capturing
power by waging a war on the minorities in the Punjab;

\(e\) For this purpose the Riots of March, 1947 were started, which
occurred simultaneously in Lahore, Amritsar, Jullundur, Multan,
Rawalpindi, Campbellpur and other Districts, the aggressors in all
places being Muslims;

\(f\) These riots were no ordinary riots, but were a war of subjugation
and conquest in which the Muslim people, the Muslim police and Muslim
officials worked in perfect unison, and brought widespread death,
destruction and uprooting to Hindus and Sikhs in a dozen districts,
killing many thousands and uprooting about a million, before the month
was out.

So, from the 5th March, 1947 onwards the constitutional game was up, and
for the Hindus and Sikhs it became a struggle for sheer life against a
fierce and well-planned Muslim onslaught-well-planned in that the Muslim
League had a fighting corps (the Muslim League National Guard), ample
stores of weapons, both sharp-edged and fire-arms, and a plan of attacks
in which with police and official help the Muslims were to be encouraged
and covered against risk, while Hindu and Sikh retaliation, if it ever
were planned, was to be stifled.

Left to themselves, Hindus and Sikhs, although they reeled under the
first unexpected blow in the first and second weeks of March, yet they
would have rallied and retaliated, for the Sikh has never taken beating
for long.  But the Sikhs and Hindus were helpless against police and
official backing of the Muslims and for the moment could at best defend
themselves in a place like Amritsar where they were not heavily
outnumbered by Muslims.  In other places, where they were outnumbered,
the Muslims rained destruction on them-month after month.  Such
retaliation as came, and as has been hinted at by Chief Secretary Akhtar
Hussain in his report quoted above, came towards August, when with the
nearness of partition the stranglehold of Muslim police and officials
began to loosen on the Eastern districts.  But just then this
stranglehold was complete from Lahore westwards, and from there it
became total mass murder and driving out of Hindus and Sikhs, with
looting and abduction on a scale horrible to contemplate.  The following
pages tell in a more detailed manner the story of which the outline has
been given above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
