+++
title = "06 MARCH, 1947. BLITZ ON THE HINDU AND SIKH MINORITIES"

+++
**MARCH, 1947.**

BLITZ ON THE HINDU AND SIKH MINORITIES

As has been told above, there was a complete concert between the Muslim
League and the Muslim masses which followed its programme and policy on
the one hand, and Muslim officials and police on the other.  The British
bureaucracy which still held supreme power, was perhaps inclined to
favour the Muslim League-not as such, but as the one force in the
country which could be relied upon to pursue a policy of dissension and
strife, and thus create in the country such a mood as would make a
politically united India, at least a politically united Punjab,
impossible So in this background came the fruition and consummation of
the Muslim League plan to dominate the Punjab, to form in this Province
its ministry, which with the consent of Hindus and Sikhs could not be
done, but which might be established after beating them down.  Only this
beating had to be swift, continual and thorough.  Without a ministry of
its own in the Punjab, the Muslim League would not be able to receive
power from the British Government in June, 1948, the target date by
which according to the February, 20 statement of H. M. G. power must be
transferred to Indian hands.  Without a Muslim League Government in the
Punjab, Pakistan would remain not only lopsided, but might even topple
altogether as a practical scheme.  This was the situation in which the
Muslim League attack on the Punjab minorities was inevitably launched.

Before making a detailed study of the Muslim attack in early March, 1947
a few significant figures must be noted here, which will show at a
glance the strategically well-planned nature of the Muslim offensive and
the total helplessness of the Hindus and Sikhs in the face of the
overwhelming odds they were called upon to contend against:

\(a\) The proportion of the Muslim and non-Muslim Police force in the
Punjab uptil August, 1947 was as follows:-

The total number of Police constables in the Punjab was shown as being
24,095, out of whom 17,848 were Muslims, 6167 Hindus and Sikhs combined
and 80 Europeans and Anglo-Indians.  This makes a percentage of 74 for
she Muslim police.  This overwhelming majority for the Muslim police was
not justified on the basis of population figures, which were 56% Muslim
and 440/, non-Muslims.  For long years non-Muslims, particularly Hindus
and Sikhs, had clamoured for greater recruitment of Hindus and Sikhs to
the police, and Hindu and Sikh public bodies came forward quite often to
offer good, acceptable Hindu and Sikh young men for the force, but the
old proportions were allowed to stand, and even good Hindu and Sikh
youths were very often rejected while Muslims of very much inferior
physique were taken.  The result of all this was that the Punjab Police
was for all practical purposes Muslim.  The Hindu and Sikh members of
the force, being in a very small minority, and kept under by intrigue
and the concerted plan of the Muslim majority, in the force itself, and
of the Minister-incharge of Police, who since the introduction of
Provincial Autonomy in 1937 had invariably been a Muslim, lost all
confidence in themselves, and were helpless in doing their duty to
protect the Hindu and Sikh minorities against aggression when the Muslim
League attack in concert with the Muslim Police began in March, 1947.

\(b\) The proportion of Hindu and Sikh population in the Districts in
which the attacks on them were made:-  
   
 

|              |             |                      |
|--------------|-------------|----------------------|
| **District** | **Muslims** | **Hindus and Sikhs** |
| Rawalpindi   | 80.00       | 18.67                |
| Campbellpur  | 90.42       | 9.36                 |
| Mianwali     | 86.16       | 13.76                |
| Jhelum       | 89.42       | 10.41                |
| Sargodha     | 83.68       | 14.88                |
| Gujrat       | 85.58       | 14.2                 |
| Multan       | 78.1        | 20.52                |
| Gujranwala   | 70.45       | 22.70                |
| Sialkot      | 62.09       | 31.12                |
| Lahore       | 60.62       | 35.9                 |

The above districts are those in which attacks on Hindus and Sikhs
occurred in a serious form in the pre-partition days, i. e., from March,
1947 to August, 1947. In other districts of the present province of West
Punjab (Pakistan) and in these above-mentioned districts, immediately
before and after August, 1947 the situation became one of mass killing
of Hindus and Sikhs and of abduction of their women-folk, looting of
their property and burning of alien, houses.

Lahore town, in which most part of the attacks on Hindus and Sikhs took
place in this pre-partition period, had a large majority of Muslim
population, though it had large non-Muslim property, industry,
educational and cultural effort centred in it.

The district of Amritsar, in which Hindus and Sikhs received, outside
Western Punjab, the severest punishment at Muslim hands in the
pre-partition period, had a slight non-Muslim majority in population. 
While the Muslim population of the district was 46.52%, the Hindus and
Sikhs made up 51.46%. But the city of Amritsar itself was, in spite of
its intimate Sikh associations, overwhelmingly Muslim in population,
which was situated mostly quite deep along the fringe of the city on all
four sides.  Its nearness to Lahore and the particularly close concert
between it and the local Muslim police and officials made it very
formidable indeed in the months from March to July, 1947.

Figures for Hazara district in the N.-W. F. P. have already been given
in an earlier chapter.  The other districts of the Frontier Province in
which large-scale attacks on Hindus and Sikhs occurred are these, with
their relative Muslim and non-Muslim percentage in population shown:  
   
 

|                  |             |                      |
|------------------|-------------|----------------------|
| **District**     | **Muslims** | **Hindus and Sikhs** |
| Peshawar         | 90.34       | 9.65                 |
| Kohat            | 91.99       | 8.1                  |
| Bannu            | 87.06       | 12.93                |
| Mardan           | 95.46       | 4.52                 |
| Dera Ismail Khan | 85.78       | 14.21                |

These districts were worse situated from the point of view of the
harassed and beseiged Hindu and Sikh populations, even than the
districts of the Rawalpindi Division in the Punjab.  These Districts
backed on the tribal Afghan territory, into which the Hindu and Sikh
women and others could be easily kidnapped.  Flight was impossible for
these unfortunate people either, for they were separated from the
Hindu-Sikh areas of the Punjab by a very long belt of Muslim areas,
through which no non-Muslim could travel with safety in those terrible
months of anarchy in the Punjab.

ATTACKS BEGIN

Although the very first attacks occurred in Lahore and Amritsar on the
4th and 5th of March, 1947, yet in the latter of these cities the Hindus
and Sikhs were numerically not overwhelmed by the Muslims.  In Amritsar
except in the initial stages Hindus and Sikhs put up a fight for safety
of life and property, although this fight as it turned out, was unequal,
with the Muslim police and officials going all-out to back up the Muslim
assailants.  In Lahore, there were 433,170 Muslims against 177,212
Hindus and only 34,021 Sikhs.  But the worst carriage and destruction
came in the Western districts-Multan, Rawalpindi, Campbellpur, Jhelum
and Sargodha where right from the 5th March the League-led Muslim mobs
fell with determination and full preparations on the helpless Hindus and
Sikhs scattered in the villages, at the rate usually of a few Hindu
and/or Sikh homes in the midst of a large Muslim population.  That the
Muslim League “Action” against Hindus and Sikhs was planned, is shown by
several undeniable factors, the logic of which is unescapable.  These
are:

\(a\) These attacks began in the several districts mentioned above, as
well as in Lahore and Amritsar, at almost the same time, as if the
League forces were waiting only for a signal, for a word of command or a
psychological moment to begin their work of bringing the Punjab under
the heel of a Muslim League government.

\(b\) These attacks were open, unchecked and of the nature of a thorough
extermination-the methods being everywhere uniform, such as stabbing,
arson and the humiliations inflicted in forcibly converting the men and
dishonouring the women of the minorities.

\(c\) These attacks all occurred in the heavy Muslim-majority districts,
and in the cities of Lahore, Amritsar, Ludhiana and Jullundur with their
large Muslim populations.  This was in the initial stages.  In the
somewhat later stages, such as a month after the beginning of these
attacks, it was again the districts in which the Muslim majority was
slightly smaller, though still very large, such as Gujrat, Gujranwala
and Sialkot that these attacks began.  No attacks on the part of Hindus
and Sikhs on Muslims by way of reprisals or retaliation occurred in the
non-Muslim majority districts during, all the months up till August,
1947.  Those districts, with the exception only of Gurgaon, in which too
the aggressors were the Muslim Meos, remained quiet, and the
non-Muslims, perturbed as they deelpy were over what was happening in
West Punjab, remained on the whole peaceful.

\(d\) As a corollary to the above, in the period up till August, 1947
there were about a million Hindu and Sikh refugees from the Western
districts of the Punjab, from the North-Western Frontier Province, from
Baluchistan and the devastated city of Lahore, besides Amritsar, who had
to be looked after in refugee camps by the Punjab Government, by the
Sikh States of the Punjab and by bodies like the Hindu Mahasabha and the
Shromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee.  There were very few Muslim
refugees anywhere in this period.  Such few as there were, came mainly
from Amritsar, where alone up till August, the Hindus and Sikhs had been
able to put up anything like a fight for life against Muslim aggression.

\(e\) The Muslims gave further evidence of plan and preparation in their
aggression in respect of the following features of their action: (i)
They were well supplied with arms, such as daggers, swords, spears and
even fire-arms. (ii) They had bands of stabbers and their auxiliaries,
who covered the assailant, ambushed the victim and if necessary disposed
of his body.  These bands were subsidized by the Muslim League, and in
many cases cash payments were made to individual assassins on the number
of Hindus and Sikhs bagged.  There were also regular patrolling parties
in jeeps which went about sniping and picking off any stray Hindu or
Sikh (This was a feature mainly of the cities of Lahore and Amritsar).
(iii) Petrol was in plentiful supply with the Muslim aggressors
everywhere-both for purposes of transport and for quick arson.  This
must have taken some time to be collected in such huge quantities. (iv)
The concert between the Leaguers of a place and their opposites of other
places and the Muslim police and authorities everywhere, was
remarkable.  Till non-Muslim military appeared on the scene, there was
no relief at all for Hindus and Sikhs, as the Muslim police never took
action against the Muslim aggressors. (v) In towns like Amritsar, where
the earliest attacks occurred, even before any Hindu or Sikh was
thinking that fighting would take place, the Muslims were fully prepared
for the offensive.  For example, they had distributed among their own
folk all the available sword-blades in Amritsar.  On Muslim shops had
been written in prominent lettering ‘Muslim Shop’ in Urdu to protect
these shops from planned arson And there was other unmistakable evidence
of this, which will be mentioned when we came to narrate the incidents
connected with Amritsar.

RAWALPINDI DIVISION

The attack came swiftly and over a vast area in the Rawalpindi Division,
in which as has been shown in the table given before, the Muslim
population in every district is over 80% and in some is well above 90%. 
In Rawalpindi town itself it appears the Hindu and Sikhs were
well-organized and well-armed, and when the Muslims attacked them, they
lilt back and drove away their assailants with some casualties.  This
beating taught the Muslims of this town a salutary lesson, and although
the Hindus and Sikhs had for long to bear a state of seige, yet they
were not murdered and pillaged on the scale on which this occurred in
the unprotected and unarmed country-side, where it was general massacre
of Hindus and Sikhs, especially of the latter.

On the 5th March, 1947 on hearing of the Ailing on the Hindu and Sikh
students of Lahore, the Hindu-Sikh students of Rawalpindi took out a
procession protesting against the Muslim attempt at the formation of a
communal (Muslim League) Ministry in the Punjab, and the police firing
on the non-violent procession of Hindu and Sikh students.  This
procession was attacked by the Muslim Leaguers.  There was a free fight
in which the Muslims got the worst of it.  Then a huge Muslim mob from
the countryside, incited for attack on Hindu and Sikhs by the Pir of
Golra, a Muslim religious head and a leader of this area, fell upon the
town.  But the Hindus and Sikhs fought them from their mohallas in
trenches, and the Muslims again lost in this battle.  The suburbs of
Rawalpindi, however, were burnt and sacked, as resistance in them could
not be effective.  Nine Hindus and Sikhs were murdered treacherously by
Muslims in Lal Kurti Mohalla, after being decoyed into entering the
Muslim Zone for peace negotiations.  This was not a solitary instance of
such murder done by treachery, as similar things occurred in other
places too, both in March and in the post partition period.

In the rural areas of Rawalpindi, however, it was a case of mass attack
by Muslims, and a general massacre of Hindus and Sikhs.  That this
description is not an exaggeration or an attempt at painting a lurid
picture, is fully borne out by the tables of incidents attached to this
booklet in the form of Appendices.  The Muslims many hundreds of times
made up in the rural areas the set-back they had received in Rawalpindi
town itself.  Here, on a scale much larger than Noakhali, in an area
many times more extensive, and involving a population many times that of
Noakhali and Tipperah, the Muslim League, anxious now to convert the
Punjab into a Muslim League-governed Province, carried fire and sword
into all areas of the Rawalpindi Division.  Here was the answer to the
query made by a British newspaper about the aims of Jinnah: “Does he
want to plunge his country into a religious war?” And the answer most
emphatically was, “Yes”.  It was to be a religio-political-war, in which
the Punjab was to be made safe at all costs for a Muslim League
Government, which should receive power, in June, 1948 from the British
Government.

The attack in Rawalpindi villages began on the 7th March, 1947, and
continued non-stop or weeks together, in village after village, wherever
any Hindus and Sikhs were to be found.  When one sub-area was rid of its
Hindu and Sikh inhabitants then the war on Hindus and Sikhs spread to
another area, and so on, till by the end of March, the surviving Hindu
and Sikh populations of Rawalpindi, Campbellpur and Jhelum Districts had
all been transferred in a destitute state into refugee camps, which were
established all over the Punjab, the Sikh states and even the U.P. In
the larger towns of this areas there were still Hindus and Sikhs, but
they were living in a state of seige, and could not stir out of their
homes, much less travel or otherwise move about.

In 128 villages of Rawalpindi district, which were attacked over a
period of several days, beginning from March 7, 1947, 7,000 Hindus and
Sikhs have been enumerated in reports as killed.  All casualties have
not in some cases been traced or registered.  The number of those
wounded has been large too, though when these attacks were made, little
mercy was shown by the assailants and they made a very thorough work of
finishing of those who fell into their hands.  Besides those killed and
wounded about 1,000 Hindu and Sikh women were abducted, who were raped
and dishonoured in a manner which would shame anyone with the least
trace of civilization or religion in him.  Women were raped in the
presence of their husbands, brothers, fathers and sons.  Later they were
distributed among the Muslims to be kept as concubines or were forcibly
married.  A large number were carried into the tribal territory, and
became untraceable.  In almost all cases houses were burnt and property
was looted.  Quite often Gurdwaras were burnt down and the Sikh
Scripture, Sri Guru Granth Sahib. torn or otherwise desecrated.  In most
of these villages the method followed by the Muslims to loot and kill
the Hindu and Sikh populations was cynically treacherous.  A village
would be surrounded; messages would be sent to the Hindus and Sikhs to
buy off the invaders with so such money.  This demand would be complied
with.  But the invaders would still be there; and one night would open
the attack on the small non-Muslim population of the place, and put as
many to the sword as could not escape or as could be killed before
military help arrived for succour, which, however in those lawless days
was not very often.

The invaders marched on to their attacks fearlessly and openly, with
drums beating and with a large display of firearms, sometimes even modem
automatic weapons.  In the newspapers of the period appeared photographs
taken of these marching hordes with plenty of rifles carried on the
shoulders of the assailants.  It is strange, however, that the valiant
fliers in these planes were content only with photographing these
invaders and did precious little to fire on them, and thus save the
lives of the thousands of helpless men, women and children on whom these
invaders loosed hell.

Forcible conversion was the other alternative to death for a
non-Muslim.  The ultimatum was given to the population of a village
either to embrace Islam or to face death.  Most Hindus and Sikhs
preferred death to the shameful surrender of faith, and died, sometimes
fighting and at other times with great tortures, at the hands of the
sadist religious zealots of the Muslim League.  Such women as could not
be abducted or dishonoured, generally escaped this shame by immolating
themselves.  Thoha Khalsa village, of which an account will follow, is a
classic example of such sacrifice of life on the part of 93 Sikh women
of that place.  This, the best known incident of its kind, however, is
not the only one.  In scores of places, both during the March attacks
and the post-partition attacks on Hindus and Sikhs, women immolated
themselves to escape dishonour at the hands of the maddened and
ferocious lusting Muslim mobs.  Those who were forcibly converted were,
if they were Sikhs, shaved off and circumcised; the Hindus too were
circumcized, even the grown-ups.  The women converts were generally
given in marriage, if they were unmarried or widows, to Muslims, the
*Nikah* ceremony being performed by some local Maulvi.  A large number
of such shaven Sikh converts to Islam arrived as refugees in March, 1947
in Amritsar, Patiala and other places, from Rawalpindi and the Frontier
Province.

The assailants did not spare even little children.  It was naked
beastliness performing a devil’s dance.  Children would be snatched from
the hands of their parents, tossed on spears and swords, and sometimes
thrown alive into the fire.  Other cruelties equally horrible were
perpetrated.  Women’s breasts, noses and arms would he lopped off. 
Sticks and pieces of iron would be thrust into their private parts. 
Sometimes the bellies of pregnant women were ripped open and the
unformed life in the womb thrown out.  In some places processions of
naked Hindu and Sikh women are also reported to have been taken out by
the Muslims mobs.

A report on 23 villages of the Attock district reveals that in these
villages a total of 610 Hindus and Sikhs were killed within about ten
days from March 7, 1947.  In these same villages 1656 Hindu and Sikh
houses, including a number of Gurdwaras were burnt and destroyed; 1361
Hindu and Sikh houses were looted of all their property; 1471 Hindus
arid Sikhs, both men arid women, were forcibly converted to Islam, and
about 100 women and children were abducted.

In the village of Duberan in Rawalpindi district not a single Sikh
survived from its total population of one and a half thousands. 70 women
were abducted.  The burning and looting of this prosperous village,
where such carnage took place, can only be imagined.

In the village of Tarlai in Rawalpindi District more than 100 Sikhs were
killed, and these included women and children. 15 were forcibly
converted to Islam.  All houses were looted.

In *Chaklala and Rata Amral*, Suburbs of Rawalpindi, Sikhs were attacked
on March 8, 1947.  The residents held out for a day and a night, but
finding the odds against them overwhelming, they surrendered.  A large
number were killed, while others were forcibly converted, and shaved and
circumcised in public.

Maddened with the zeal for exterminating the ‘Kafirs’ and making room
for the establishment of an Islamic State in Northern India, the
League-led Muslim mobs combed hundreds of villages as has already been
related above, in the Rawalpindi District.

In Bhagpur the entire Sikh population was wiped out.  Women and children
were not spared.  The Gurdwara was burnt.

In Bewal, 400 Hindus and Sikhs who had taken shelter in a Gurdwara were
burnt alive by the Gurdwara being set on fire.

In Thamali Khari, 400 Sikhs were killed, and one Gurdwara and one school
building were burnt to cinders.  Only 20 out of its population survived.

In the village of Nakrali about two dozen Sikhs were killed and some
women immolated themselves to escape dishonour at the hands of the
invading Muslims. 40 Sikhs were forcibly converted.  The Gurdwara was
looted and burnt.

In the village of Mughal 141 Sikhs were killed, and only about a dozen
survived out of its population.  The Gurdwara was burnt.

In Thoha Khalsa, on March 12, 1947 after long and heroic resistance, 200
Sikhs were killed.  The women were asked to embrace Islam, but 93 of
them, old and young, decided to escape dishonour by drowning themselves
in a well, which they did.  The Muslim invaders, aghast at this tragedy,
fled from the place.  A little later, the military arrived and rescued
the survivors. (See a fuller account of this happening in Appendix).

In the village of Sayad, well-known for its educational and
philanthropic effort, about 30 Sikhs were killed.  Some were forcibly
converted.  The Gurdwara of the place was burnt.

In the village of Adiala, on March 8, 1947 Muslim mobs collected by beat
of drum in broad day-light.  The invaders raised a false alarm of a Sikh
attack on themselves, and on this pretext, fell to looting the Hindu and
Sikh quarters, which they did extensively.  Hindus and Sikhs were
ferreted out, and were burnt alive, stabbed or shot dead.  The number of
those killed was above a hundred. 40 were forcibly converted.  The
Muslim police watched the whole of this carnage going on, and did just
nothing about it.

The village of Gorsian in Gujarkhan Tehsil was attacked by a mob of 600,
who had been persuaded by the Muslim League Mullas that it is a holy
deed to kill Hindus and Sikhs.  Several Sikhs were killed in this
village, and large-scale looting occurred.

In most cases in these villages a stop was put to the depredations of
the Muslim mobs only by the somewhat belated arrival of the military.

In Mandra the attack came on March 9. There was large-scale looting and
burning of houses and shops of Hindus and Sikhs. 200 Sikhs were killed;
40 others were missing, and were probably killed while fleeing for
life.  The Gurdwara and School were burnt.

In Kahuta, on March 8, 60 Sikhs were killed and Sikh and Hindu houses
were extensively looted. 500 women were abducted from this village.  The
Gurdwara was burnt.

Burning of Gurdwaras and Schools, wherever situated appears to have been
a settled part of the plan of these predatory mobs, bent upon
exterminating and failing that, humiliating Sikhs and Hindus.

In Sukho, where stiff resistance was put up by Sikhs one girls’ school
and one Gurdwara were burnt.  In Daultala too, very stiff resistance was
put up by Sikhs.

In Tainch and Harnali about two dozen Sikhs were killed and brutalities
committed in the latter place.  About 30 women were abducted from these
places and the Gurdwaras were burnt.  In Harial about 20 Sikhs were
killed and 40 were abducted.  The Gurdwara was burnt.

This last is Master Tara Singh’s home place.  Masterji’s house were
razed to the ground with sadistic vengeance, the site struck with shoes
and ploughed over.

In Bamali, on March 8, about 80 Sikhs were killed and more than 105 were
abducted.  Some Sikhs in this village killed their womenfolk to save
them from certain dishonour at the hands of the Muslim invaders.  In
Banda 20 were killed, including women and children.  The Gurdwara here
too was burnt.

In Machhian, on March 11, 1947, 200 Sikhs were killed which number was
all the males in the village.  The women and children were all abducted
and were later rescued by the military.  The Gurdwara was burnt.

Narali was attacked by a mob of 15,000 on March 12.  The Hindus and
Sikhs took shelter inside the Gurdwara, from where they put up stiff
resistance.  Several Hindus and Sikhs were killed, and large scale
looting of houses of Hindus and Sikhs occurred.

Murree, a very popular hill station near Rawalpindi was attacked on the
9th March, 1947 and about 150 bunglows belonging to Hindus and Sikhs
were looted and then burnt.

At Nara, in the tehsil of Kahuta, Sikh women and children were burnt
alive, and the women were tortured in ways most devilishly ingenious and
sadistic, which it is not possible for any decent human being to
describe.

Such barbarities and widespread murderous attacks occurred
simultaneously and on the same scale in districts in the neighbourhood
of Rawalpindi, such as Campbellpur, Jhelum and Sargodha.  As has been
pointed out, all these districts were overwhelmingly Muslim in
population.  Similar things occurred in the District of Gujrat,
bordering on Jhelum.

In the village of Sarkal Kaser in Jhelum district, on and after March 7,
43 Hindus and Sikhs were killed, the survivors were forcibly converted
and all Hindu and Sikh houses were burnt.  Prominent among other
villages burnt and looted, with their Hindu and Sikh inhabitants killed
in large numbers or forcibly converted and driven as destitutes from
their homes are: Darwal, Narang, Chak Sewak, Bhagwal, Athwal, Tahar,
Sahota, Mangwal, Thanel Fatuhi, Rupwal, Ranjha, Dhanogi, Ghugg etc.  In
the last named, as many as 128 Sikhs were killed and 40 women were
abducted.  Looting and arson in Hindu-Sikh houses occurred on a large
scale.  In Jia Bagha 18 Sikhs were killed and 52 were forcibly
converted. 66 Sikhs’ houses were burnt.

Dhudial is a large village in Jhelum district, with several gurdwaras, a
High School and a bank.  It was attacked on March 12. The first attack
was resisted by the Sikhs, who were a well organised and substantial
community.  The second attack, made on the evening of March 13, was much
more severe.  Large scale arson and looting of Sikh houses occurred. 
About a dozen Sikhs were killed.  Besides three-fourth of the houses in
the village, 4 Gurdwaras, the Iran-Hind Bank and the Khalsa High School
were burnt.  Only the arrival of the military on the scene stopped
further destruction. 14 other villages in the neighbourhood of Dhudial
were looted with murder and arson.  Altogether the Chakwal Tehsil of
Jhelum District was over-run.

On March 7, the Frontier Mail was stopped by a Muslim mob at Taxila
Railway Station, in Rawalpindi district.  Hindu and Sikh passengers,
especially the latter, were pulled out and 22 dead bodies were left on
the platform.

About the same time, be it noted, another Muslim mob killed Hindu and
Sikh passengers in a train while it was held up outside Sharifpura, a
suburb of Amritsar.  Train hold-ups and killing of Hindu and Sikh
passengers was a regular feature of the Muslim League plan of action, as
various incidents from March, right up till January, 1948 show.

Cambellpur witnessed atrocities on Hindus and Sikhs, even much worse and
on a larger scale.  In Rajar, in Tehsil Fatehjung of the Cambellpur
district on March 10, the Muslim mob which attacked was armed with
rifles.  In this attack 300 Sikhs were killed and 3 Gurdwaras were burnt
and the Sikh Scripture was desecrated.  In this place, 116 Sikhs
including women and children there coasted alive inside a Gurdwara. 95
women were abducted and forcibly married to Muslims.  All Sikh houses
were burnt and looted.

In the villages Pand and Tali Pandi in this District on March 9, Sikh
houses were looted and burnt on a large scale.  An ultimatum was given
to Sikhs to embrace Islam and a large number were forcibly converted. 
Such of the Sikhs as did not get converted, were brutally done to death,
and these included old women and children.  Some were also burnt alive. 
In the village of Jhan, the entire Hindu and Sikh population was wiped
out.  In Parial, 150 Hindus and Sikhs out of its total population of 160
were burnt alive while they were taking shelter in the Gurdwara.  In the
villages of Chakri and Dheri, Sikhs fought against overwhelming numbers
and many were killed.

In Jand, Kanat and Basal, in Campbellpur district there was large-scale
arson and heavy casualties among Hindus and Sikhs.  Numerous piteous
appeals were sent by the panic-stricken inhabitants to the authorities,
but seldom did such appeals help in saving those who made them.  Appeals
from beleaguered Sikhs bespeaking the last extremity of despair and
expressing any hope of preservation only from God, the Preserver of all,
were received from these various areas in the office of the Shromani
Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee at Amritsar, which however, was utterly
helpless in this situation in which only a strong Government, determined
to stop lawlessness ruthlessly could be of any help.

In Cambellpur lawlessness was of an especially serious nature.  In the
village of Dheri, on March 8, the attack was made by a large mob which
advanced with drums beating.  A very large number of Sikhs, among whom
were women and children, were killed.  Such dastardliness which spared
neither sex nor age was a regular feature of this Muslim League campaign
of extermination of Sikhs and Hindus.  Various kinds of brutalities were
committed.  Hindus and Sikhs who were converted, were forced to swallow
beef.

Everywhere in Campbellpur District, there appears to have been no law or
Government in these days.  The Muslim police abetted and aided the
assailants of Hindus and Sikhs.  The Muslim mobs everywhere advanced
with drums beating and with the Muslim League flag flying.  Raping of
women, forcible conversions, torturing of men and women were freely
indulged in besides burning and looting. Gurdwaras were burnt and
desecrated.  In Chauntra all Sikhs were forcibly converted, and their
womenfolk given over to Muslims.  Later a plot was hatched by Muslims to
kill all these Hindus and Sikhs, notwithstanding their recent
conversion.  This plot got somehow known to the intended victims, and
they managed to get military aid sometime before they could be done to
death.

On March 12, there was a two-hour battle between the Muslim rioters on
the one hand and police and military on the other at Jand in Tehsil
Pindigheb in Campbellpur district.

On the 12th March, a mob of 10,000 Muslims advanced upon Mianwali.  It
was only the tact and firmness of the district authorities which averted
the fate of the neighbouring areas befalling the Hindus and Sikhs of
this town.

On March 11, the town of Tandlianwala, in Lyallpore district and an
important trading centre, was attacked by a huge Muslim mob, bent upon
loot, arson and the murder of Hindus and Sikhs.  Here again it was the
courage displayed by Hindus and Sikhs and the firmness of the
authorities which saved this town.  So widespread over the Punjab was
this Muslim League campaign of beating the minorities into submission.

On March 9, in the words of *The Civil bind Military Gazette* report ‘an
armed mob (of Muslims) from rural areas raided Hazro Bazar, 12 miles
from Cambellpur and committed arson and loot on a large scale.  Six
persons were killed and two injured.’ The number of casualties is a
gross understatement, as all such estimates given in official and
quasi-official reports in those days were later proved to be.

In Khusab (Sargodha district) on March 14, Hindu shops, houses and
temples were looted and burned.  There was huge loss of property.  A
similar situation was developing in Sargodha, Bhera and Bhalwal.

A remote village, Chajian in Hazara district, where attacks on Hindus
and Sikhs were made in December, 1946 and January 1947, was attacked on
March 15.  Hindus and Sikhs had to be evacuated to places of safety.  In
Peshawar Hindus and Sikhs were beleagured.  Muzaffargarh, a district in
Multan Division, and Montgomery, in Lahore Division, both Muslim
majority districts, showed signs in these days of attacks on Hindus and
Sikhs brewing.

It was significant that during this period there had been no disturbance
on the part of Hindus and Sikhs in any of the non-Muslim majority
districts.  In Jullundur and Ludhiana towns trouble was made by Muslims,
who were in a majority of 70% in each of these towns-Sikhs were in. a
majority in the rural areas of Ludhiana District, and were a powerful
factor in both rural Jullundur and Ferozepore.  Yet no reports were
received of any disturbances from these areas.

Rawalpindi Division was ablaze.  Its rural Hindu and Sikh population was
almost entirely in refugee camps.  The biggest of these camps was at
Wah, in Campbellpur District, and its population was about 25,000. 
Another refugee camp, nearly as big, was situated at Kala, in Jhelum
District.  There were other refugee camps at smaller places.  But most
of the Hindus and Sikhs of this area had got so much panic-stricken that
they preferred to leave this area altogether, and travelled east.  The
railway trains were full to capacity of destitute Hindu and Sikh
refugees from places from Jhelum to Peshawar and other areas.  They
moved in search of shelter into the Sikh-Hindu majority districts of the
Punjab, into the Punjab States, into the Jat States of Bharatpur,
Dholpur, into Alwar, into Delhi and the U. P. Some moved even further
east.  Patiala State alone had, by April, as many as fifty thousand Sikh
and Hindu refugees, who had to be fed, housed and clad, whose children
had to be educated and who needed being settled in life again after
being uprooted.  Thousands of widows and orphans created a problem
well-nigh insoluble in the face of the suddenness with which it had
emerged.  Destitutes were roaming every town and village of the Punjab
east of Amritsar in search of food and shelter.  Pitiable indeed was the
condition of these people, who had become victims of an unprecedented
kind of disaster.  State Governments and private organizations like the
Shromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee, the Hindu Mahasabha and the
Congress tried to do their best to relieve the distress of these
unfortunates, but the task was gigantic.  So, barring a microscopic
minority of these uprooted people, who had means in the East Punjab, the
others remained, practically speaking, destitutes for whom life held
little hope.  This was the state to which the Muslim League campaign had
reduced about at least ten lakhs of enterprising, useful human beings.

But the story of the terrible carnage wrought by the Muslim League
campaign of conquest of the minorities is not yet even half told.  The
known number of casualties in Rawalpindi Division alone is about 7,000
killed.  The number of those injured must be considerably higher.  Not
less than between four and five thousand women were abducted or
dishonoured.  Houses and shops burnt were thousands, while hundreds of
Gurdwaras, Hindu temples and schools were burned or desecrated. 
Expressing his reaction to what he saw in Rawalpindi Division in these
days, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, then Vice-President of the Interim
Government of India said that the deeds committed in -the Rawalpindi
district would shame even beasts.  J. A. Scott, Deputy Inspector-General
of Police in the Rawalpindi range, in a statement to the Press,
declared:

“It is unbelievable that barbarous acts such as were committed on
innocent people in rural areas of the Rawalpindi Division could be
possible in the Punjab.”

All these atrocities on Hindus and Sikhs brought no condemnation
whatever from the Muslim League leaders.  They either kept silent about
them, or continued to trot out imaginary atrocities on Muslims.  This
not only encouraged the Muslim goondas, but gave them the confidence
that they could go on safely with the blessings of the League leaders. 
Defence Leagues of Muslim lawyers and others were set up to rescue from
the clutches of the law murderers and beasts in human shape who had
perpetrated unspeakable atrocities on innocent and defenceless human
beings.  The Muslim League Press continued to protest against the
so-called police excesses in Founding up Muslim bad characters and
criminals, against whom action in fact was inadequate and very much
belated.  Such action as was taken, came when the military appeared on
the scene, and when the Punjab Government decided a little to modify its
disastrous policy of making the Punjab Police Department as entirely
Muslim preserve.

In Multan attacks of a most destructive nature began on the 5th March,
the day on which the Muslim League had decided to unleash its offensive
in the Punjab.  In violence, speed and the extent of destruction wrought
this Multan campaign was in no way less than its Rawalpindi parallel. 
In both areas Hindus and Sikhs were in a small minority, and the Muslim
population very inflammable.  In Multan city itself the attack came on
the 5th March.  A procession of Hindu and Sikh students which was taken
out to demonstrate against the formation of a communal Muslim League
ministry in the Punjab, was suddenly and brutally attacked by a Muslim
mob, with the help of the Police.  Many of the students who were in this
procession were killed.  Then this mob fell upon Hindu and Sikh quarters
of the town.  A modest estimate places the number of Hindu and Sikhs
killed on the first day at 300 and those injured at 500.  The Muslim mob
was led by a Sayad or Muslim holy man, reputedly a descendant of the
Prophet of Islam, on a white charger, ‘inspiring’ the ‘faithful’ with
the destruction of ‘Kafirs’.  The police were watching all this and
moved not their little finger to stop what could be stopped with firm
action in a short space of time.  So virulent had been the Muslim League
propaganda, and such the fury into which the League had whipped the
Muslim temper, that the mob did not even spare Hindu and Sikh patients
in the T.-B. Hospital.  Whole families were done to death, and on the
least suspicion of being a non-Muslim a man was killed.  Dr. Saifuddin
Kitchlew, President of the Punjab Provincial Congress Committee, was on
that fateful night a guest in the house of Seth Kalyan Das of Multan. 
Dr. Kitchlew’s host and his entire family were butchered and the Doctor
escaped death only on his proving to his assailants’ satisfaction that
he was a Muslim.  Hindu shops were looted and burned on a large scale. 
More than a dozen Sikh and Hindu holy places were also burned and
desecrated: Eight factories belonging to Hindus were looted and
destroyed by fire.  Hindu and Sikh quarters were burned to cinders.

The trouble spread to the countryside of Multan simultaneously.  Police
lorries, which moved to and fro ostensibly for the relief of sufferers,
were really employed to carry Muslim goondas into the countryside.  In
Shujabad Tehsil of Multan, an attack was made on March 7 on the Hindus
of village Aliwala.  Large-scale murder of Hindus occurred. 
Simultaneously Hindus of the villages of Chhajjushah, Mochipura and
Bhojewala were also attacked.  All this was done in village after
village after the Muslims had given assurances of safety on the Koran to
Hindus.  Hindu women were molested and abducted.  Altogether 50 villages
in this tehsil were looted with arson, murder and abduction of women. 
Ears, noses and breasts of women were cut off, and they were raped in
the presence of their husbands, brothers, fathers and sons.  Such Hindus
as approached Muslims with messages of peace were brutally and cynically
murdered by these League gangs.  Forcible conversions of Hindus occurred
on a large scale.  It is estimated that Hindus were wiped out in this
district over an area of about 500 square miles.  Some of the prominent
villages in which this destruction occurred are these: Traggar, Matoth,
Basti Ahir, Jhakkar, Birkhi, Lashkriwala and Shurewan.

In Lahore, attacks on Hindus and Sikhs started even a day earlier than
they did in Multan, that is on the 4th March.  Hindu and Sikh students
took out a procession, protesting against the attempt to foist a purely
communal, Muslim League Ministry on the Punjab.  The police and
officials had watched the progress of the Muslim League agitation of
January-February, 1947 for 34 days.  On the whole, as has been pointed
out above, this agitation was dealt with in a most ‘soft’ and even
inadequate manner by the police, so that from being an agitation
unattended by acts of violence, this agitation soon became violent in
nature.  It was at no time, not even at its inception, non-violent in
the sense in which the struggles of the Congress had been non-violent,
for foul and vituperative abuse, provocative anti-Hindu-and-Sikh
slogans, forcing non-Muslims to join the Muslim agitators, etc. had been
resorted to by the League agitators as a matter of course.  But all
through the police contended themselves with effecting ‘temporary’
arrests of the League leaders, with now and then tear-gassing the League
processions and. such other mild measures.  Only when the police were
themselves attacked, did there occur lathi-beating and firing.  All this
was because the police and the civil officials had Muslim League
sympathies and they were in fact, completely ‘demoralised’.  Fair and
impartial administration of justice could not be looked for from them. 
They wanted to create an atmosphere favourable for the establishment of
Pakistan in the Punjab, and allowed the Muslim League agitation, which
was in fact intended to usher in a Muslim League Ministry, the precursor
of Pakistan. to grow more and more irresistible.

The conduct of the police at once changed even on the first day when the
Hindus and Sikhs took out a procession in protest against the attempt at
foisting Pakistan on the Punjab.  The procession of Hindu and Sikh
students was perfectly nonviolent.  It only raised slogans, but these
were in no way against Muslims as such.  There was no evidence that this
agitation would either grow violent or hold within itself any
potentialities detrimental to peace.  It was constitutional agitation. 
Yet the police fired on this procession and several students were
killed; many were injured.  This was, in the words of the Sikh leader
Giani Kartar Singh ‘an attempt to crush, appositive to Pakistan with
police aid.’ He further declared, ‘The police did not fire in Lahore for
a single day during all the 34 days of Muslim League agitation.  It is
amazing they could not tolerate our meetings for a single day.’

That in crushing the Hindu-Sikh opposition to the attempted formation of
establishing Muslim League *raj* in the Punjab, the police were acting
with excessive zeal and initiative born of their pro-League bias, is
shown by the statement issued by the non-Muslim ministers in the
Coalition Ministry, which resigned on the 2nd March, and which ceased
even to function under protest on the 4th.  This statement clearly shows
that the police and the authorities were not taking their directions
from the Government which was still supposed to function, but were
acting as ‘an army of the Muslim League.’ Said the non-Muslim Ministers
in their letter of March 4 (evening) in a statement to the Press:

“We had agreed to continue with the Premier in his caretaker Government
according to the usual conventions, but the firings and disturbances,
which occurred in Lahore, on Thursday^([1](#1)) resulting in many
casualties, have compelled us to tender our resignations to the Premier,
since we feel that we are no longer in a position to take complete
responsibility for the situation.”

While on the one side the police were trying to crush and cow down the
Hindus and Sikhs, and put an end to the opposition to the establishment
of Pakistan, on the other, the Muslim population of Lahore, for months
and months prepared for an attack on Hindus and Sikhs.  This was kept in
check so far only by the known stern determination of the Coalition
Government to put down rioting with a firm hand.  Arms of all kinds,
petrol and other incendiaries, helmets and even jeeps had been collected
and stored by the Muslims for some time.  They were being kept against
their need for such opportune time as presented itself on March 4 and
after, when an all-out many-pronged assault was to he delivered on
Hindus and Sikhs in all such districts in the Punjab, where the League
was in a situation favourable for a successful fight.  So, Muslim
goondas fell upon a Hindu-Sikh procession in Chowk Matti, inside the
walled city and adjoining the passage to Mochi Gate, a large and
thickly-populated Muslim quarter of the town.  Police separated the
parties.  The town was placed under curfew.  The Muslims then took to
stabbing and assaulting of stray Hindus and Sikhs and to setting fire to
Hindu and Sikh houses and buildings.  For this kind of warfare they had
long been trained.  Stabbing had been one of the items in which Muslims,
whether members of the Muslim National Guards or not, had been given
special training, as the facsimile of the certificate given earlier will
show.  For efficient arson they had collected petrol and other
incendiaries, which were pumped into a building, and over the sprayed
woodwork a piece of burning cotton or other flaming object thrown.  In a
few minutes the whole place would catch fire, and the entrapped inmates
would either be burnt alive, or would be killed by the Muslims who would
be waiting outside to pounce upon them as they struggled out of the
flames.  Before this, in Calcutta and other towns Muslim Leaguers had
tried this method of warfare.  It left the Hindus and Sikhs aghast, as
they were not provided with the means of defence against such a total
war of extermination.  With the police planning with, aiding and
shielding the Muslim League goondas, Hindus and Sikhs felt the situation
becoming desperate for them.

Stabbing and waylaying of Hindus and Sikhs became a common occurrence
during these days.  Hindus and Sikhs going about singly or even in small
groups were almost certain to be stabbed to death.  In tongas, in buses
and even at the Railway Station they were not safe, for Muslims would be
lurking with daggers concealed on them, which they could use skilfully
and with fatal effect.  There is not a doubt that hired Muslim assassins
went about Lahore, (and other towns, like Amritsar) charged with the
task of murdering Hindus and Sikhs on payment.  These rings of assassins
were financed by the big ones of the League.  Sometimes when such
assassins were caught they confessed to being in the pay of the Muslim
League leaders.  One assailant, arrested some time later on the Mall
near the Charing Cross, said to the crowd:

“Please inform Begum Shah Nawaz that I have been arrested and ask her to
help me to be released” (*Begam Shah Nawaz ko meharbani kar ke ittlah
dena ki main griftar ho gaya hun, koshish har ke muihe chhuraen*.)

That the existence of such a ring of assassins and their financiers is
not a myth or figment of the imagination, but is based on authentic
proof, is also supported by disclosure made in the leading article of
the *Civil and Military Gazette* of Lahore; dated June 18, 1947-three
and a half months after the campaign of extermination of Hindu and Sikh
minorities had been launched by the Muslim League in the Punjab. (For
this see Appendix).

The incidents which occurred in Lahore from March onwards are
illustrative of the sort of campaign the Muslim League was carrying on,
and the widespread plot of extermination made And put into execution
against Hindus and Sikhs.

A Sikh was standing at a milk-shop, buying milk.  He was stabbed while
standing there and killed.  A Hindu was going on a bicycle.  He was
stopped on the road by a group of Muslims, asked to prove whether he was
Hindu or Muslim, and on it being ascertained that he was a Hindu, he was
put on the road, and his throat cut with slow torture like an animal
slaughtered in the Muslim way.

A Sikh was coming from Court, where he was a clerk.  As he passed
through a Muslim lane in Mozang, some Muslims fell upon him and finished
him on the spot.

Darshan Singh, a Sikh, came out of his house to buy vegetables in Mewa
Mandi.  Several Muslims fell upon and fatally assaulted him.  His dying
declaration revealed that Mian Jalaluddin, a Corporation councillor of
Lahore, was directing his murderers.

A Hindu tangawala was found murdered in his tonga on Empress Road.

Muslims in jeeps would prowl along Lahore roads, and would snipe at or
stab stray Hindus or Sikhs.  Such incidents occurred on Ravi Road, near
the Canal, on Jail Road and Ferozepore Road.

As the month advanced, the tempo of Muslim attack on Hindus and Sikhs
also increased.  In March and April these attacks remained confined to
stabbings and stray burning of houses.  The Muslim Leaguers were feeling
their way.  After the elimination of minorities had been effected to a
great extent in the Rawalpindi Division and in parts of the Multan
Division, and a large part of Amritsar had been devastated, it was
decided by the Muslim Leaguers to drive Hindus and Sikhs out of Lahore
by methods of large-scale murder, loot and arson, for which the police
was very willing accomplice.  The conduct of the Muslim police and
magistracy during this period shows a bold and determined partisanship
with the Muslim League rioters in their campaign of crime.  This was
noticed in the case of M. G. Cheema, a Lahore Magistrate, who abetted
and got completed the ruin of a large and populous Hindu-Sikh part of
the walled city of Lahore.

In May the attack on Hindus and Sikhs assumed very large proportions. 
Regular burning, murder and pillage started.  On May 18, the Muslims of
Mozang, a high Muslim majority area of Lahore attacked the Hindu and
Sikh inhabitants.  The Muslim mob is said to have been ten thousand and
was supplied with rifles which report speaks of as having come from the
armoury of the police station of Mozang, through the courtesy of the
Muslim Sub-Inspector.  The arms thus loaned were to be returned after
“use”.  Several Hindu and Sikh buildings were set on fire, and moving
about in the Mozang area became extremely risky for any Hindu or Sikh.

On the same day, bungalows of Hindus and Sikhs, situated opposite the
Sikh National College on Grand Trunk Road, were set on fire.  So were
the huts of Hindu labourers in this area.  One Hindu temple was burned
inside the Masti Gali area.  Hindu houses were set on fire inside Akbari
Mandi and Kucha Patpatian.  A non-Muslim was killed near Shahi Mohalla
(a thickly populated Muslim zone, close to the Shahi Masjid) and his
dead body was set on fire with petrol sprinkled on it.

Muslims of Baghbanpura, a Muslim suburb of Lahore near Shalimar Gardens
on the road leading to Amritsar, attacked their neighbouring non-Muslim
areas, Singhpura and Bharat Nagar.  In the former place, which was
inhabited by Sikhs mostly, several mob attacks were made, and Sikhs
killed with rifle fire and houses set on fire.  In Bharat Nagar several
Hindu houses were burned and people venturing out of their houses were
stabbed.  The Punjab Government was compelled to impose a collective
fine of two lakh rupees on Baghbanpura Muslims for their continued
aggressive behaviour towards non-Muslims.

The announcement of the Mountbatten Plan on June 3, 1947 which conceded
Pakistan and made its coming into existence on August 15, 1947 a dead
certainty increased ten-fold the tempo-of attack on non-Muslims in
Lahore.  The Mountbatten Plan had provided for a boundary commission for
the partition of the Punjab and of Bengal, should the non-Muslim
legislators of either province demand partition.  Considering the temper
of the Muslims of these provinces, especially in the course of the year
1946 and 1947, ever since the Direct Action resolution of the Muslim
League was passed on July 29, 1946 at Bombay, it was not likely that the
non-Muslims of these areas would like either province to go entirely
into the proposed theocratic Muslim State of Pakistan.  So, a vote for
division in either case was expected-as a matter of fact, on the part of
the non-Muslim legislators who in this matter fully carried out the
wishes of the Hindus and Sikhs of the provinces concerned, it was known
to be a foregone conclusion.  The Boundary Commissions were appointed to
demarcate the boundaries of the two provinces where in the event of a
non-Muslim demand for partition, these provinces were to go into
Pakistan and India respectively.  The two commissions, which however had
in Sir Cyril Radcliffe, a common chairman, were required to take into
consideration, while fixing the boundaries, population and ‘other
factors.’ What these ‘other factors’ were to be, was never precisely
defined.  It was thought that they would include historic and religious
attachments, extraordinary economic interest and stake and no less
inevitably the need for making a tenable, stable international
boundary.  Sikhs had a strong stake in the Montgomery, Lyallpur and
Sheikhupura districts in which they had been pioneer colonists and had
created unheard of prosperity through sheer dint of labour and
unexampled force of hardihood and character.  So, they expected that
these districts, or anyway such portions of them as had a concentration
of Sikh interest, would be decided to be allotted to India.  The Sikhs
had a further deep interest in Nankana Sahib, which is the birthplace of
Sri Guru Nanak Dev, founder of Sikhism and is situated in the heart of
Sheikhupura district.  The Hindus of the Punjab had quite as heavy an
economic stake in these districts as the Sikhs, and more so even in
Lahore, which town owed almost its entire wealth, industry, educational
enterprise, and importance to the vast effort the Hindus had been
expending for generations in building it up.  Sikh enterprise in
developing Lahore was second only to the Hindu-the Muslims there being
backward and unenterprising, consisting mostly of migratory seasonal
labourers or petty hawkers.  A large part of the Muslim population of
Lahore lived on the verge of crime and other anti-social activities, and
were a ready army in the hands of gangsters, rioters and now of the
Muslim League fascists.  The story of the allotment of the three
above-named districts of Sheikhupura, Montgomery and Lyallpur besides
Lahore to Pakistan is a tragic story, and is black and gross betrayal
of- the Sikhs and Hindus into the hands of those who were planning to
coerce, subdue and exterminate them.  It is not strictly relevant to the
purpose of this booklet to go into the details of this aspect of the
history of the Punjab, or into the proceedings of the Punjab Boundary
Commission, before which the Sikh and Hindu case was put by eminent
lawyers with unanswerable force of logic.  But it appears the British
Government had made up their mind not to let Pakistan be a resourceless
state, and so, regardless of the fate and future of the Sikhs, the above
named areas were allotted to Pakistan.  The award of the Boundary
Commission, which in effect was the award of Sir Cyril Radcliffe was
based on the population figures and any ‘other factors’ did not enter at
all into its determination.  And so the Sikhs were not only cut into
twain, but their best lands and holiest shrines and perhaps the most
enterprising portion of their population were thrown to the wolves.

The award of the Boundary Commission was made public on the 17th August,
1947.  Speculation had been rife as to what the boundary was likely to
be, ever since the announcement of the Mountbatten Plan on June 3. It
appears the Muslims were determined that not only Lahore, but portions
of the Amritsar, Jullundur and several other East Punjab Districts must
come to Pakistan.  They had perhaps a long-range plan as well, of which
we got hints from the way the Muslims prepared for an attack on the
Hindus and Sikhs of Delhi on the Punjab scale.  That plan evidently was
to create centres of Muslim disaffection and rebellion against the
future Government of the Indian Dominion, and to prepare the way for
occupation of the East Punjab, Delhi and whatever else might come into
the bag, by Pakistan.  With Kashmir thrown in, the empire of Pakistan on
the western side would stretch from at least the Jumna westward.  This
was the ambitious Pakistan Plan.

In order to make such a plan a success, it was very essential that
Hindus and Sikhs must be thoroughly beaten down and driven, as far as
possible, from the Muslim zone, which was designed to spread as far cast
as the Jumna. While the March-May attacks on Hindus and Sikhs had made
Pakistan a reality in the terms of the Mountbatten announcement, the
attacks of June onwards had even a fuller purpose.  This was to drive
Hindus and Sikhs out of Lahore, Amritsar and other large towns by a
campaign of murder and arson.  So, the month of June saw a vigorous
flare-up of the trouble in Lahore and Amritsar and the occurrence of
attacks on Hindus and Sikhs in towns which had so far been more or less
quiet, such as Gujranwala and Gujrat.

On June 13, 1947 Mozang which has already been mentioned as figuring
prominently in March in attacks on Hindus and Sikhs, was a highly
disturbed area.  Many Hindu and Sikh houses and shops were burned.  The
situation deteriorated to such an extent that a curfew, lasting 60 hours
had to be imposed on the area.  In this area shots were fired on Hindu
and Sikh houses from adjoining Muslim houses.  The area of the fires was
quite wide and spread over the different parts of Mozang, a locality
roughly a mile square.

Destruction by arson appears to have been from now on the settled policy
of the Muslim Leaguers in Lahore.  The fate of Lahore still lay in the
hands of the non-Muslim legislators, who were to meet on the 23rd June
to decide on the partition or otherwise of the Punjab, and later in the
hands of the Boundary Commission.  But the Muslim.  Leaguers wanted to
drive all Hindus and Sikhs from Lahore.  If Lahore came to Pakistan, it
would have been a good riddance and action according to plan if Hindus
and Sikhs were made to vacate Lahore.  It was calculated that the vast
wealth accumulated by Hindus and Sikhs for generations in this
magnificent city would fall into the hands of Muslims.  If Lahore by any
chance was allotted to India, it would have been a good thing to have
destroyed this fine city, and to make a present of heaps of ashes and
cinders to the new rulers of India on August 15, 1947.  Such calculation
and surging hate and malice appear to have directed the course of Muslim
action in Lahore in the months from the beginning of June onwards.  It
is said also that the Muslim goondas of Lahore were put to shame by
their compeers in Amritsar, who had done extremely well in murdering
Hindus and Sikhs of that city and in reducing about a quarter of the
town of Amritsar to ashes.  In an interview to the Press Mr. Eustace,
District Magistrate of Lahore revealed that the Muslim *goondas* of
Amritsar sent, as a mark of sarcastic provocation churis (glass bangles)
and mehndi (henna) to the *goondas* of Lahore, implying lack of
manliness and feminity in them in not having ‘done’ anything against
Hindus and Sikhs.  The Lahore goondas were evidently stung to the quick,
and stirred their ‘manliness’ not a little, by setting fire to a good
part of the Hindu and Sikh localities of Lahore and letting loose on the
city a campaign of stabbing and looting, which went on unimpeded with
active police and official support.

On the 19th June while some non-Muslim workmen were proceeding to the
Railway Workshop, a bomb was thrown at the party, injuring several. 
Several cases of stabbing occurred in the Muslim areas of Brandreth
Road, Bull Road, Barkatali Road, Circular Road and Railway Road. 
Stabbing of non-Muslims also took place inside Mochi Gate (a Muslim
area). The area covered by Naulakha Police Station, a thickly populated
Muslim area, commanding ingress and egress from the city as it is
situated near the Railway Station and the general lorry stand, beside a
number of important road junctions, became dangerously active, and had
to be placed under 42-hour curfew.  On this day occurred the widest and
longest campaign of burning down Hindu and Sikh localities hitherto
experienced in Lahore.  Mohalla Jalotian Sanda Kalan, Kucha Moolomata,
Chohatta Wasti Bhagat, Bazar Nauharian and several other localities saw
buildings set ablaze. On the evening of 19th June as many as 22 fires
could be seen raging in the city of Lahore.  The fire-raisers had done
their job with an efficiency and skill born of long training and
possession of quick incendiary materials.  Sprinkling of petrol with the
help of stirrup pumps and then setting the whole place ablaze with a
piece of cotton set alight or a burning rocket was the process
employed.  Here as elsewhere the victims, Hindus and Sikhs, whose houses
and localities were thus set on fire, were totally helpless in fighting
the fire, or retaliating on the Muslims in kind had they had the desire
to do so.

The whole plan was well laid out by the League arson squads in
conjunction with the police and officials.  The area marked out was
generally made the scene of a few stabbing cases or brawls.  It was then
placed under curfew.  As the administration of the curfew was in the
hands of Muslim officials and police, Hindus and Sikhs naturally had to
observe the provisions of the curfew order strictly.  The least
appearance of a Hindu or Sikh in the balcony of a house or above the
projection of a wall, drew a shot from the police.  Not so the Muslim
*goondas*.  They were allowed to move about freely.  So, during curfew
hours, under cover of the police who would keep the coast thoroughly
clear, the Muslim miscreants set fire to Hindu and Sikh houses.  This
fire would spread quickly.  Any Hindu and Sikh coming out of his house
even to take steps to fight this fire was liable to be shot at for
defiance of curfew rules.  The police kept Hindus and Sikhs completely
at bay.  So, the choice open to the Lahore Hindus and Sikhs from June
onwards was this:

They must either have their houses and house-hold effects burnt, and
themselves along with these in the fire;

Or, they, must be shot down by the police in the attempt to extinguish
the fires or to escape with their lives from their burning houses.

21st June dawned terrible and grim in Lahore, even more than the two
previous days.  On this day a bus was stopped by Muslim goondas outside
Mochi Gate, a purely Muslim locality.  Hindu and Sikh passengers were
pulled out, the Muslims being asked to stand in a separate line.  The
Muslim goondas on such occasions used the term ‘chhatra’ (a sheep) or
‘suer’ (pig) for the victims, and asked the drivers if they happened to
be Muslims, to surrender their prey to them. 10 of these unhappy
passengers were stabbed to death and left dead on the Circular Road.  On
this day the city, of Lahore, both walled and new, saw altogether 46
fires raging in it.  In the walled city alone, a thickly populated area,
concentrating a population of 3 lakhs in a square mile or so, 20 fires
were burning in the Hindu and Sikh localities.  Gurdwara Baoli Sahib
inside Dabbi Bazar in the walled city was attempted to be burned, but
was saved by the arrival of a military patrol.

On the 22nd June, the campaign of arson took a still more widespread and
‘all-out’ form.  On this day the town had as many as 69 fires burning in
its different localities.  Shahalmi Gate, the biggest and busiest
trading centre of Lahore, almost entirely Hindu, was the spot selected
for destruction by Muslims this time.  To close down the trading areas
inside this gate would mean paralysing almost the whole of Hindu
business and means of sustenance, and would cause a general exodus f
Hindus from Lahore.  M. G. Cheema, the notorious magistrate who figured
in a High Court enquiry for excesses against Hindus and Sikhs, directed
this biggest so far destruction of non-Muslim property in Lahore. 
Several busy shopping centres, each commanding immense trade, were
completely gutted, the houses on both sides of the narrow streets having
fallen and blocked the roads with debris.  Hindus attempting to escape
from the flames were repeatedly fired on by the police.  Mohalla Sarin,
Bazar Satthan, Pipal Virha etc., were some of the other localities which
were destroyed by fire.  Magistrate M. G. Cheema, instead of bringing
any relief to the unfortunate Hindus and Sikhs of these localities only
arrested the men-folk and subjected the women-folk to shameful,
humiliating and most indecent treatment, which these unfortunate ladies
narrated with tears in their eyes to Pt.  Nehru, Vice-President of the
Interim Government of India, when soon after he visited Lahore.

With the burning of a good part of Hindu Lahore, and repeated attempts
at arson in Krishan Nagar, Chauburji and other areas, there began a
general exodus of Hindus and Sikhs from Lahore.  Every outgoing train
was full of people whose houses, shops and places of business had been
destroyed and who travelled east for places where to keep their
families.  Thus, already in June, on the heels of the Rawalpindi refugee
problem, a new refugee problem, involving more than a lakh of people,
emerged for the Hindus and Sikhs of the Punjab.

A party of Lahore journalists went round the city of Lahore after this
terrible destruction.  This is the pitiful sight they described:-

“It was a pitiful sight when saw in the city on Thursday morning with a
party of Pressmen.  Houses once inhabited by happy families now stood
there deserted, blackened and burnt out.  Smoke was still coming out of
many of them and the air was heavy with a bitter tang which irritated
the eyes and nostrils.

“Shahalmi Gate, once the main centre of provisions trade, has become a
wreck.

“A block of 250 houses and shops has been reduced to ashes and the main
street is impassable with mounds of rubble still smouldering.  In order
to check the fire from spreading to the nearby houses the authorities
have ordered the demolition of the burnt-out or half-burnt houses.

“The party then visited Mozang which had suffered heavy destruction of
property.  Rows of houses have been burnt out leaving behind smoking
rubble, charred bricks, and twisted girders.  The houses in this area
were mostly empty, for the occupants of the houses anticipating trouble
ahead, had migrated to safer places.  The demolition of the half-burnt
houses and clearing of the debris was in progress.”

Ichhra and Mozang are two nearly purely Muslim areas, the Hindu and Sikh
populations in them being scattered and slight.  Muslim goondas of these
areas indulged in a continued and widespread campaign of arson in Hindu
and Sikh houses.  On June 27, the police rounded up 11 such Muslim
goondas.  On this very day, a steel foundary and a firewood store, both
belonging to non-Muslims, were set on fire.

Misri Shah is another thickly populated Muslim area, situated on the
northern side of the railway track, beyond the railway station.  This
area saw an intensified campaign of loot, arson and murder let loose
upon its non-Muslim population, on June 30.  Arms were found or
collected in Muslim houses on search being made.  The burning of houses
and stabbing of non-Muslims became so serious that the area and to be
placed under a 72-hour curfew and to be cordoned off.

July was a month of violent and widespread attacks on Hindus and Sikhs
in Lahore.  The elimination and extermination of these minorities by the
Muslims was proceeding apace now, and the field covered was coming to
embrace more and new spheres of life and activity.  Moghalpura Railway
Workshop was one of the biggest of its kind in undivided Northern India,
employing thousands of workers, Muslims as well as non-Muslims.  The
area is a Muslim majority area, with Baghbanpura, a suburb notorious for
its attacks on non-Muslim life and property lying hardly a mile off. 
Early in July, during the lunch recess, a Muslim mob got into the
workshop premises and stabbed to death a large number of Sikh and Hindu
workers.  A still larger number were injured.  The same evening a Hindu
cycling home from Mughalpura area was waylaid on the road, and his
throat cut by Muslims with slow torture like that of a goat slaughtered
in Muslim fashion.  On July 23, a special train which used to carry
workers daily from Lahore to the Harbanspura workshop was stopped near
Mughalpura Railway Station, and an attack made on the Hindus and Sikhs
in it.  The train had been held up by placing boulders across with
track.  In this attack eight Hindus and Sikhs are reported to have been
killed and twelve injured.  More casualties were averted as the
engine-driver kept his nerve, removed the obstruction from the track and
drove the train away.  There were on this very day reported more than
half a dozen cases of stabbing and shooting down of Hindus and Sikhs
from the various Muslim localities of Lahore, such as Tibbi, Bhati Gate
and Naulakha area.  There were several cases of arson, the most serious
being the burning down of a cinema house outside Bhati Gate, belonging
to a Hindu.

On July 30, a train was attacked near Tangra, a station about 15 miles
distant from Amritsar, and several passengers killed.  Muslim Leaguers
had made train hold-ups a very important part of their method of warfare
on Hindus and Sikhs.  A few days before a train was similarly attacked
near Hoshiarpur.  The Mughalpura train attack has been mentioned just
above.

Several passengers were brutally murdered at Wazirabad station after
which the Muslim assailants set fire to Hindu shops and business
premises.  The Wazirabad branches of the Punjab National Bank and the
Lakshmi Commercial Bank were gutted after being looted.  The cashier of
the Punjab and Kashmir Bank was stabbed.

The bazar of Malakwal, a well-known mandi, was burnt.  Trains were
stopped at Alha, a wayside railway station, where several people were
killed.

Three persons including a two-year old child were shot dead inside a
house at Rawalpindi.

A major disaster on Chakwal line was averted by the police and through
courage shown by an Anglo-Indian Railway Inspector, who was travelling
in that train.  A gang of about half a dozen hooligans, armed with
sten-guns blocked the rail between Harnal and Mandra-Bhaun section of
the N. W. Railway.  Noticing that there were some non-Muslims in a
particular compartment the inspector, who had a revolver, immediately
came out of his compartment and returned the fire.  The intruders
thinking that military was accompanying the train, withdrew after
killing two and injuring there.  Several passengers were killed at
Taxila Railway Station.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))March 4, 1947.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
