+++
title = "12 WEST PUNJAB ABLAZE SHEIKHUPURA"

+++
**WEST PUNJAB ABLAZE**

SHEIKHUPURA

Sheikhupura is the district next to Lahore on the Western side. Just
three miles out of Lahore, after crossing the River Ravi, one enters the
boundary of this district.  This district contains Nankana Sahib, the
birthplace of Sri Guru Nanak Dev, and the huge estate attached to this
Gurdwara which before partition yielded a revenue of about twenty lakh
rupees annually to the Sikh people.  Most of the proprietors of land in
this district were Sikhs who had fine lands and had made them rich and
productive by lavishing on this land such hard labour as only the Sikh
agriculturist appears to be capable of.  Besides, the urban Hindu and
Sikh population of this district had industrial enterprise and had set
up business houses, factories and works.  Sikhs and Hindus were,
however, in a minority in this district, the population proportions
being:-  
 

|         |     |     |     |        |
|---------|-----|-----|-----|--------|
| Muslims | ... | ... | ... | 63.62% |
| Hindus  | ... | ... | ... | 9.12%  |
| Sikhs   | ... | ... | ... | 18.85% |

Sheikhupura Hindus and Sikhs were perhaps, after Rawalpindi and Multan,
the worst sufferers at the hands of the Pakistani fanaticism and
cold-blooded murderous frenzy.  The blow fell on them suddenly and
swifly-leaving between 10,000 and 20,000 of them dead in two days.  The
conspiracy that was hatched in Sheikhupura between the Muslim Leaguers,
the Civil Officers, Police and Military for the extermination of Hindus
and Sikhs of this town and the district governed by it, is perhaps the
worst on human record, showing calculated devilry on such a large scale.

No incidents had occurred in Sheikhupura of any considerable nature, in
spite, of all that happened since March, 1947 in Rawalpindi and Multan,
Lahore, Amritsar and Gujranwala.  This continued up till the day the
Award of the Boundary Commission was announced, that is, August 17. 
Till that day there had been speculations as to which side would the
part of Sheikhupura in which Nankana Sahib was situated, would go. 
Also, some people speculated that the ‘other factors’ clause in the
terms of reference of the Boundary Commission might mean for example,
Sikh landed interests on the basis of which Sheikhupura or a part of it
might be awarded to India.  So, during the period of indecision the
Muslim League trouble-makers of this district were quiet, and were in a
way sitting on the fence.

As soon as the Award of the Boundary Commission was announced and they
knew that Sheikhupura had been awarded to Pakistan, the Muslim Leaguers
and their allies, the Pakistan Police and Military, feverishly began to
perfect and execute their plans for the looting and murdering of Hindus
and Sikhs.  Attacks on the countryside began as early as the 18th
August; and within a week Sikhs and Hindus everywhere in villages, as
will be seen from the appendix of incidents at the end, were being
driven out *en masse*.  During this time the plan was also made by which
Sheikhupura town and other towns in the district were also to be cleared
of Hindus and Sikhs.

The conspiracy began on about the 10th of August, when a public meeting
of Muslims was called in cattle-fair grounds, ostensibly for the purpose
of saying prayers for rains, which had that year been rather scarce.  At
this meeting, which naturally no non-Muslim could attend, the “plan” for
attack on Hindus and Sikhs was explained to the Muslims.  Muslims were
very reticent about this meeting to their Hindu and Sikh friends and
acquaintances.  After this meeting, Muslim E. A. C.’s and other
officials ceased attending the official club of which they were
members.  They instead held secret meetings, along with big Police
Officers and Karamat Ali, a minister in the West Punjab Government and a
resident of Sheikhupura.  A confidential list was prepared of all
leading Hindus and Sikhs of Sheikhupura, which was accidentally revealed
by the Christian stenographer of the Anglo-Indian Deputy Commissioner,
Disney.  This was the ‘murder list’.  Haq Nawaz, Superintendent of
Police, transferred from Gurdaspur to Sargodha, incited Muslims while on
the way to his new charge, to murder Hindus and Sikhs.  The Deputy
Commissioner was a willing tool in the hands of the Muslim League
plotters, the police and officials, all of whom took their inspiration
and guidance from the above-named Karamat Ali, at whose residence daily
meetings of these elements were held.

The situation was tense and ominous.  All issue of petrol to non-Muslims
was stopped.  Petrol was dumped for arson.  After the 20th August
military used to parade the town for four or five days.  But there were
no incidents.  Without valid ground, curfew was imposed on the 24th
August.  This was the first time Sheikhupura experienced curfew.  Here
too the curfew operated as everywhere in Pakistan.  Muslims were free to
move about during curfew hours, to set fire to houses of non-Muslims and
to commit murders.  Non-Muslim representatives approached the D. C. with
the request to lift curfew, as it was being abused.  But he did not
agree to this request.

Muslims were making brisk preparations for the rioting of the next few
days.  There was a good deal of coming and going of Muslims at the
residence of Karamat Ali, Minister.  On the 25th, Hindu and Sikh houses
were burned in Gurdwara Bazar.  A false alarm was raised of an attack on
a Muslim mohalla by Sikhs.  All this was done to incite Muslims to fall
upon Sikhs.  On the 25th also a vigorous attack was made on Ramgarha
which had a Sikh population of 1,200.  Sikhs were being chased.  The
Muslim mob was followed by the military.  When Sikhs gave a fight the
Muslim mob retreated.  Then the military took the lead and took up
positions against Hindu-Sikh areas at about 2 o’clock (day).  By about 5
o’clock the Hindu-Sikh population of this area had been killed, and the
houses were in flames.  Muslim mobs now swelled and spread out to attack
to different parts of the town.  Street after street was surrounded by
Muslim mobs, military and police.  The looting, burning and murdering
continued all over the town for more than 24 hours, and stopped only on
the evening of the 26th.  Some Hindus and Sikhs saved themselves by
hiding; others ran out during the night. 3,000 Hindus and Sikhs were
killed by the military in Atma Singh’s factory alone.  Altogether 15,000
Hindus and Sikhs were killed in this massacre.  Pt.  Nehru, at the time
lie toured the West Punjab with Mr. Liaqat Ali Khan, estimated the
number of those killed in Sheikhupura at 22,000.  Women were molested. 
Hindus and Sikhs who resisted the molesters were shot dead on the spot. 
In the Namdhari Gurdwara two wells were filled with the bodies of Hindu
and Sikh women who committed suicide to save themselves from dishonour. 
Two other wells were similarly filled.  Swami Nand Singh, a member of
the Peace Committee was shot dead by his former Muslim colleagues on
this Committee.  On the night of the 25th August, the D. C. was present
in the Main Bazar when arson, murder and looting was going on.  A
Section 30 Magistrate, Ahmed Shafi asked Lt.-Col. Dr. Surat Singh to
convey his boast to Sikh leaders that Muslims had done in two days what
Sikhs might never be able to do to Muslims.

This is in brief the tragic story of Sheikhupura.

The countryside of Sheikhupura, like that of Lahore was combed for Sikhs
and Hindus, who were turned out of their houses, and murdered in large
numbers.  Muslims fell upon Hindus and Sikhs all over the district with
a brutality and thoroughness the extent of which it is difficult to
imagine, and of which only a vague idea can be given in the brief
accounts given below.  It is not easy to estimate how many actually
succeeded in reaching the river Ravi or crossing it successfully, on
their way to India in the first few days after the establishment of
Pakistan.

The village of Kot Pindi Das in Shahdara Tehsil was attacked on the 15th
August and, was thoroughly burned and pillaged for two days.  It appears
those who attacked were busy in pocketing loot.  So, Hindus and Sikhs
managed to escape with their lives in a destitute state.

Bohar, Chak 8 and Chak 702 (all in the Tehsil of Nankana Sahib) were
simultaneously attacked on the 21st August with the help of Muslim
Military.  The refugee train which carried Hindu and Sikh evacuees from
these places was stopped near Shahdara, a railway station five miles
West of Lahore, and they were stripped of all their possessions.

Nangal Bhuchar was attacked on the 21st August.  Hindus and Sikhs were
forced to save their lives by fleeing, leaving their entire property
behind.  While crossing Pattan Bhindian (on Ravi River) they were
attacked.  They put up a good tight, however, and routed their
assailants.

Machhochak in Shahdara Tehsil was attacked on the 22nd.  Muslims from 10
surrounding villages fell upon this single village.  About 50 Hindus and
Sikhs Were killed.  The rest left in a destitute state.

Dhanoe was attacked by a Muslim mob, accompanied by Pakistan Military,
on the 24th.  Hindus and Sikhs fled to seek shelter in Babakwal, a
neighbouring village.  Their assailants pursued them there.  Here a
general slaughter ensued in which between 400 and 500 Hindus and Sikhs
were killed.  A number of women were abducted.

Sikham, situated in the jurisdiction of Muridke Police Station, was
attacked on September 1. Here 100 Sikh males were killed and 50 were
wounded. 22 women were abducted, while 50 were forcibly converted and
married to Muslims.

At Dharanagar lying in the area served by Sharakpur Post Office, 90
Sikhs were killed on the 27th August.  Of Chak No. 49, in Shahdara
Tehsil which was attacked by 50 Pakistan Militarymen on the 25th August,
the entire Sikh population was wiped out.

Aiya Kalan was attacked towards the end of August, also by Pakistan
Military.  Here the number of Sikhs killed was about 80. Another 30 were
killed on the way while evacuating from this village.

Khori and Nangal Dunna Singh (in Gujranwala District) were attacked by
beat of drum.  When Hindus and Sikhs of these villages were evacuating
and crossing Pattan Bhindian (on Ravi River) they were again attacked,
and some women were abducted.

In Ratniwala about 30 Sikhs were killed, while another 100 were killed
by the police near village Wadhai Chima when they were evacuating for
safety to a refugee camp. .

Chak No. 12, also called Gobindpura, was attacked on the 27th August by
a force of 2,000. 25 Hindus and Sikhs were killed here.

Hindus and Sikhs of Sadh Nau Abad were forced to quit their homes and
were again attacked while crossing the Ravi River, when 40 were killed.

In Awan Labana, on the 25th a big attack was made by a Muslim mob,
Muslim police and military.  Here 200 Sikhs and Hindus were killed, 200
women and some children were abducted.  Looting and burning occurred on
an immense scale.

The village of Faridabad (in Nankana Sahib Tehsil) was attacked on the
26th.  Only half of the Hindu-Sikh population of this place reached
India.  The rest were either killed or forcibly converted.

Chak No. 4 Risala, situated within the jurisdiction of War-burton Police
Station was besieged for 3 days, from 26th to 28th August.  An ultimatum
was given to Hindus and Sikhs to embrace Islam or to be prepared to face
the consequences.  The attacking force had in it 30 men armed with
rifles, who marched at the head of a big mob.  The Sikhs of this place
were many of them ex-military-men, and they put up a very stiff
resistance. On the third day all Hindus and Sikhs were forced to quit in
a destitute state.

At Shah Kot brutalities were committed.  One Sikh’s eyes were gouged out
by the Muslim mob. 1,000 Hindus and Sikhs were forcibly converted. 
Hindus and Sikhs of Sacha Sauda were turned out, stripped of all their
possessions.

One of the memorable and heroic battles given by Sikhs took place at
Bhuler Chak 119, in the jurisdiction of Sangla Hill Police Station. 
This large village was attacked on the 30th August.  This village is
located close to the borders of other districts, notably Gujranwala and
Sialkot.  All through August Muslims of the neighbouring areas continued
to make preparations for attacks on Sikhs, with the active complicity of
Muslim officials.  After the 15th August, Bhular was the centre where
Hindus and Sikhs of a considerable radius around came together for
shelter.  On the 30th, Muslims sent an ultimatum to the Sikhs of this
place to vacate Bhuler, which the Sikhs indignantly rejected.  Then
Muslim mobs and police attacked from all sides.  On the 1st September
about 25,000 Muslims had gathered for attack.  This mob attack, however,
failed to break the morale of the Sikhs.  Then armed police and Baluch
Military stepped in to help the Muslim mob.  Finding that the fight was
unequal, Sikhs decided to die fighting, and killed their own womenfolk
to save them from dishonour.  A fierce and desperate battle ensued after
this.  Sikhs set fire to their own homes and property.  About 200 Sikhs
met their death in this engagement.  The rest evacuated, fighting.

Sangla Hill is a fairly large and flourishing town in Sheikhupura
district.  This place was attacked on the 27th August by the Muslim
Military, and the attack continued for several days.  Here the technique
followed was the same as employed by Muslims in most other towns. 
Curfew was imposed, which confined Hindus and Sikhs to their houses
while Muslims went about freely, setting fire with police help to Hindu
and Sikh houses, killing and looting.  Here operations were directed
against Sikhs by Magistrate M. G. Cheema of Lahore notoriety. 300 Sikhs
were killed and a large number were shaved forcibly.  Stabbing went on
with police looking on.  Hindus were given a false assurance of safety
and ordered on pain of death not to shelter Sikhs.  Later, Hindus too
were looted and killed.  Huge looting went on for days in this
prosperous town.  Searches took place in a way which outraged the
modesty of Hindu and Sikh women.

Other Sheikhupura villages looted and devastated on a large scale, in
which men were killed and women abducted are, Kuthiala Virkan, Khanna
Labana, Chak 32, Chak 33, Malian Shekhan, Khanpur Kalla, Hariala etc.

Kathiala Virkan, in the jurisdiction of Muridke Police station was
attacked on the 19th, when Sikhs began to evacuate.  The evacuees were
attacked between the villages of Fatehpur and Bhatianwala by Muslims of
20 neighbouring villages. 200 Sikhs were killed, and 250 women were
abducted.  Out of the original jatha of 5,000 only 1,500 finally reached
India, the- rest having been killed on the way in attacks at various
points.

Sharakpur is a Municipal town and a Sub-Tehsil of District Sheikhupura. 
Here leading Muslims had promised safety to Hindus and Sikhs with oath
on the Koran.  On the 27th August, however, the day after the
unprecedentedly large Sheikhupura Massacre, Muslims fell upon Hindus and
Sikhs.  Muslims armed with rifles and automatic weapons attacked Hindus
and Sikhs.  Only 71 out of a total Hindu-Sikh population of a thousand
escaped being murdered.  Women and children were not spared. Jewellery
and property worth hundreds of lakhs was looted from Hindus and Sikhs.

This was another installment of the elimination of minorities from
Pakistan.

LYALLPUR

Lyallpur constituted the richest spot the Sikhs possessed in the
Punjab.  It was purely a Sikh creation, economically speaking.  Sikhs
had converted by hard toil of generations a sandy waste which this area
was, into the granary of the Punjab.  The Lyallpur Sikhs were not only
one of the most prosperous group among the Sikhs anywhere, but they were
also very well-disciplined, independence-loving and had a highly
developed social conscience.  They had taken a leading part in the
movements of education and reform which stirred the Sikh people in the
twentieth century.  They were a proud, assertive and militant kind of
people, who would not easily take a beating from any one.  It was of the
Lyallpur Sikhs primarily and also of the Sheikhupura Sikhs that the
official Pakistan publication said that they left the West Punjab
‘defiantly.’ Yes, the sturdy Sikhs of those areas left the West Punjab
thoroughly defiantly, and not abjectly.  It was they again, to turn out
whom from West Punjab, Governor Mudie made up his mind firmly.  In his
letter to Governor-General Jinnah, quoted elsewhere, he said:  

“I am telling everyone that I don’t care how the Sikhs cross the border,
the great thing is to get rid of them as soon as possible.  There is
still little sign of the 3 lakh Sikhs in Lyallpur moving, but in the end
they too will have to go.”

This letter needs being pondered over carefully to realize the deep-laid
Pakistan conspiracy to turn out Sikhs from their hearths and homes in
his way: “I don’t care how……”

In the town and district of Lyallpur as a whole there had been few
incidents of any kind before August, 1947.  That was because the Sikhs
of Lyallpur were so sturdy, so well-organised and capable of giving to
any assailant much more of beating than they got.  So, despite their
majority in the district, Muslims dared not attack the Sikhs.  There had
been a few stabbing incidents in Lyallpur, and curfew for a few days but
that was all.  While in the neighbouring districts of Multan, Sargodha
and Jhang there had been trouble on a varyingly large scale, the
prestige of the Lyallpur Sikhs kept the Muslims at a respectful
distance.  Later on it was the Pakistan Military and police which
finally decided the Sikhs upon leaving.  And then they left, but in the
words of the Pakistanis, ‘defiantly’ offering stiff resistance in most
places.

So little was the amount of disturbances in Lyallpur up till August and
so great the confidence of the Sikhs in being able, despite all that had
happened since March 5, 1947 to get on even in Pakistan, that they more
or less made up their minds to becoming citizens of Pakistan when
Pakistan came into being.  One of the two Sikh members elected to go
into the Pakistan Constituent Assembly was a resident of Lyallpur, Giani
Kartar Singh.  The other, Sardar Ujjal Singh, belonged to the
neighbouring district of Sargodha.

But so determined was the policy of the Pakistan Government and of the
Muslim League in ejecting all non-Muslims and especially Sikhs from
Pakistan, that harassment and murder of Sikhs and Hindus began even in
quiet Lyallpur, as soon as Pakistan came into being.  A few days after
the establishment of Pakistan two non-Muslims were stabbed to death in
Lyallpur near the Clock Tower, a very central place in the town while a
crowded peace-meeting was being addressed by the Deputy Commissioner
there on the need for communal peace.  This incident and a few others of
the kind showed to Hindus and Sikhs which way the wind was blowing for
them.  By the end of August murder and arson by Muslims had become very
common in Lyallpur, and Hindus and Sikhs moved into refugee camps, those
at Khalsa College, at the Arya School, and other places.  Evacuation
from these camps began somewhat later.

The way in which the Pakistan administration functioned is illustrated
by such instances as these: One Sikh’s hand was cut off by Muslims with
the kirpan snatched from the Sikh.  The police put the Sikh under arrest
and nothing was done against the Muslims. 12 Sikhs were stabbed during
curfew hours, in spite of which being imposed, Muslims roamed about
freely, attacking Hindus and Sikhs.  One woman was snatched away from a
Hindu by Muslim Janglis, while the two were going to the aerodrome to
take plane to India.

In the rural areas the attacks began round about the beginning of
September.  By that time the whole of the West Punjab was in flames, so
to speak.  Hindus and Sikhs were being attacked everywhere and were
largely on the move to India.  Lyallpur Sikhs were the last to be
attacked and it was the Pakistan Military alone which felt confident of
handling them.

The village of Chak 37 is situated close to the Lahore-Shorkot railway
line.  On the 4th September a refugee train was stopped near this
village and Muslim Military attacked it, killing 50 Sikhs.  After this
butchery, the train was again started.

Jaranwala, a prosperous commercial town, was attacked by a large Muslim
mob on the 28th August.  While the townfolk (Hindus and Sikhs) put up a
good resistance at first, the mob fell upon a hospital where Sikhs who
had fled from the Sheikhupura terror of August 25-26th had taken refuge.
57 of these helpless Sikhs were killed and 40 of their womenfolk were
abducted.

Attack on Jaranwala continued for ten days or longer.  A large number of
Hindus and Sikhs, estimated at about 700 were killed in the various
refugee camps, such as the Mandi, the school and Turianand Hospital. 700
women were abducted and the number of those wounded was in the vicinity
of 1,000.  This attack was planned after the joint visit of Pt.  Nehru
and Mr. Liaqat Ali Khan, so that the Indian Prime Minister could be
shown a clean record in this part of Pakistan.

From Chak No. 143 in Samundari Tehsil which was attacked by a Muslim mob
on the 4th and 5th September, not more than 3 Sikhs were known to have
come to India out of its total Sikh population of 700.  This fact has
its own grim story to reveal.

Kamalia, a large town, was attacked near about August 15.  Here Muslim
officials becoming active early, got as many as 3,500 Hindus and Sikhs
killed and a very large number, especially Hindus, were forcibly
converted.  Other details like looting etc. are better left to the
imagination of the reader.

Balloki Head was the bottleneck at which Hindu-Sikh convoys coming from
Montgomery, Lyallpur, Sargodha and Multan etc. had to cross over the
River Sutlej into Indian territory.  Here these convoys were quite often
detained for days together and extensively searched.  These ‘searches’
were really predatory attacks in which everything of value was snatched
from Hindu 12 and Sikh refugees by Pakistan Military, police and Muslim
goondas.  From the huge Sikh convoy of 90,000 which reached Balloki Head
on or about the 13th September, a group of 4,000 was forcibly detached
and diverted towards Bhai Pheru.  This group was attacked on the way and
out of it hardly 250 survived.

In the beginning of September, Hindus and Sikhs of 8 or 9 villages
around Chak 305 (in the jurisdiction of Police Station Chatiana) were
forced to quit their homes under threat of shooting.  Their arms were
taken away from them, and they were kept thirsty for a whole day.  Then
they were ordered to march.  Those in the rear were repeatedly attacked
and killed and their womenfolk abducted.  After much further
ill-treatment they were pushed into a railway train.  This train was
stopped at mile 5 on the Shorkot Road line and Pakistan Military and
police fell upon it.  This happened on the 9th September.  Out of the
5,000 Hindus and Sikhs in this train, only 6 (six) survived.  So
thorough was the slaughter of these Hindus and Sikhs.

Hindus and Sikhs while evacuating from Pakistan were subjected to
repeated attack, killing and looting.  From village after village have
come stories confirming this.  The Hindu and Sikh inhabitants of several
villages collected in Chak 272, which however, was attacked and
extensively looted on September 8. The survivors of this attack
evacuated from their place of shelter and were again attacked near
Salooni Jhal.  Here a large number of Hindus and Sikhs were killed and
great loot was taken by the invaders.  The unhappy survivors’ trials
were not yet at an end, for they were once again robbed of their
belongings at Balloki Head, in Pakistan, the point at which they had to
cross over into India.

The Sikh and Hindu residents of Chak No. 310 and other neighbouring
villages in Tehsil Toba Tek Singh had to undergo very gruesome
experiences at the hands of Pakistan Military and Muslim National
Guards.  About the last week of August, Muslim Military began attacks on
Sikh bustees.  The Muslim Sub-Divisional Officer of this area lulled
Sikhs into a false sense of security by repeated oaths on the Koran and
promises that Sikhs would not be attacked.  Finding conditions growing
intolerable, on the 1st September 5,000 Sikhs left the area on foot. 
Still the S. D. O. promised on the Koran that he would make them entrain
from Toba Tek Singh and arrange for their safe evacuation to India. 
Instead, however, of being taken to Toba Tek Singh, they were taken to
Chak No. 95 where they were attacked by Muslim Military and Muslim
National Guards.  Several women were abducted here.  Finally on the 7th
September these people were put in a train for India at Toba Tek Singh. 
This train was attacked by a large Muslim mob and the Muslim National
Guards.  These attacks were repeated and between Toba Tek Singh and
Dabbanwala Railway Stations more than 1,500 Sikhs were killed.

A convoy of Sikhs of Chak 204 and its neighbouring villages was looted
by Muslim Police at Balloki Head, the place already mentioned as being
the point of junction between India and Pakistan.  A portion of this
convoy was diverted by the Police to Bhai Pheru, where an attack was
made and 220 of the convoy were killed, 250 wounded and 15 women were
abducted.  Other portions of this convoy were also repeatedly attacked
and looted.  Near Khudian, which is close to Chhanga Manga, Muslim
villagers broke the *bund* of the canal to obstruct the passages of this
convoy and to entrap and slaughter it.  The Gurkha Military accompanying
the convoy, however, showed praiseworthy firmness.  It is said the
Gurkha Jemadar was wading in water up till his neck, but made the
Muslims to realize that it would go hard with them if they continued to
play mischief by letting flow the water of the canal.  The threat of
reprisals on the part of Indian Military made the Muslims realise that
their own safety lay in ending the mischief.  So the broken *bund* was
repaired by them and the convoy passed on.

In the Loco Workshops Shed at Lyallpur Railway Station on the 3rd
September, 3 Sikhs were killed in an attack.  Among those killed was a
child.

At Tarakabad Railway crossing, Muslim Military shot dead 60 Sikhs, who
were part of a Sikh convoy which was proceeding on its way to evacuate
to India.  This happened on the 3rd September.

The incidents narrated above are only a very few (so few indeed as to be
not more than two percent of all that happened in Lyallpur district). 
More names of villages attacked and casualties suffered appear in the
catalogue of attacks appended towards the end of this book.

The Lyallpur Sikhs, as has been pointed out above, were a resolute
disciplined body of men and in these days they were fortunate in being
served by a band of selfless and cool-headed leaders, who to shame the
devil, decided to co-operate fully with the regulations of the Pakistan
Government, which that Government never seriously put into effect.  Some
of these workers had to their credit the rescue of Muslim women and
children trapped in East Punjab.

In some places Sikhs in desperation followed the scorched-earth policy,
destroying their own belongings when it became clear that they would in
any case be looted by their despoilers, Pakistani Muslims.  No wonder
the Pakistan pamphlet complained that Sikhs left West Punjab
‘defiantly.’

During the months of September and October, 1947 the roads leading from
West Punjab into India revealed one unending, melancholy procession, day
after day, of Sikh men, women, children and cattle, all fatigued and
hungry, as they trekked into India, some with their few salvaged
belongings in carts and others on foot.  These begrimed and harassed
Sikhs were those driven out of Lyallpur by systematic and designed
Pakistan terror.

Many died on the way, especially the young, the old and the sick.  The
roads were all full of stench at every few yards from dying cattle.  It
was to this state that Pakistan had reduced the best and most prosperous
colonists which India has in recent times known.

GUJRANWALA

The District of Gujranwala lies next to Sheikhupura west of Lahore.  The
Muslim population of this district was 70.45%, while the Hindu and Sikh
population combined was 22.70%. As everywhere in the Punjab, Sikhs and
Hindus were enlightened entrepreneurs, good businessmen and organisers,
and the Sikhs were very good farmers and owners of rich, fertile land
for which they contributed land-revenue many times their population
strength.

Nizamabad in Gujranwala District is famous for its cutlery industry. 
Thousands of parcels of knives from this place have been despatched by
the Muslim grinders to different places in the Punjab and outside to
replenish the armouries of Muslim League and Muslim National Guards. 
Very many times the Police of Bombay, Central Provinces, the United
Provinces and other provinces have intercepted these parcels in the
railway yards, and thus prevented their reaching those who could have
used them for murdering the followers of other religions.  But while
some of these parcels have been confiscated through police vigilance,
many times the number so confiscated surely reached their destination.

Wazirabad, a railway junction joining the Lahore-Rawalpindi-Peshawar
main line and the Jammu-Sialkot line has earned great notoriety for the
attacks made on Hindu-Sikh refugee trains and for the large massacres
which took place both in the town and at the station.

Gujranwala itself continued to be disturbed in June and July; and in
August, like all other West Punjab towns, it rose to massacre and hound
out its Hindu and Sikh population.  A peace meeting had to be called in
Gujranwala on the 11th July at which Muslim League leaders including
Mian Iftikharuddin and the Khan of Mamdot made very glib speeches about
the virtue of neighbourliness and communal harmony.  But the Muslim
audiences knew very well that all Muslim League leaders’ peace appeals,
from Mr. Jinnah downwards were meant only to do a formality, to fool the
Western world and to lull Hindus and Sikhs into a false sense of
security.  Behind the scenes these very speech-makers were planning
riots and organising and financing arson and murder.

In July stabbing attacks on Hindus and Sikhs occurred frequently.  There
were also some attacks on Hindu-Sikh areas and arson was attempted.  But
the Hindus and Sikhs of Gujranwala were a well organised and fearless
people, and gave back to the Muslims better than they got.  Especially
was the Gurdwara attacked, from which Sikhs kept their assailants well
at bay.

With the approach of August 15, however the aspect of things began to
change.  By the end of July when a Muslim Deputy Commissioner arrived to
take over charge of the District, the Muslim determination to hound the
Hindus and Sikhs out of the own was evident.  Officials, police and
Muslim League were working in close co-operation to this end.  Hindus
and Sikhs naturally sensed the imminent danger and tried to leave before
loss of life occurred.  The Hindu-Sikh exodus became a general flight,
for which even enough transport was not available.  On the 27th July
stabbing of Hindus and Sikhs was going on frequently.  In the curfew if
the Hindus and Sikhs came out, they were arrested, while Muslims went
about armed, freely doing whatever mischief they liked.  Stabbing of
Hindus and Sikhs went on with the police looking on.  Hindus’ and Sikhs’
houses were set on fire; even when the culprits who did this were
arrested, the police did not take cognizance of the offence.  A secret
order was issued by Mehar Ghulam Mohammed, Inspector of Police who went
from Amritsar, to the Muslim policemen to kill all non-Muslim
policemen.  Muslim police constables shot dead at sight any Hindu or
Sikh.  Between the 11th and 17th August all Hindu and Sikh localities,
such as Guru Nanakpural Hakim Rai, Mandi Khajurwali, Brahm Akhara, Chauk
Chashma, Sheikhupura Gate area, etc. had been burned.  The murder of
Hindus and Sikhs occurred on a large scale.  One of the most brutal and
shocking murders was that of Dr. Tej Bhan’s family.  There were 14
members in their family.  Dr. Tej Bhan’s house was attacked by Muslim
police, but the attack was repulsed.  Then Imdad Hussain Shah,
Sub-Inspector came with more force.  The house was set on fire at which
the inmates came out.  The men were first shot dead; and then the
womenfolk with children in their arms.  Only one minor boy and one girl
escaped.

Sub-Inspector Hussain Shah, who at Lahore had burned down the vast and
prosperous Hindu area inside Shahalmi Gate in collusion with Magistrate
M. G. Cheema, now came to Kamoke, a prosperous Hindu-Sikh trading centre
a few mites from Gujranwala.  He carried on a general massacre of Hindus
and Sikhs in Kamoke town and in the Ilaqa.

Asghar Ali Shah, Assistant Sub-Inspector of Naushehra Virkan got all
Sikhs within his jurisdiction murdered.  He would collect them under
pretext of making some enquiry and get them all shot dead.

These were some of the ways in which minorities were being eliminated in
Pakistan.

Village Dorhian in the area of Police Station Kila Didar Singh had a
purely Sikh population.  The inhabitants of this area were murdered
wholesale by the police and Muslim National Guards.  In Eminabad
wholesale murder of Hindus and Sikhs occurred also.  At Sohadra, on the
13th August, 60 Hindus and Sikhs were killed.  Burji Chanda Singh was
attacked repeatedly from the 16th August to the 2nd September and 125
Sikhs got killed.

The town of Gakhar was attacked on the 17th August.  Here looting and
killing continued for 3 days. 200 Sikhs and Hindus were killed.

Kot Des Raj was attacked on the 15th August.  Here the number of Hindus
and Sikhs killed was 300; 120 were forcibly converted.  In Udhowali,
attacked on the 27th, about 60 were killed.  Almost the entire Hindu and
Sikh population of Maju Chak, numbering 500 was slaughtered.

Village Ramke Chatha was attacked on the 5th September.  Here Hindus and
Sikhs took the life of their own womenfolk to save them being
dishonoured by Muslims.  Mandi Sukhoki was attacked on the 3rd
September.  Sikhs were ferreted out from Hindu homes and killed with
brutality.

Dharaunkal was attacked on 19th August.  Out of its total Sikh
population of 80 only about 20 survived the attack.

A large massacre of Hindus and Sikhs occurred at Dhariwal in the
jurisdiction of Kila Didar Singh Police Station.  Hindus and Sikhs were
evacuating, and were attacked near Lalpur. 1000 were killed.

Great destruction of Hindu-Sikh lives also occurred in the villages
falling within the jurisdiction of Wadhon Police Station, which was
attacked by Mohd.  Azam Magistrate, and the D. S. P.

In Ladhowali Chima a big massacre occurred. 125 Hindus and Sikhs were
killed and 50 wounded. 200 women were abducted.  The people of village
Sagar put up a heroic resistance and most of them died fighting against
the Muslim assailants.

In Mari Thakran 76 were killed.

Patlemal, Mirzapur, Thapnala and Mirza Jan suffered great loss of Hindu
and Sikh lives.

Muslim goondas were imported from Lahore to attack Lohianwala, a village
three miles outside Gujranwala.  Here 30 to 40 Sikhs were killed. 
Looianwala, another village was attacked by the Muslim military which
got down from a train which was stopped on purpose, and attacked this
village, Sikhs were hounded down and in a brief space of time 100 were
killed.

In Wadd 42 Hindus and Sikhs were killed.

Kamoke is an important trading town, a few miles east of Gujranwala. 
Hindus and Sikhs had set up here flourishing Mills, factories and
banks.  Here, on the arrival of the Muslim military, on the 16th August,
looting and murdering of Hindus and Sikhs started.  On the 16th August
100 bags of rice were looted from shops of Hindus and Sikhs and on the
next day a whole truck-ful of food looted by Muslims.  One woman was
shot dead.  The general attack began on the 21st, when the police called
50 to 60 Hindus and Sikhs out of their houses and shot them dead.  On
the 23rd eight rice husking factories, all belonging to Hindus and Sikhs
were burned and so were many houses of Hindus and Sikhs.  When Hindus
and Sikhs, on demand of the Muslim police officers, paid a sum of sixty
thousand rupees, this arson and murder stopped temporarily.  But soon
after, these activities were resumed by Muslims and huge looting
occurred which included the Central Bank and wheat in Mandi, which was
worth four lakhs of rupees.  On the 24th the Gurdwara of Dam Dama Sahib
was attacked.  The Granthi and several Sikhs inside the Gurdwara were
murdered by a Muslim mob of 1,000.  Later, another 150 Hindus and Sikhs
were killed while sheltering in private houses.

Towards the beginning of September, a Hindu-Sikh refugee train coming
from West Punjab was attacked by a Muslim mob, abetted by the police and
military, at Kamoke.  The refugees in the train had been kept without
water for two days.  Whatever weapons of defence the refugees had, such
as licensed guns, were taken away from them.  The mob stabbed and
speared the passengers, while the police shot down any one who tried to
escape by running away.  The Pakistan Military made a show of firing,
but their shots were directed towards the sky and not the mob and after
a short while they also joined the mob and the police in shooting down
the passengers.

Most of the male refugees were butchered or shot dead.  The women were
sorted.  The elderly ones were later butchered, while the younger ones
were distributed.  Children were murdered by being flung with force on
the ground.

Wazirabad which was an important Hindu-Sikh trading centre, became like
Raiwind, notorious for the large number of attacks on Hindu and Sikh
refugee trains.  On the 12th August a train left Amritsar.  Its Hindu
and Sikh passengers were first attacked at Moghulpura five miles east of
Lahore, and almost all of them were murdered.  Some few who escaped
reached Wazirabad and beyond.  On the 13th a general massacre of Hindus
and Sikhs occurred at Wazirabad.  The Mandi was burned and huge looting
took place.  The same day general looting of the bazar again occurred
and all available Hindus and Sikhs in the bazar were murdered.  Trains
coming from Wazirabad carrying Hindus and Sikhs fleeing from Muslim
terror, were stopped at Nizamabad, a few miles cast, and the Muslim
military escort joined Muslim goondas of the mob in murdering Hindu and
Sikh passengers. 5 or 6 women were abducted from this train.  Altogether
about 500 Hindu and Sikhs travelling by this train were killed.  The
railway track to Jammu, whither Hindu and Sikh refugees were going as
the nearest way out, was removed.  This train was also attacked, but its
escort fortunately was Sikh and thus the Muslim mob were kept at a safe
distance from Hindu and Sikh passengers.

MONTGOMERY

The Sikhs of this district like those of the neighbouring district of
Lyallpur were colonists mainly from the districts of Central and Eastern
Punjab.  Many of them were ex-soldiers or their descendants, who had got
grants of land from the British Government for war service, since the
beginning of the twentieth century.  These sturdy colonists cleared the
jungles and made of them smiling and prosperous fields.  The local
Muslims were the Janglis-wild, illiterate folk, whose fanatical passions
could easily be roused by the Muslim League leaders of this area, who
were big absentee landlords and had neither the enterprise nor the
industry and ability of the Sikhs and the Hindus, who brought prosperity
to this area.

The population proportion of this district were as follows:-  
 

|         |     |     |     |        |
|---------|-----|-----|-----|--------|
| Muslims | ... | ... | ... | 69.11% |
| Hindus  | ... | ... | ... | 14.38% |
| Sikhs   | ... | ... | ... | 13.17% |

In Montgomery town trouble started on the 18th August, just the day
after the announcement of the Boundary Commission Award.  Montgomery, or
at least those areas of it which were contiguous to Lahore and faced on
to Ferozepore, in which most part of the Sikh land was situated, was one
of the ‘dispute’ regions before the Boundary Commission and like
Sheikhupura, Lahore and part of Lyallpur, it was expected that this area
in justice and fairness would be awarded to India.  Men, however, the
Boundary Commission’s Award was announced, the Muslim Leaguers, waiting
only for a signal, directed their attack on Sikhs and Hindus.  On the
evening of the 18th August, Sikh and Hindu shops were looted and all
Sikhs and Hindus found in the bazars were murdered.  The attacked
communities shut themselves up in their houses and Gurdwaras and
Mandirs.  The Mandir was attacked.  Hindus and Sikhs, after the first
day, gave tough fight, but their valour and courage could not avail them
anything against the Pakistan Military, police and officials, who were
planning and leading the attacks.  Huge loot was collected by Muslims
from deserted and burning Hindu and Sikh houses.  Sikhs had taken
shelter inside the big building of Gurdwara Singh Sabha.  Here they
resisted attacks for days.  Life inside this confinement was extremely
hard, as food was scanty, and so was water.  Dirt continued to
accumulate, but the Sikhs inside bore all such sufferings with stoic
courage.  Even when Sikhs came out under official permit to carry
rations inside the Gurdwara, they were subjected to torture and
humiliation.  Sikhs and Hindus were fired on and shot at the railway
station, where they were waiting for days for being transported to
India.

The attack on Montgomery town was the signal for Muslim attack on Sikhs
and Hindus all over the district.  In village after village, as happened
in Sheikhupura, Gujranwala, Gujrat or for the matter of that, any of the
West Punjab districts, Sikhs were attacked, and fired on by Pakistan
Military and police, which invariably directed the operations of the
Muslim mobs.

The village of Mirak Shah (Police station Nurshah jurisdiction) was
attacked on the 22nd August by a Muslim mob, Muslim National Guards,
Police and Military in combination.  An ultimatum was issued to Hindus
and Sikhs to turn Muslims or to face the consequences.  On their refusal
to turn Muslims, they were extensively looted.  The threatened
population took shelter at Tandlianwala, in Lyallpur district, which is
at a short distance.  Tandlianwala was attacked by Muslims on the 25th
August.  The Gurdwara, where Hindus and Sikhs had taken shelter, was set
on fire.  Pakistan Military and Police fired on the Hindus and Sikhs who
came out on the roof of the Gurdwara building.  About 300 Hindus and
Sikhs were killed here.  On the 28th August, Wards Nos. 2, 3 and 4 of
Tandlianwala, which had Hindu and Sikh populations, were attacked.  In
this attack, 1,900 Hindus and Sikhs were killed, and 400 women were
abducted.  The loot from this prosperous Hindu-Sikh commercial centre
can only be imagined.  The attacking force numbered about 25,000.

Chak 139/9L was attacked on the 1st Bhadon (about the end of August). 
This village and Chak No. 128/9L, which is in its neighbourhood, were
simultaneously attacked.  In these two villages Sikhs and Hindus from 27
surrounding villages had collected for shelter.  The assailants who had
come from the surrounding areas for this ‘holy war’ numbered about
30,000.  Sikhs put a very stiff resistance, and held out for days. 
Casualties were inflicted on both sides.  Ultimately Sikhs and Hindus
were evacuated to India by the Indian Military.

Sikhs and Hindus from Chaks 65/4R, 65/J.D., 27, 61, 78 etc., finding a
peaceful life rendered any longer impossible for them, formed, near
about the 23rd August a caravan for travelling to India.  No Military
accompanied these people.  Near Yusufwala railway station these people
were attacked by a large crowd which was well armed and was led by
Muslim National Guards. 18 Sikhs were killed in this attack.  The
evacuees were subjected to tremendous looting by Muslim mobs.  Near
Montgomery town police fired on this caravan.  Here vast killing ensued,
and 400 women were abducted.  Finding the situation hopeless, a number
of Sikh women immolated themselves by burning themselves or jumping into
wells, to escape dishonour at the hands of Muslims.  Some Sikhs took the
lives of their own womenfolk.  Among those who thus destroyed themselves
were children of even eight and ten years of age.

In Hujra Shah Muqim the attack came on the 22nd August and continued for
several days.  The local Sub-Inspector of Police lulled Hindus and Sikhs
into a false sense of security by promising to protect them against
attack.  However, a day after such assurance, the Muslim mob advanced to
attack under cover of the Police and Military.  Hindus and Sikhs in
panic collected in 3 mohallas for safety.  These 3 mohallas were set on
fire by the Military.  Hindu and Sikh women in these mohallas immolated
themselves to escape dishonour.  The men fought back, but could do
little against the Police and Military.  At last word was given to them
that they would be safe if they came out of these mohallas.  But as soon
as they came out, indiscriminate fire was opened on them and 3,100
Hindus and Sikhs were shot dead.  When the survivors were at last
marched towards India, they were attacked by Muslims at Husainiwala Head
in Pakistan.  Here several men were killed and 25 women were abducted. 
Some Hindus were forcibly converted, but later on they were shot dead by
Muslims.

An evacuee train carrying Hindus and Sikhs was held up at Montgomery
railway station (first week of September) for attack.  The pretext was
made was that no coal was available for the engine.  Hindu and Sikh
factory owners, who were awaiting evacuation agreed to give coal out of
their stocks for the engine, but as coal shortage was not the real cause
of the train being held up, so it was not started.  An attack on this
train was, however, averted at Montgomery.  Later this train was
attacked at Raiwind on the 4th September, where already a large number
of dead bodies of Sikhs were lying along the railway track.  Those of
the Sikhs killed in this train were added to those which were already
lying there.

Pakpattan, Harappa, Okara, Dipalpur and other places in this district
were also attacked, Hindus and Sikhs were killed and their belongings
looted.  In many places Muslim pirs directed these attacks and
characterized them as a holy war waged against infidels, that is Hindus
and Sikhs.

SIALKOT

Sialkot is a district bordering on Lahore and Amritsar beside Gurdaspur
and Gujranwala.  Its population proportions were as under: -  
 

|         |     |     |     |        |
|---------|-----|-----|-----|--------|
| Muslims | ... | ... | ... | 62.9%  |
| Hindus  | ... | ... | ... | 19.41% |
| Sikhs   | ... | ... | ... | 11.71% |

which means that its population was divided into communities pretty much
as in its neighbouring districts of Gujranwala and Sheikhupura, in both
of which such huge carnage occurred among Hindus and Sikhs.

Sialkot did not have much of disturbance to speak of uptill August,
1947.  Perhaps the Muslim League elements did not feel so very sure
whether the district would be awarded to India or Pakistan.  So,
awaiting the Boundary Commission’s award they lay low, waiting for their
opportunity.

Sikhs were a well-organised and important element in the district of
Sialkot, despite their inferiority in numbers.  They were mostly sturdy
peasant proprietors and there were many ex-soldiers among them.  The
district had also played an important part in the Akali Movement and in
the various Congress struggles.  So, there were among the Sikhs and
Hindus good leaders, organisers and fighters.

Muslim mischief started on the 12th August, the day after it had started
in a big way at Lahore.  An attack was made on Mohalla Bhabrian.  Police
were actively helping the assailants. Sikhs put up a very stiff and
heroic resistance, and fought a strongly defensive battle.

Ultimately they were overpowered with the help of the Military.  There
was not much arson on this day, but quite a number of Hindus and Sikhs
were murdered.  The exodus of Hindus and Sikhs from Sialkot began after
this attack.  They took either the Jammu route or the Amritsar route. 
On the Wazirabad route, which was the third alternative, in those days
no Hindu or Sikh was safe.  At Wazirabad station, as stated elsewhere,
several times massacres of Hindus and Sikhs occurred.  On the Amritsar
route, huge massacres occurred at Narowal and in its neighbourhood.  As
witnessed by a police constable, who was an evacuee from the district,
he saw round about the 24th and 25th August, more than 500 dead bodies,
mostly Sikhs lying outside Narowal.  The railway track between Sialkot
and Amritsar was strewn with dead bodies, mostly Sikhs.  Village after
village was attacked and pillaged.  Sikhs were especially hunted down. 
While as a rule no non-Muslim convoy was allowed to pass a Muslim
stronghold without being attacked, the main force of such attacks was
directed against Sikhs, whom the Pakistan Muslims attacked with
especially bitter malice.  Earlier on the 17th, many Sikhs and Hindus
had been murdered near Narowal when attempting to cross the River Ravi. 
The town was pillaged with arson and murder.  Gurdwara Baoli Sahib in
Sialkot was attacked on the 13th August. 20 Sikhs including women and
children, who were inside the holy building, were killed or roasted
alive in the flames of the burning Gurdwara.

As a matter of fact, on the 13th August, after their tame success of the
12th, Muslims made a full scale attack with the help of the police and
the military.  A vigorous campaign of arson, looting and murder was
initiated, resulting in a large number of Hindu and Sikh houses and
shops being burned and many Hindus and Sikhs being killed.  The
survivors fled to the railway station for safety, where on the 13th they
noticed a train load of Hindus’ and Sikhs’ corpses arrive from Wazirabad
side, at which station on the same day a huge massacre of Hindus and
Sikhs had occurred.  The famous Gurdwara of Babe di Ber was burned, so
dear to Sikh sentiment as one of the places where Guru Nanak had resided
for a considerable time.  The inmates of this Gurdwara were shot dead by
the police.  Other Gurdwaras in the city were similarly attacked and
burned.

While Hindu and Sikh refugees were being brought to India, a few days
after, their lorries were unaccountably stopped at the Ravi Road in
Lahore.  A motor cyclist went into the town and brought with him a
Muslim mob, which attacked these lorries, killing 40.  The entire
caravan would have been murdered, but for the timely arrival of Sikh
military, who rescued the remainder.  The survivors of this tragedy were
seen at Amritsar by Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Health Minister of India.

Bhawanipur, in Tehsil Shakargarh, which was formerly part of Gurdaspur
District, but since 17-8-1947 the date on which the Award of the
Boundary Commission was announced has been included in Sialkot
(Pakistan), was the scene of brutality and highly reprehensible and
heartless duplicity on the part of Muslims.  On the 24th August this.
village was attacked by a Muslim mob.  Those Hindus and Sikhs who
escaped killing, hid in a sugarcane crop to save their lives.  Muslims
standing outside the field gave promises of safety in the name of Allah
to all such as came out.  Such of the besieged as were simple enough to
believe this promise were killed on the spot as soon as they came out. 
Only a few women and 3 men were left.  These men too were killed later. 
Many of the young girls were abducted.

Village Badomali was attacked and a large killing done and many women
abducted.  Below is the statement of Parsini, a 15 year old Hindu
abducted girl, rescued by Indian Military.  Her statement to the Chief
Liaison Officer, East Punjab Government is:-  

“About three months-back our village was raided by Muslims and our
street known as Samaj Wali Gali was set on fire and the property was
looted.  They announced to the Hindu population that they would be given
safe passage across the river Ravi towards India if they would go out
peacefully.  When men, women and children walked out of their houses the
Muslim raiders committed atrocities with the women in the open streets
and all young girls were taken away and a very large number of men and
old women were killed. I was forcibly taken away by one Fazal Din alias
Fajja, a tonga driver of Baghbanpura.  A very large number of raiders
belonged to Baghbanpura.  Mst.  Piari, who is now present outside and
her cousin named Piari were also with me at the time.  Two men named
Labhu and Allah Rakha were with these two girls and were forcing them to
go with them.  We all the three girls with three men walked on foot and
passed the night at Passianwala at the house of a Muslim whose name I do
not remember.  The owner of this house was uncle of Allah Rakha who had
abducted the senior Piari.  Next day we were marched again to
Baghbanpura at about 10 in the night. I was taken to the house of Fajja
and the other two girls also spent the night at the same place.  During
the course of the night Labhu, against the wishes of senior Piari, who
is present outside, committed rape on her and also relieved her of two
gold rings.  The next morning both these girls named Piari, were taken
away by Allah Rakha and Labhu respectively.  After 15 days or so I was
forcibly married to one Farid, aged about 25 years, a relation of the
said Fazal Din. I was taken to his house where he used me as wife in the
face of great protest and resistance put up by me. I was given the name
of Khurshid and was forcibly converted.”

Jalalpur Jattan, an important town, was disturbed on and after the 12th
August.  The Muslims there had planned murder of Hindus and Sikhs in
collusion with the District officials.  On the 18th burning of
Hindu-Sikh houses and the Mandir started on a big scale.  Trains were
held up; telegraph wires 13 were cut, and every Hindu and Sikh was
blockaded.  Saving of life by fleeing was rendered impossible.  In the
village surrounding Jalalpur Jattan, a very large number of Hindus and
Sikhs were killed.  In this town itself, 400 were killed; only one
person out of its Hindu and Sikh population is traced as having
survived.

At Thambrewal, in Tehsil Daska, on the 16th August, several Hindus and
Sikhs were murdered.  About two dozen were forcibly, converted to
Islam.  These converts were later killed, their leaving of their
ancestral creed not having satisfied the power-lust of their conquerors.

The village of Panj Grain Bajwa, in Tehsil Pasrur was attacked on the
26th by a Muslim mob and Pakistan police.  Its total Hindu-Sikh
population was 300 out of which only 70 or 80 survived.  The rest were
attacked several times and killed in large numbers on their way to
Narowal, whence they intended to evacuate to India.  Those who were not
killed and were captured, were forcibly converted.

Hindus and Sikhs of Bhikho Chak were attacked by a party of 130 Muslims
while they were leaving the village.  The attack occurred on the Pattan
at Ravi river. 113 of those attacked were killed; there were not more
than 17 or 18 survivors.

In this village terrible butchering was done.  The force which attacked
it was 6,000 strong.  Altogether 3,000 Hindus and Sikhs were killed by
the Muslim Military with rifle fire.  The number of women abducted was
300.  The survivors were forcibly converted.  Muslims made the attack
with drums beating and possessed machine guns and such other weapons.

Of the village Bhoi in Tehsil Daska, very few Sikhs survived.  In
Melomer on the 29th August, as many as 1,500 Hindus and Sikhs were burnt
alive in the places where they had hidden for shelter.

At Dhapai in the jurisdiction of Zaffarwal Police Station 150 Hindus and
Sikhs were killed and 50 young girls were abducted.

Jassar is an important town in Sialkot District and a railway junction. 
A terrible massacre of non-Muslims occurred in this town on the 23rd
October, 1947.  This incident created great tension in East Punjab.  The
following telegram was sent by the Commander of J. D. Camp,  Amritsar to
the East Punjab Government:-

“No. 3346 ShW.  Situation in Amritsar has deteriorated suddenly through
information about attack on train load of non-Muslim refugees which
occurred at Jassar in Sialkot district, and was proceeding to Dera Baba
Nanak (India Border) on foot on 23rd.  Though Pakistan press has given
out that 30 were killed and 200 wounded rumour in city based on story of
survivors and published in local papers is 1,500 killed.  About 10,000
non-Muslims collected at noon today near the Muslim refugee camp at
Cattle Fair ground for the purpose of attacking camp in retaliation. 
They have been persuaded to turn back with considerable difficulty.  But
feeling in city is still high.  People are insisting that some action
should be taken at highest level and West Punjab Government warned that
unless incidents cease on their side, it will be difficult to control
people on ours.  Curfew has been imposed.  Additional military posted at
refugee camps Cattle Fair Ground and Jandiala.  Muslim refugees train
detained at Beas.  Arrangements are being made to reinforce Beas. 
Muslim refugees train will only be passed through if railway track found
in order and situation permits.  Assistance of local leaders also being
harnessed.”

The Deputy Commissioner, Gurdaspur, reported about this incident:-

“I visited Dera Baba Nanak with Brigade Commander and Superintendent
Police yesterday in connection with the attack on the non-Muslim train
near Jassar, district Sialkot.  It appears all refugees were made to
detrain at Jassar.  The luggage had to be put aside and then short
distance away attacked by armed Muslim mob.  Military escort fired into
air only and also shot dead three Sikh members of guard because they
protested against Muslims failure shoot at mob.  Only two thousand
reached.  Of this number about six hundred were injured; about seventy
needing hospitalization.  Thirty serious cases have been brought to
Gurdaspur or sent to Amritsar hospital and others were being moved.  It
is not possible yet to give exact number dead or wounded left behind but
total feared high as according some reports train carried about five
thousand refugees.  The property was all looted after systematic
searches and a very large number of women have been abducted.”

On November 1, the Governor of West Punjab wirelessed his apologies to
the Governor, East Punjab taking care, however, to minimise the number
of casualties.

The message was as follows:-

“Your 381-GPP.  The incident at Jassar is deeply regretted by all.  Full
particulars were furnished immediately after verification by Provincial
Government to Prime Minister, East Punjab, Refugees Minister India,
Deputy High Commissioner and CLO.  Casualties in this incident were 30
refugees killed and 200 wounded; action of the escort resulted in 50
attackers killed; wounded not known but must have been 300 or 400.  All
possible steps are being taken to prevent such occurrences and this
particular case is being vigorously investigated.  I.G. Police has
appointed an S. P. for special enquiry.”

MIANWALI

This border district of the Punjab was comparatively undisturbed during
the March riots.  A mob of 10,000 attacked the town of Mianwali, but the
presence of mind shown by the Deputy Commissioner and the authorities
averted the trouble then.  On the 28th August in Mianwali Muslim mobs
and military killed 250 Hindus and Sikhs inside the Gurdwara, in Sanatan
Dharm Mandir and Arya Sumaj Mandir.  These places of worship were also
attacked.

Later, a massacre of Hindus and Sikhs occurred, in which altogether
3,500 were killed and 1,000 women were abducted.  Looting was on a very
extensive scale.

After the establishment of Pakistan, however, the process of elimination
of Hindus and Sikhs started in this district, as all over West Punjab,
in full vigour.  In this district, on the 1st September the Deputy
Commissioner in an open meeting declared it to be his policy to turn out
all Hindus and Sikhs from the district. . A regular time-table for this
purpose was fixed, and parwanas were issued to the lower officials. 
Such an open declaration of policy left no doubt in the minds of the
Muslim goonda elements as to their complete immunity from official
action which they would have for anything done against Hindus and Sikhs.

A Sikh Captain, P. S. Grewal was shot dead by Muslim National Guards at
Pai Khel railway station.  No police action followed this murder.

Regular attacks on trains started after this.  Hindus and Sikh
passengers were combed out of trains, murdered and thrown on the
platform, or along the railway track.  No one checked these activities.

Non-Muslim railway employees were murdered in large numbers.  The
Brahman station master of Shah Alam railway station was forcibly
converted, and later on shot dead when he refused to swallow beef.

A Sikh railway employee of Doratta was murdered along with his whole
family.

At Kundian railway station, as many as 72 Hindu railway employees and
passengers were killed.

Kundian, Harnauli, Pipla, Kullur Kot and Bhakhar were attacked in the
first week of September.  The number of Hindus and Sikhs killed in these
various places is:-  
 

|                      |     |     |     |       |
|----------------------|-----|-----|-----|-------|
| Kundian              | ... | ... | ... | 100   |
| Harnauli             | ... | ... | ..  | 2,500 |
| Pipla                | ... | ... | ... | 600   |
| Bhakkar Tehsil Total | ... | ... | ... | 6,000 |
| Abawali              | ... | ... | ... | 120   |
| Kullur Kot           | ... | ... | ... | 150   |

From Harnauli about 500 women and girls were abducted.  The wounded were
brought to the Government Hospital at Mianwali.  The Muslim civil
surgeon told Hindu and Sikh wounded that she would dress their wounds
only if they got converted to Islam.  Relief workers from among
non-Muslims were repeatedly attacked and killed by Muslim mobs under the
very nose of Pakistan Military.

In Darya Khan 1,500 Hindus were forcibly converted.

In Isa Khel the Deputy Commissioner got 25 Hindus besieged who were
murdered by Muslim mobs.  Later 50 Hindus were put under arrest.  No
Muslim was arrested.

In Sohla Wasti Sikhan of Bhakhar Tehsil, on 5 Sawan (beginning of
September) a large number of Hindus and Sikhs were killed. 113 Hindus
were forcibly converted and some women were abducted.

A Hindu-Sikh refugee train, which left Mianwali on the 13th October, was
repeatedly attacked on the way between Kundian and Wan Bhuchran, at
Sargodha and Shahdara.  On the wav the refugees suffered acutely for
lack of water, which was not given to them.  Muslims sold it to Hindus
and Sikhs at ten rupees a tumbler.

In Haidarbad Thal Area in Tehsil Bhakar, from the 25th August onwards
villages Sadhwala, Manakera, Khin, Main, Dhinana, Wiri, Karloowala etc.
were besieged and Hindus and the few Sikhs forced to quit their homes
after great sufferings and being subjected to loot.

Wan Bhuchran was attacked on the 4th September.  The Hindus approached
the authorities for protection and were given assurance of safety.  The
mob nevertheless attacked the town that very night and arson and looting
went on the whole night, A Hindu, who escaped from the besieged town at
great risk, informed the district authorities at Mianwali.  Military
arrived, but did little except driving away the raiders.  No loot was
returned.

JHANG

Attacks on Hindus and Sikhs began all over the district of Jhang near
about the 24th August.  Sikhs and Hindus were harassed, murdered and
besieged in every town and village.  Gurdwaras were almost everywhere
burned, such as at Nanaksar and Chund.

In Mandi Shah Jiwana Sikhs and Hindus were looted on a large scale.  In
village Chund the Gurdwara where Hindus and Sikhs had collected for
shelter was besieged.  Ultimatum was given to them by Muslims to embrace
Islam or face death.  Hindu and Sikh women finding all hope of succour
or safety gone, immolated themselves on funeral pyre to escape dishonour
at the hands of Muslims.  The men fought back the invaders and had 375
out of their total of 450 killed.

Population proportions in Jhang.

|         |     |     |     |        |
|---------|-----|-----|-----|--------|
| Muslims | ... | ... | ... | 82.61% |
| Hindus  | ... | ... | ... | 15.80% |
| Sikhs   | ... | ... | ... | 1.49%  |

BAHAWALPUR STATE

This state lies south-west of the Punjab, running along the rivers
Sutlej and the extension of the Chenab, and borders on the Province of
Sind.  It had a minority of Hindu and Sikh population, and is ruled over
by a Muslim Nawab.  This state acceded to Pakistan.

After the establishment of Pakistan murder, loot and abduction were let
loose on the Hindus and Sikhs of this state.  Sikhs were almost all
colonists, who had, like Sikhs in Lyallpur, Montgomery, Jhang and
Multan, made the land productive through their hard labour.  They were
cut down in every village.  The state authorities far from protecting
them, only abetted their destruction.

At Bhattian in Rahim Yar Khan district 4000 Sikhs were collected from
the surrounding villages with promises of safety by the state police. 
On the 23rd September, they were attacked. Out of this 4000, only 660
survived. 700 women were abducted.  Looting of Sikhs’ property went on
everywhere.

Hindus too, who as a class were prosperous, were looted and murdered
everywhere.  In the capital of the State, all Sikh and Hindu officials
(who were not many in the civil list) were put under arrest without any
cause.

In a press note the Ministry of States, Government of India, stated on
December 3, 1947.

“The non-Muslim population of Bawalpur state, according to the 1941
census, was 2, 40,000 which, allowing for normal increase. is now
estimated at about 2,70,000.”

“Of these between 70,000 and 80,000 recently had to leave the state as a
result of the disturbance, the number left behind being stated to he in
the neighbourhood of 70,000.  This leaves over 100,000 unaccounted for.”

These 100,000 “unaccounted” for Hindus and Sikhs are the unfortunate
ones who were hunted down by the Muslim mobs, Military and Police, and
murdered for no other reason except that they were Hindus or Sikhs.

JHELUM

The devastation which occurred in Jhelum district in March, 1947 has
been told of earlier.  Very few Hindus or Sikhs were left in the
countryside.  They had either come down east, or had collected in
refugee camps.  The towns had been comparatively safe up till August. 
But on the establishment of Pakistan, things began to take an ugly turn
for Hindus and Sikhs.

Towards the end of August, all Hindus and Sikhs in Rohtas and Sanghoi
were put to death.  Some women and girls were also abducted.  All this
was done with the active planning of Muslim Leaguers and the Police.

The total non-Muslim population of village Mirpur in Pind Dadan Tehsil
was murdered, only 2 children having escaped.  Vahalee wag razed to the
ground, and its population burnt alive.

Hindus and Sikhs at Khewra were attacked, and forced to leave for India,
after suffering losses in life.

In Pind Dadan Khan town there was large-scale murder of Hindus and
Sikhs.

The refugees trains which left Jhelum district were attacked several
times on the way to India and a heavy toll bf Hindu and Sikh lives was
taken.  One train was attacked on the 19th September between Pind Dadan
Khan and Chalisa.  Here heavy loss of life occurred.  A further attack
was made at Harbanspura, where however the timely active intervention of
a British officer drove away the assailants.  At Lahore, 200 of the
wounded were carried out of the train, and most of them were
systematically finished.

Another train left on the 24th September.  This was attacked at Kamoke,
where about a thousand Hindus and Sikhs were killed, and a large number
of girls and women were kidnapped.

The town of Jhelum was attacked on the 25th September.  Here the
planning of the attack was done by the Pakistan Military.  In Govindpura
Mohalla, the centre of Hindu-Sikh population, about 700 Hindus and Sikhs
were shot dead.  People were dragged out of their houses and killed. 
Women were molested and many abducted.  No evacuee from Jhelum was
allowed to take out more luggage than he could carry on his head.  Forty
truck loads of Hindu-Sikh property were looted by Muslims from the
railway station of Jhelum.

In the month of November, Hindu and Sikh girls brought by Pathan raiders
from Kashmir were sold in the bazars of Jhelum.

MULTAN AND MUZAFFARGA

The happenings of March, 1947 in Multan have been narrated earlier. 
Whatever Hindus and Sikhs were still left in that district, were mopped
up after the establishment of Pakistan.

On the 26th September, a Muslim mob fell upon Makhdumpur Jaura.  Here
1,500 Sikhs and Hindus were killed, and 150 women were abducted.

On the same date Rampur, in Kabirwala Tehsil was attacked. This was a
Sikh village.  All Sikhs to a man were killed here.  Children were not
spared.  The women immolated themselves to escape dishonour at the hands
of the Muslim marauders.

In the refugee camp of Mailsi 2,000 Hindus and Sikhs were shot dead in
the beginning of October.  The assailants were Pakistan Military. 
Later, at Mailsi railway station, another 200 were shot dead by them. 
The refugee train which carried the survivors of these attacks was also
attacked several times on the way to India.

Chaks 571, 561, 563, 565, 566 etc. in Tehsil Vihari were attacked on the
31st August and the residents, mostly Sikhs, turned out of their hearths
and homes in a destitute state.  Their foot caravan was attacked several
times on the way by Muslim mobs.  They were safe from these attacks only
when Indian Military got to know of them and escorted them to India.

In Chak 80 in Tehsil Shujabad, on the 11th September, 6 Sikhs were
killed.  The rest were turned out in a destitute state.

Muzaffargarh is an outlying district to the west of Multan.  Here the
Muslim proportion in the population was about 87%.  Terrible massacres
of Hindus and Sikhs occurred in this district, which was dominated by
fanatical Muslim Pirs, rabid Muslim Leaguers and big feudal Muslim
landlords, who flourished on the ignorance and easy impressionability of
the Muslim masses around them.

On a conservative estimate. 10,000 Hindus and Sikhs were killed in this
district. 

Gurmani, Basti Navin and Patti Bhanwali etc. were places on which
attacks started on the 9th September.  Here all Sikhs and Hindus were
forcibly converted by Muslims.  The converted people, even the grown-up
ones were circumcized and were forced to partake of beef.  They were
compelled to marry away their daughters to Muslims.

When these Hindus and Sikhs were later being evacuated to India, their
train was attacked by Muslims near Kahna Kachha (Lahore district).  The
assailants were driven off by the Indian Military escort.

In Basti Sikhanwali, on the 10th September, 800 Sikhs and Hindus were
killed.

The Deputy Commissioner of Muzaffargarh sent for Hindu notables, and
warned them not to harbour or shelter any Sikhs as the latter had in
any, case to be thrown out of Pakistan.  This was about the middle of
September.

At Kot Adu, on the 10th September, 1,400 people, mostly Sikhs, were
killed.  In this carnage women and children were not spared.

In Gobindpur, Alipur and Badra false assurances of safety were given to
Sikhs. 150 Sikhs of Gobindpur were shut up in a building, which was set
oil fire, and all were burnt alive. 20 women were abducted (August 19).

In the Tehsil of Khanewal in Jahanian and Mian Channu areas all Sikh
villages were attacked.  In Chak 107/15L half a dozen Sikhs were
killed.  The Gurdwara of Multan Cantonment was besieged.  Hindus in
Multan were forcibly converted on a large scale.

GUJRAT

The district of Gujrat lies between Gujranwala and Jhelum.  Although
large-scale wiping out of Hindu and Sikh populations had occurred in
Rawalpindi and Jhelum districts from March, 1947 onwards, yet the
district of Gujrat as a whole had remained more or less quiet.  That was
perhaps because after the experience of Rawalpindi, Jhelum and Multan
and the fear of Hindu-Sikh reprisals in the Eastern districts of the
Punjab, the Government had tightened up security measures and large
military forces were sent to the Western part of Punjab for keeping
order.  Anyhow, such steps were taken as kept the Muslim League elements
in Gujrat under proper check.

Trouble, however, began immediately after the establishment of Pakistan,
when mass murder of Sikhs and Hindus began in Sialkot, Wazirabad,
Gujranwala and other parts of central and western Punjab.  The district
of Gujrat was particularly badly situated from the point of view of
Hindus and Sikhs.  It had no easy route of escape into Kashmir State, as
Sialkot had.  Towards the West of it the entire Hindu and Sikh
population had been evacuated or murdered in the March riots.  So, in
towns and villages fanatical, League-directed Muslim mobs, Pakistan
Military and Police fell upon Hindus and Sikhs, as usual murdering,
burning, raping, looting and abducting.

Lala Musa, which is an important junction on the Delhi-Lahore-Peshawar
main line, became the scene of Muslim League operations on the 18th
August.

The technique adopted was the raising of a false cry that Sikhs had
attacked Muslims.  The entire town was blockaded by Muslim mobs from the
town and the countryside with the help of Pakistan Police and Military. 
A vigorous attack was started against Hindus and Sikhs.  Looting and
arson occurred on a large scale.  The loss of life was comparatively
less.  One of the features of this attack was that three big Gurdwaras
in the town were set on fire, and their inmates were burnt alive.  Hindu
and Sikh women were molested by Pakistan Military.  The train which
carried Hindu and Sikh refugees from Lala Musa to India was stopped near
Shahdara (Lahore) and a number of these refugees were killed.

Attack on the village of Murala, which has a well-known Sikh Gurdwara
and is the home of Mahant Prem Singh, M.L.A. started as early as the
14th August, the day on which celebrations were going on in Karachi to
receive the Crown of Pakistan for Mr. Jinnah from the British Viceroy. 
Here Muslims played a confidence trick.  They got hold of all the
valuable possessions of Sikhs on the pretext of guarding them from being
looted.  These valuables were, of course, never returned.  A number of
Sikhs of Village Dhalla were persuaded to come together into one house
by Muslims, the reason given for such a step being that this was
necessary for their safety.  This house was then locked, and the trapped
men, women and children left to burn inside the house which was set on
fire.  All were burnt alive inside.  Those who tried to escape were
caught hold of, thrown on the burning heap and finished in this way.  On
the 18th August which was the day of Id, the Dera of Murala, seat of
Mahant Prem Singh and held in reverence by Sikhs, was attacked. 400
Sikhs and Hindus had taken shelter inside this Dera.  All of them would
have been butchered but the intervention of some Muslim notables of the
area, personal friends of Mahant Prem Singh, turned back the attacking
mob.  The besieged, like all other Hindus and Sikhs of the area, went
into the Refugee Camp at Gujrat in a destitute state.  The station
master of Kharian and 5 Sikhs were killed at Kharian railway station. 
Some Sikhs were also killed in the village of Loharian.

Jokalian and Mitha Chak and other places in this area began to be
attacked on the 18th August.  Muslims of this area had given assurance
of safety on the oath of the Koran to their Hindu and Sikh neighbours. 
On the 18th August, however, the well-known technique of raising a false
alarm of attack by Sikhs on Muslims was employed and the Muslims of the
area were incited to attack Sikhs.  Stabbing of individuals and
harassment continued for some time.

On the 3rd September Muslims from about 60 surrounding villages gathered
at Jokalian for attack.  The number of this mob was about 20,000.  The
Gurdwara of the place, where Sikhs had collected for shelter, was
attacked, and in one hour 800 Sikhs including women and children, were
killed.  Later almost the entire remaining Sikh population was killed
also.  The volume of Guru Granth Sahib was tom and desecrated.  Looting
continued for 3 days.

After Jokalian, the Hindus and Sikhs of Mitha Chak were given the
ultimatum either to embrace Islam or to face death.

People of some forty villages were forcibly converted. (A list of these
villages is included in the appendix containing summary of attacks).

The Hindus of village Ghanian were threatened by Muslims with dire
consequences if they made common cause with the Sikhs.  This left the
Sikhs altogether friendless, as their number was already very small
(about a dozen in all).  Finding the situation grown desperate, these
brave and unbending Sikhs killed their womenfolk with their own hands. 
After this the men gathered in a house, set fire to it and perished in
the flames.  The Muslims after the Sikhs had been finished, fell upon
the Hindus who had so unwisely put trust in their promises, killed
several and abducted sonic young women.  These incidents occurred round
about the 21st August.

Bharowal was attacked on the 17th August.  Here a general massacre of
Hindus and Sikhs occurred.  Out of a total Hindu-Sikh population of
1,200 only 123 survived.  Looting took place after this massacre on a
very large scale.

Mandi Bahauddin is an important trading centre of Gujrat district.  Here
Muslim military came into operation early.  Sikhs were taken out of
their houses, bayoneted and otherwise tortured and forced to embrace
Islam.  The refugee camp established here was run on barbarous lines by
the Muslim officials, and no torture and indignity was spared to the
Sikhs.  Piteous appeals for removal from this camp to India continued to
come from Sikhs to the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee, the East
Punjab Government and the Government of India.

At Dinga, a fairly large town, 3,300 Sikhs were killed.

In villages Shadiwal Kalan and Shadiwal Khurd, while Hindus were forced
to accept Islam, all Sikhs were killed.  These occurrences took place on
the 18th and 19th August.

The Sikhs of Mangat, an important village were attacked on the 5th
September.  They gave a very stiff fight to the invaders and were later
all evacuated to Mandi Bahauddin Refugee Camp, from where they were
evacuated to India.

Hindu-Sikh refugees from Gujrat district, numbering 2,000 were being
evacuated to India in trucks.  Obstruction was placed in the way of
these trucks near Kunjah bridge.  The Indian Military escort
accompanying these trucks fired on the Muslim assailants, cleared the
point of obstruction and dispersed them (September 9).  Later, these
trucks were again attacked in the Mozang area of Lahore.

In Kotla Kasim Khan, on the 27th August a Muslim mob of 4,000 attacked
Hindus and Sikhs.  Many houses were burnt, 70 Hindus and Sikhs were
killed and 30 were wounded.  Even women and children were not spared,
and were ruthlessly cut to pieces.

Kunjah, in Tehsil Phalia, was attacked towards the end of August.  Here
a large number of forcible conversions took place.  Hindu and Sikh
houses were forcibly occupied by Muslims.  The Gurdwaras and their
inmates were burned in flames.  Not a single Sikh of this place was left
alive.

SARGODHA

In this district attacks on Hindus and Sikhs began in March, 1947.  On
the 26th March news came of serious and widespread attacks on Hindus and
Sikhs in various places in this district.  These attacks were not yet on
the scale on which they occurred in Rawalpindi, but they still were
serious. Earlier on the 11th March, Muslims attacked Mansehra but were
dispersed.

On the 14th March attacks on Hindus and Sikhs and Hindu and Sikh shops
were made in Khushab.  Three Hindu Sadhus were murdered.

Trouble in the district continued, so that according to a news-item of
the 11th July, the Muslims of Khushab were fined Rs. 50,000 for their
continued attacks on Hindus and Sikhs.  Many villages in this area were
collectively fined for the same offence-the fines ranging from Rs. 500
to Rs. 3,000.

After July, for some days there was a comparative lull in this
district.  On the establishment of Pakistan, however, on the 16th August
attacks on Hindus and Sikhs began again with full vigour.  Trains
running between Malakwal and Shorkot and Malakwal and Bhera were
attacked and Hindu and Sikh passengers were looted and murdered.  In the
villages ultimatums were given to Hindus and Sikhs to embrace Islam or
die.  And in many cases the threat to kill was carried out on refusal to
get converted.  Even the converted were in many cases killed.  Those who
were not killed obstructions were placed in their way to be evacuated to
India when Indian Military came to evacuate them. 325 such forcibly
converted persons were found in Bandial alone. 

In Bhalwal Tehsil, Bhera witnessed several stray murders of Hindus.  In
Lillani 10 Hindus were killed. 150 Hindus of Gondpur were murdered by
order of a Sub-Inspector of Police, whose party looted all their
belongings.

In Miani, which was attacked on the 10th September, 600 Hindus and Sikhs
were murdered and 36 women were abducted.  The estimated value of
property looted is 50 lakhs.

From August 28 on up till about 10 days, Padhrar, Warcha, Jabbi, Khohri,
Mitha Tiwana, Addi Kot, Girot, Mirpur and Thatta Shah Jamal were
attacked.  Hindus and Sikhs were killed in fairly large numbers and
their belongings taken away.  In several places young girls and women
were abducted.  In Mitha Tiwana 59 men were murdered and 17 girls were
taken away.

Hindu and Sikh evacuees were not permitted to carry more than Rs. 15
each plus a few scanty belongings, such as the bedding of the season and
a tumbler.  No clothes other than they were wearing were permitted to be
carried by them.

In Shahpur and Sargodha Tehsils incidents of murder and loot on varying
scales occurred in almost all towns and villages.

A large number of those who were forcibly converted were compelled to
marry away their daughters to Muslims, so that the girls so married and
their families may not evacuate to India.

Residents of Chaks 45, 46, 19, 20, 26, 15, 37, 42, 44, 30, 36 etc.,
mostly Sikhs, were forced to quit their homes in a destitute state and
they sought shelter in the Gujrat relief camp.  The number of evacuees
from these Chaks was about 9,000.  Their evacuation was complete by the
first week of September.

On the 27th August in Bhera several Hindu and Sikh shopkeepers were
stabbed.  Stabbing of Hindus and Sikhs continued for several days by
moving parties of Muslim goondas.  The Malakwal Hindus and Sikhs there
forced to quit their homes after several cases of killing.

In Chaks 38B and 29 (both in Sargodha Tehsil) a large number of Sikhs
were killed by the Muslim Military.

In Khiyali on the 16th August, a large number of Hindus and Sikhs were
killed.

50,000 Sikh refugees from Sargodha were attacked at Tarakabad railway
crossing in Lyallpur, with the active instigation of the Muslim Military
escort.  Many Sikhs were killed although they put up good resistance
against their assailants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
