+++
title = "15 War, Inside and Out"

+++





**A **life cannot properly be measured until it ends. One could argue that the greatest achievements of Buddha, Jesus, and Muhammad, or political figures such as Alexander, Caesar, and Cleopatra, lie less in what they themselves did, but in their legacies, in what they inspired their followers to do. Genghis Khan’s most enduring impact came from the laws he created and the dynamic energy he infused into his large and ever-growing state. His empire continued to expand for more than sixty years after his death, and it survived another century after that.

In accordance with Genghis Khan’s wishes, his people built no stone or wooden monument, tomb, or temple to honor their leader. After he died, most of his people continued to operate as if he were still in command. Each one of his four widows continued to hold court in the *ger* in which she had lived with Genghis Khan. Horses were put aside for his use and allowed to graze freely as though waiting for his summons. His heirs continued to issue edicts and letters in his name.

Under his instructions, each son would be khan over his territory, but Ogodei would be the Great Khan or emperor over all of them. Each of his widows and daughters had already received allocations of land, water, and people. The lands had been distributed from east to west to his offspring according to their birth order, with the heir to the office of Great Khan in the middle. Tolui received the eastern portion including much of northern China, Manchuria, and eastern Mongolia, including Burkhan Khaldun. Ogodei received western Mongolia, adjacent to the lands of Tolui. To his west \(or to his right, as the Mongols refer to the west\) were the lands of Chagatai in modern Kazakhstan and Central Asia. Jochi had died shortly before his father. His death, as mysterious as the circumstances of his birth, simplified the succession plan; his heirs, soon to be known as the Golden Horde, inherited the westernmost part of the empire in what is now Russia.

In the spring of 1228, the Year of the Rat \(according to the *Secret History*\), or the summer of 1229, the Year of the Ox \(according to Juvaini and later Chinese records\), the Mongols gathered to install Ogodei as the new Great Khan. He chose the title Dalai Khan to distinguish himself from his father, taking the Mongol word for sea, *dalai*, so that, like Attila, he would be the emperor of all the land encompassed by the world’s oceans. The first thing Ogodei did was to reaffirm the laws of his father. “The law of Genghis Khan should be maintained, and secured, and protected against the evils of change, and alteration, and confusion.”1 He kept his father’s generals and important military officers as well as his Torguud bodyguard, but he prudently removed the late khan’s *Keshig* from politics, appointing them eternal guardians of his father’s grave.

With their new government in place, the people began to drink and feast. They slept by day and celebrated so much at night that “the brilliance of the fire of wine became like broad day.”2 Ogodei opened the warehouses that stored the wealth of the nation and lavished its goods on his followers. Juvaini wrote that it was a time of “herbs and flowers blossoming in the meadows,” and thus “the world began to smile” with “the impurities of deceit and envy remote from their secret thoughts.”3 But deceit and envy seem rarely to be altogether remote from the thoughts of powerful men. Despite all the wonderful words and soaring metaphors, a struggle had begun. The drunken revelry of Ogodei’s installation was a preview of the chaos to come.



Genghis Khan’s heirs had divided the land between them, but now they each wanted control of the future, and therein lay the problem. Should they send the army to attack China, Korea, India, Europe, or Iraq? Each brother was intent on extending the borders of his particular lands, not the empire as a whole. Unable to agree on a unified goal, they set out to conquer in every direction at once, with each brother in command of his own army. Their campaign was the closest history had come until then to a world war.

With the armies sprawled out in so many different directions stretching from Korea to Hungary, it seemed that the empire would quickly pull itself apart. Not even their founder Genghis Khan had fought on so many fronts quite so far apart or spread so thinly over two continents. The brothers showed a dangerous combination of stubbornness, arrogance, and reckless risk-taking, yet sometimes fate favors the fool. Surprisingly their audacious plan worked. Despite a few setbacks, the Mongol armies consistently triumphed over one enemy after another on every front. They appeared to be as invincible as they had been under Genghis Khan. During Ogodei’s reign Mongol warriors conquered from Kashmir in modern India as far as the borders of Poland and Germany and from the highlands of Tibet to the suburbs of Vienna. Much of the conquest was more akin to a series of massive raids in which the armies looted wherever they went, but they were now spread out too far to effectively organize their vast land holdings into a single functioning empire.

While the Mongol army won its battles, it was not necessarily winning the war. Each son seemed eager, as Jochi had declared in his lifetime, to conquer and loot new territories rather than administer the old ones. Once Genghis Khan withdrew from Central Asia, his allies the Nizaris attempted to replace him and assume control over the former Khwarizm territory. The alliance between Mongols and the Assassins broke dramatically soon after Genghis Khan’s death, when the Nizari assassinated a Mongol commander, Chaghatai Qorchi.4 The target of the assassination was identified in some Muslim sources as the young orphan whom Genghis Khan had adopted at the end of the Tangut campaign, but Rashid ad-Din claims the boy was Genghis Khan’s natural-born son with a Tangut woman.5 Whichever was true, any such familial connection to Genghis Khan would have forced the Mongols to sever all ties with the Nizari.

Soon thereafter, in further plotting against the Mongols in 1238, the Nizaris joined with the caliph of Baghdad to send an envoy to the kings of England and France, attempting to create an alliance of the Nizari imam with the caliph and the pope against the Mongols.6 The mission failed.

With the newly conquered territories, wealth poured back into Mongolia, but the heart of the empire had begun to rot. Behind the scenes the brothers squabbled. As Great Khan and therefore the most powerful, Ogodei snatched territory from his brother Tolui and ordered the building of border walls between them to keep the game, particularly the massive herds of steppe antelope, from migrating into his brother’s land. While the brothers quarreled with each other and gradually absorbed the lands of their sisters, uncles, and their father’s aging widows, a completely new generation of women was coming to power—the wives so shrewdly chosen by Genghis Khan for his sons, who had been left in charge of court life while the men campaigned. Over the next thirty years until the rise of Khubilai Khan in 1260, these women held the empire together.

One of the predominant figures among this rising matriarchy was Ogodei’s wife, Toregene Khatun, a Naiman princess who had been married to a Merkid leader before she married Ogodei. She chose the ministers, administered the laws, allocated money, heard pleas, and ran the court which was, in essence, the imperial government. Although raised a Christian, she financed Islamic schools and generously donated money for the publication of Taoist scriptures. Most of the officials who had prospered under Genghis Khan continued to do so under Ogodei Khan and his wife Toregene Khatun. While the Taoists received slightly preferential treatment from the court, all faiths were allowed to worship freely.

During Genghis Khan’s lifetime, Yelu Chucai had persuaded him to abandon some of the older Mongol traditions in favor of Chinese models of government. He had proceeded slowly but persistently in the belief, as he put it, that “things which are quickly made, quickly perish, and those that are achieved late, end well.”7 Yelu Chucai became more open in his promotion of Chinese ideas, and his policies flourished under Ogodei, who showed a more positive attitude toward Confucianism than his father had. In 1233, Ogodei Khan conferred on Confucians the same privileges and tax exemptions enjoyed by Taoists and Buddhists. He also built the first known Confucian temple in Mongolia at his capital city of Karakorum.

Yelu Chucai recruited capable Confucian officials to run the empire and helped to transfer power away from Mongol advisers. Over time, the *Keshig* lost the power to decide legal cases and no longer outranked commanders in the army and ministers of government. Koreans were eventually recruited to replace some of the Mongols in Ogodei’s bodyguard. Just as Genghis Khan had kept a balance of power among his ministers by recruiting men of different faiths and cultures, in 1229 Ogodei recruited Yelu Chucai’s old nemesis Li Zhichang, who as a young Taoist disciple had met with Genghis Khan in Afghanistan, and appointed Li to the office of state teacher.8

Despite the growing conflict within the Mongol royal family, the ameliorating influence of men such as Li Zhichang and Yelu Chucai helped make Mongol rule more acceptable to the Chinese and to adjoining nationalities who had an affinity for classical Chinese culture. Yelu Chucai’s Chinese factions continued to conflict with the Central Asian Muslims and Christians at the court, but at this point the frictions were more ethnic and cultural than religious. His insistence on introducing more Chinese clerical practices into the court and using Confucian phraseology in some documents improved the image of the Mongols in China by making them less foreign. In the end, Yelu Chucai had a much greater influence on the Mongol Empire than the religious leaders who met and sought to guide the Great Khan. Even his detractors recognized his importance. One was quoted as saying that Yelu Chucai’s discourse “still rings in my ears, as clear as the stars and the sun.”9

In the first years of his reign, Ogodei campaigned hard against the Jin in China, but he seemed to be in constant competition with his younger brother Tolui. Tolui appeared to have enjoyed his brief reign as regent and harbored desires to become sole ruler after Ogodei.

Ogodei could not have failed to recognize the danger that Tolui and his four dynamic and skilled sons posed to his rule. Whereas Tolui’s sons remained united under their mother Sorkhokhtani’s leadership, Ogodei quarreled with his sons and they with one another. Ogodei described his son Guyuk, who quarreled frequently with everyone, as a bad egg and, according to the *Secret History,* expressed the wish that he might rot like one.10 His favorite grandson, Shiremun, who he hoped would inherit the empire, never showed as much promise as his grandfather saw in him.

Suddenly in 1232, on the verge of the final defeat of the Jin, Tolui died. Some claimed that he was simply drunk as usual and died in a coma, but the *Secret History* offers a lengthy and bizarre explanation that began when Ogodei became ill and lost his ability to speak.11 The court shamans diagnosed his problem as having been bewitched by the guardian spirits of the Chinese lands and waters. The shamans offered the spirits gold, silver, cattle, food, slaves—anything they wanted to release their khan—but the illness only grew worse. Finally, they divined by “inspecting the entrails of victims” that the spirits would give up their paralysis of Ogodei only if they could have the sacrifice of someone in his family. Suddenly, Ogodei Khan supposedly woke up, asked for a drink, and wanted to know what had happened to him. When the shamans told him that the spirits had released him in exchange for the sacrifice of someone in his family, Ogodei looked around and his eye fell on his younger brother Tolui.

The shamans prepared “magic water” for Tolui, who dutifully drank it and died. The *Secret History* includes a long poetic speech supposedly given by Tolui just before he died claiming that he wanted to give his life for his brother. This episode with the victim supposedly asking for death resembled the events leading up to Jamuka’s death, when Genghis Khan offered him freedom but instead he chose to die.



Unlike his father, who loyally accompanied his soldiers until the end of his life, in 1234, at nearly fifty years of age, Ogodei retired from fighting. He left the battlefield and returned home to Mongolia. His health was failing from rampant alcoholism and he seemed haunted by the ghost of his brother as he returned to the steppe for his final years. He appears to have suffered a stroke or some other severe impairment, so his wife Toregene administered his court just as Yesui had done in the final year of Genghis Khan’s life. With the fall of the Jin dynasty, Toregene launched new campaigns in the name of her ailing husband against the Southern Sung, the kingdom of Goryeo \(Korea\), the Kipchak, and Tibet. While Ogodei’s sons and generals went out to fight, Toregene and her ministers ran the empire, issuing edicts under her own name and authority.

Under Toregene’s rule, the Mongol nation acquired its first capital, Kharkhorin, which became known in the West by its Turkic name, Karakorum. Built on the Orkhon River where it flows out of the Khangai Mountains, this was the place where the earlier Turkic tribes had built their capitals. But this was now the capital of a vast world empire. It housed metalworkers and weavers from Khwarizm and Persia, scribes and potters from China, soldiers from Russia, clerks and papermakers from Korea, maids who had once been ladies of the royal court, dung gatherers who had once lived in luxurious palaces, and even a goldsmith from Paris. Astrologers, monks, and priests of all religions flocked to the Mongol court. In addition to Christian chapels, Muslim mosques, and Buddhist and Taoist temples, a visitor could find a Confucian temple and school.

After Ogodei’s death in 1241, Toregene became the regent, and for the next five years she ruled the largest empire in the history of the world. Although she is little remembered today outside of Mongolia, no man or woman had ruled as large a territory or as many people. Not until the reigns of Isabella and Ferdinand of Spain in the sixteenth century did an intercontinental empire come close to rivaling hers, and not until the British annexation of India and Burma under Queen Victoria in the nineteenth century did any monarch claim as large a domain or as many subjects.

Toregene’s *tamgha*, the symbol branded on her animals, was a stylized archery bow, and that became her seal of office, replacing the S-shaped seal of her husband. Her bow was cast on coins, which boldly proclaimed her office and power in different languages depending on where they were issued. In Turkic, the most common language within the empire, the coins were inscribed with *Ulugh Mughul Ulus Beg*, Ruler of the Great Mongol Nation.



After Ogodei’s death, Yelu Chucai gradually lost favor. Though he was only fifty-four years old, he was a walking relic from another time. Respected but ignored, he was pushed to the sidelines of court life, replaced by other advisers who promised greater tax yields and more luxuries. These were men who had not been with Genghis Khan on the long campaign, had not helped in the march to victory, but now came wagging their tails, eager to exploit his subjects. Yelu Chucai died at Karakorum in 1244 reportedly of a broken heart, devastated by the direction taken by Genghis Khan’s heirs.

Soon after Yelu Chucai’s death, Subodei of the Uriyankhai, the nephew of Old Jarchigudai and the most respected surviving adviser of Genghis Khan’s inner circle, retired. He was the last person to have known Temujin as a youth on Burkhan Khaldun, and he had continued fighting for nearly two decades after his friend’s death. Having waged battles from China to Hungary, Subodei had conquered more cities than any other Mongol leader. Late in life, he was still begrudgingly honored by the younger members of the royal family but was otherwise ignored. He became so disgusted with Mongol politics that like Yelu Chucai, he withdrew. Friar Carpini reported seeing him in 1247, by which time he supposedly had grown quite heavy, but others said that he returned to Hungary, the scene of his greatest victory in 1241. He had named his son Uriyankhadai, in honor of their tribe of origin, and by this time Uriyankhadai had become an accomplished general, campaigning across Eastern Europe.12 Some claimed that the old warrior wanted to die with his son by the Danube, but this romantic story is based solely on hearsay. While it could be true, it may also be a tale manufactured to disguise Subodei’s disenchantment with the empire he had helped build. By 1248 Subodei was gone, and with him the Old Guard as well.



In time even the strongest rope begins to unravel, and the golden cord that was Genghis Khan’s Mongol nation proved no exception. Beneath the surface of conservative continuity, political rivalries intensified within the family. By 1246, Toregene had solidified the empire and centralized power to the point where she was ready to hand it over to her unpopular and largely incompetent son Guyuk. The summer of his installation was dreadfully cold, with snowstorms, lethal hail, and floods in the area around Karakorum. Because of the damage from harsh winds, possibly even a tornado, the investiture ceremony had to be postponed until deep into August.

For the first time, foreigners were not only allowed but encouraged to attend the ceremony. According to different chroniclers, as many as two thousand foreign officials attended together with an equal number of retainers. Many were already vassals of the Mongols; others sought to curry favor with the new world power. Although they were not allowed to participate in the selection or to witness the actual installation, the foreigners were allowed to submit tribute and to offer their submission once Guyuk was installed. The 1246 Congress of Karakorum was the first international summit of ministers and heads of so many states. “Emirs, governors, agents, and deputies made their way to his *ordo* from north, south, east and west,” wrote Rashid al-Din.13 “No one had ever witnessed such an assembly nor has the like been read of in any history.” They came from as far away as the courts of the sultan in Delhi, the pope in Rome, the Seljuk sultan in Turkey, and the caliph in Baghdad. Rival claimants to the throne of Georgia \(both named David\) came to pay their respects and plead for appointment as the new Georgian king, the brother of the Armenian king arrived, and the grand duke of Russia along with his son the great hero Prince Alexander Nevsky came. Two thousand tents had to be erected to house the vast number of guests.

It was feared that the foul weather at the time of the installation was an omen of a stormy reign, and so it turned out to be. Guyuk did not accept some of the ambassadors who were sent to him and pointedly refused all communication with the Nizari imam of the Assassins. “As for the envoys from Alamut, he dismissed them with contempt and disdain; and the reply to the memorandum they bought was correspondingly couched in harsh language,” wrote Juvaini.14 Guyuk was too busy to deal with the Nizari at this point, but their earlier treachery had sealed their fate.

We are lucky to have an exceptional eyewitness account of Guyuk Khan’s selection and installation. Unexpectedly and almost entirely unnoticed, on July 22, 1246, amidst all the confusion of the election, the threatening armies, and the unprecedentedly large horde of foreigners thronging the Orkhon River valley, the first envoy arrived from Pope Innocent IV in Rome. Innocent had commissioned two Franciscan envoys and sent them east by separate routes. Their mission was to contact the Mongols, negotiate with them, and return with much-needed information on their political intentions and military capability. The pope dispatched Lawrence of Portugal, who apparently headed for Asia Minor and then disappeared into obscurity. The pope also sent out Friar Giovanni of Plano Carpini, who had been one of the early disciples of Saint Francis of Assisi. The sixty-five-year-old overweight friar set out from Lyon, France, on Easter Day 1245, accompanied by Stephen of Bohemia on the first successful mission from Europe to Mongolia. As any foreigner might, Carpini found Mongol politics and protocol quite bewildering. He apparently tried to approach Guyuk with the pope’s letter, but he was politely referred to the court of Toregene Khatun, who still ruled. Carpini wrote with astonishment that Toregene Khatun had a massive white tent capable of holding two thousand people and that the area in front of her courtly tent teemed with officials and supplicants from all over the world. He stayed at her court for four weeks, and insisted that there were about four thousand people swarming around. Because of the language barrier, he was not sure what they were doing, but he thought that the Mongols were holding an election.15

The court included more Europeans than Carpini had expected. Fresh from their campaigns to Hungary and Poland, the Mongol court was filled with “many Ruthenians \[Ukrainians, Belarusians, and Russians\], Hungarians, people who knew Latin and French, and Ruthenian clerics and others who had been with the Tartars, some for thirty years, in wars and other circumstances, who knew everything about them because they knew the language and had stayed with them constantly, some twenty years, some ten, some more.”16

With help from some of these Europeans working in the Mongol court, Carpini managed to have the pope’s letter translated for Guyuk Khan. Given the fact that he had a Christian mother, Guyuk Khan knew significantly more about Christianity than the Christians knew about the Mongols. Indeed the khan had a private Christian chapel, and he maintained a “Christian choir before his largest tent, and they sang publicly and openly, and rang the hours according to the Greek custom.”17 From their reconnaissance, the Mongols were well aware that the pope represented neither Europe nor the Christians because he did not rule over all of Europe or have the allegiance of most of the world’s Christians.

The Great Khan sought to send Mongol ambassadors back with Carpini to Europe, but Carpini strongly resisted. He did not want the Mongols to see how disunited the Europeans were, or to take responsibility for their lives. The Mongols did not insist. As a sign of good will, Toregene sent them back with coats made of fox fur sewn with silk to comfort them on their long journey home.18 Mongols at that time rarely accepted “no” as an answer. Despite Carpini’s refusal to escort Mongol ambassadors to Europe, they sent them anyway.

The English cleric Matthew Paris, who wrote a year-by-year chronicle of events in his lifetime, reported that Mongol representatives arrived in Rome in 1248. “In this same summer two envoys came from the Tartars, sent to the lord pope by their prince,” wrote Paris, “but the cause of their arrival was kept so secret from everyone at the curia that it was unknown to clerks, notaries, and others, even those familiar with the pope.” Because of the difficult language barrier separating the Europeans from the Asians, “the letters they brought with them for the pope were three times translated from an unknown to a better known language as the envoys approached the region of the West.”19 The Christian church was not receptive to the Mongol claim that Genghis Khan was heaven’s representative on Earth and that by his law, the Mongols protected and honored all religions. Church officials anxiously suppressed all knowledge of this un-Christian message from pagans.

The court was soon splintered by arrogance, pride, and greed. Guyuk reaffirmed the laws of his grandfather and father, and he continued to use the title Dalai Khan, like his father. He may have done so not so much out of loyalty as sheer laziness. He greedily sought power and wealth and showed little interest in administration, referring officials and envoys to his mother’s court and seeming content to allow her to continue to run the government. “He was, on most days,” wrote Rashid al-Din, “engaged from morning till evening and from dawn to dusk with the quaffing of cups of wine and the contemplation of angel-faced, sweet-limbed maidens.” Aside from the maidens, “he was in a melancholic frame of mind and had no inclination for conversation.”20

A feud soon broke out with his mother, who had prepared the way for him to become Great Khan. As he purged her court, she tried to resist, but she was probably well over sixty years of age at this point and weakening. The fight between mother and son did not last long, as the Empress Toregene suddenly died. No information is given regarding the details of her demise. She could have died a natural death, but there may also have been a plot against her. We will probably never know the truth of this heroic empress’s end.



Despite his avowed commitment to the laws of his grandfather, Guyuk executed some of the Muslim administrators Genghis Khan had assigned to help govern China. His hostility seemed less directed at the faith than it was an effort to clear out old ministers and take firm control over the government. The abrupt changes created an atmosphere of paranoia as each group felt itself to be, or about to become, unfairly victimized. Rumors and lies could scarcely be separated from fact. Each religious faction seemed to fear that its followers might be exterminated. Chinese and Persian chronicles relate how followers of different faiths attempted to have others banned. Some Chinese officials advocated banning Buddhism as well as Taoism.21 The Catholics wanted to exterminate Asian Christianity, which they condemned as Nestorian heresy. The general mood of paranoia is reflected in the report, firmly believed by many, that some Buddhist monks proposed to Guyuk Khan that he massacre all Muslims under Mongol control. When he would not do so, they purportedly persuaded him to prevent them from reproducing by castrating Muslim men. According to Juzjani’s account, Guyuk drew up the order for castration only to rescind it when a dog unexpectedly attacked one of the Buddhist monks and ripped off his genitals.22 This was supposedly a sign of Allah’s determination to protect the Muslims. Such stories, however unlikely, further inflamed the passions and exacerbated the power struggles.

“By Virtue of God,” proclaimed Guyuk, “from the rising of the sun to its setting, all realms have been granted to us. Without the Order of God, how could anyone do anything?”23 The *Golden Chronicle* tells us that Genghis Khan’s descendants enjoyed the fruits of his labor and undermined his life’s work.

Guyuk’s life was short and his death mysterious. After only eighteen months as Great Khan he died in the spring of 1248, while moving his army across southwestern Mongolia toward the land of his cousin Batu Khan in modern-day Russia. He was forty-two years old. Was it poison, alcohol, fever, a fight, exhaustion, a wound? There has been much speculation but no satisfactory answer. His widow, the Christian queen Oghul Ghaimish, perfectly matched both in temperament and ability, became the regent. Her reign lasted three years, twice the length of her husband’s, but she lacked the skill and vision of her late mother-in-law, the Empress Toregene.

Oghul Ghaimish depended increasingly on her Christian advisers to run what little she controlled of the government, while she huddled with the shamans, turning to divine the future through astrology and by studying the cracks in the burnt shoulder blades of sheep.

In the words of Juvaini, she was closeted with the shamans, “carrying out their fantasies and absurdities.”24 She avoided the new Mongol capital at Karakorum and set up her nomadic court along the Emil River in western China, near the place where her husband had died and far from her main rivals, Tolui’s family, in the east.

After Guyuk’s death, the simmering conflicts within the royal family spilled into public view. The discord increasingly took the form of religious rivalries as his two sons set up rival courts, each hoping to become the Great Khan. Juvaini wrote that the wise men “struggled in the mire” and “could find no way out.”25 Differences over religion were not the underlying issue fueling the conflicts, but religion was the tool through which other rivalries were funneled and expressed. The Mongol Empire was at its height, and it would endure for another 120 years. But the decay had begun. The Mongols could defeat any foe but they could not control themselves.

Oghul Ghaimish’s greed and lack of tact were fully displayed in 1250, when she received a Dominican monk, Andrew of Longjumeau, who had been sent by the French king Louis IX, also known as Saint Louis. The envoy had not come as a vassal to submit but as a possible ally eager to create a Mongol-European alliance against the Muslims. Although Oghul Ghaimish’s armies had not attacked France or fought French soldiers on the battlefield, she arrogantly assumed that Longjumeau had come on behalf of his king in order to surrender Christian Europe, or at least France. Her letter of response to King Louis IX dispensed with flattery and did not even express appreciation for his having sent an envoy all that way. Instead she offered grandiose claims and puffed-up threats. She sent him a list of the rulers whom she claimed to have executed for failing to please her and then commanded the French monarch “to send us so much of your gold and of your silver each year, if you hold it back from us, we shall do what we did to those whom we named before.” The French king simply ignored the letter. One surviving account of his reaction states simply: “he was very sorry that he had sent a mission.”26

One person’s failures often make room for another’s strength. Oghul Ghaimish’s weakness offered opportunities for others to step in, and it was another, far stronger woman who outmaneuvered all the men in the royal family. Ultimate victory in the bitter struggle for succession to the office of Great Khan went to Sorkhokhtani Beki, the sister of Genghis Khan’s Christian wife, Ibaqa Beki. Sorkhokhtani Beki was also Christian and was the widow of Genghis Khan’s youngest son, Tolui, and the mother of four strongly competitive contenders—Mongke, Khubilai, Hulegu, and Arik Boke.

In the summer of 1251, Sorkhokhtani negotiated a secret alliance with Batu Khan, the heir to Jochi in the Golden Horde of Russia and an excellent leader, who would have been an excellent candidate for Great Khan had it not been for the questions of paternity surrounding his father. Jochi’s lineage was thus united with that of Tolui against the weakened, fragmented, and alcoholic line of Ogodei. Through Sorkhokhtani’s careful plotting and detailed guidance, her four sons seized control of the Mongol Empire in a carefully orchestrated coup.

Her eldest son, Mongke, took office as the new Great Khan, and, seizing territory already granted to other members of the royal family, his three brothers divided up most of the empire among them. Khubilai was given responsibility for most of the Chinese territory under Mongol control, including large parts of Tibet. Hulegu took Central Asia as far as Kashmir and western Tibet, and Arik Boke, the youngest, retained authority over the Mongolian homeland. The brothers controlled the entire empire with the exception of Russia. Because of Sorkhokhtani’s alliance with Batu Khan, he and his family retained control of their lands, which they administered with increasing independence.

Sorkhokhtani, who had long served as regent for her dead husband, Tolui, over northern China and eastern Mongolia, could have followed the precedent of Toregene Khatun and Oghul Ghaimish Khatun and herself become queen. In her prime she almost certainly would have been the greatest of all the Mongol queens, but now she was in her mid- to late sixties, nearing what the Mongols call “the completion of her age.” She refused the title of Sorkhokhtani Khatun and remained what she had always been, Sorkhokhtani Beki, a princess. She had fought all her life to prepare her sons for this day and she decided to put them forward instead.

In a protracted struggle of wills, Oghul Ghaimish Khatun, the legally elected regent, refused to participate in the election of Mongke Khan or to recognize him afterward. She insisted that only a person from the lineage of Ogodei could hold that office, which, in her view, had been vouchsafed to them in perpetuity by Genghis Khan. In the midst of this struggle Sorkhokhtani died in the spring of 1252, just as the young Juvaini arrived in Karakorum for the first time. As his father was already working for the Mongols, a twenty-six-year-old Juvaini had a chance to visit Karakorum only a few months after the installation. His eyewitness account of the new administration is valuable, if decidedly overwrought.

Juvaini’s praise for Mongke Khan was even more exaggerated than it had been for Genghis Khan, whom he had never met. “The world was a rose garden and the season resplendent.” he wrote.27 “And when the World-Emperor had auspiciously seated himself upon the couch of the Empire, like the sun in the zenith of power,” he decreed that “people should not engage in acts of hostility and enmity towards one another but should enjoy themselves and make merry.”28 Juvaini waxes on for a dozen pages about the beauty and perfection of Mongke Khan’s reign until the celebrations have finished. “And the princes having departed and their business being dispatched, he\[Mongke Khan\] turned his attention to the administration of the realm, and the straightening of the crooked, and the righting of the wrong, and the chiding of the wicked, and the suppression of the seditious.”29 The ornate prose scarcely gave justice to the horror that was about to unfold at the Mongol court.

Until this point the struggle between the lineages of Ogodei and Tolui had been mostly one of words, political plays, and bluffing, but the death of Mongke Khan’s mother seemed to have released him from all restraint. His first victim was his mother’s long-term rival Oghul Ghaimish. He had her arrested along with the surviving widow of Ogodei Khan. Oghul Ghaimish was certainly guilty of many faults, including incompetence, arrogance, and greed, but she did not deserve the brutal fate that awaited her. Mongke Khan had her brought to court, stripped naked, and publicly tortured. Ravaged but still alive, she was then “wrapped in felt and flung into the river.”30

Her formal charge was witchcraft, but privately in January 1254, Mongke told the French envoy William of Rubruck that she was the worst kind of witch, “more vile than a dog. She was a ‘bitch.’” Thus ended the life of the last reigning empress of the Mongol Empire.

William of Rubruck was struck by the heightened state of paranoia and vigilance. He was surprised at the high security of the court and the suspicious nature of the Mongol khan and his officials. Upon arrival, every foreign envoy was summoned and interrogated about the details of his life and journey. “And they inquired most minutely whence we were, why we had come, what was our business,”31 William explained in his account of his journey. He attributed this scrutiny to fear of assassination by the Nizari, with whom the Mongols were now virtually at war. “And this inquiry was made,” he wrote, “because it had been reported to Mongke Khan that forty *Hacsasins* had entered the city under various disguises to kill him.”32

Although a similar story of Nizari assassins was reported by other participants, it may well have been a rumor started by the Mongols as justification for the security. No evidence survives of anyone having been arrested. Alleged threats from Oghul Ghaimish or from the Assassins became an excuse for all types of additional security, but in truth the officials in Mongke’s court were only persecuting their fellow Mongols and mostly just their own family members.



Having seized control of the empire, Mongke Khan needed to secure his hold on power. To do that he wanted to rid himself of all opposition. He interrogated nearly everyone associated with the reigns of Ogodei and his hapless son Guyuk and purged many of his cousins, their spouses, children, and allies. He “ordered them all to be bound and imprisoned, and for a while he reflected about their fate,” wrote William. He presented himself as the defender of Genghis Khan’s laws and traditions, but he lacked a legal pretext under Mongol law to torture the prisoners or punish them. Only a council of the whole royal family could order the execution of another member of the Golden Lineage. Instead, Mongke Khan chose to try them before a court with judges whom he controlled.

Shigi-Khutukhu, now in his seventies, still served as the supreme judge of the Mongol nation, an office he had held for forty years. Genghis Khan had specifically declared that no one could alter the laws recorded by Shigi-Khutukhu, whom he described as “eyes to see with, ears to hear with.” Ogodei had also appointed him as the chief judge over northern China, the very land ruled by Sorkhokhtani. Shigi-Khutukhu was still alive at the time of the purges, and was almost certainly the most respected official in the government. He was quickly removed from office.33

Genghis Khan’s half brother Belgutei had also served as a judge and was still alive, but he too was excluded from power, as were members of Genghis Khan’s *Keshig*, who had been charged with enforcing and preserving the law, but now had only the authority to protect his grave. Mongke Khan seemed determined to destroy anyone with a closer tie to his grandfather than his own. He arrested Yisun Toe, the grandson of Old Jarchigudai, who had escorted Genghis Khan’s body to Burkhan Khaldun. He too was killed.34 Old Chinqai, the Christian minister who had served Genghis Khan so faithfully, had been abandoned. According to Rashid al-Din, he “was perplexed in the conduct of affairs, and no one listened to his words and advice.”35 Finally, on a flimsy pretext, Chinqai too was executed in the fall of 1252.

Mongke Khan appointed new judges and officials to carry out the prosecutions. He wanted no one around him with a direct connection to Genghis Khan. To override his grandfather’s laws, he knew he would need to find some higher precedent. According to Rashid al-Din, he found this in the* Romance of Alexander*, a popular account of the adventures of Alexander the Great. One of Mongke Khan’s advisers read a passage from the book that held that when faced with rebels, Alexander had sent a messenger to his former teacher Aristotle to ask “what measures he should take to deal with them.” Rather than answering in words, Aristotle had uprooted a large tree to show that the old must be removed before the new can grow.36 According to Rashid al-Din, Mongke Khan “was extremely pleased with this story and realized that these people must be done away with and others maintained in their place.” It mattered little that the story was merely a myth or that it contradicted the explicit edicts and teachings of Genghis Khan. Mongke Khan issued his verdict.



Mongke brought the *ordu* of Genghis Khan, the tents that had belonged to his wives, from their resting place as shrines at Burkhan Khaldun and had them erected in the steppes near Karakorum, from where he now ruled. He used them as the venues for the trials of his relatives. According to Rashid al-Din, Mongke Khan “went to the *ordu* of Genghis Khan, sat upon a chair, and tried” his royal cousins, the princes and former heirs.37 In the belief of the time, part of Genghis Khan’s spirit lived on in the *ordu* and by not stopping the trials and punishments he was supposedly giving his posthumous blessing to the rule of Mongke Khan and to the trials.

Mongke Khan’s prosecutors used an effective technique, beginning the questions circuitously before the accused realized what was happening. Like hunters who let their prey run until it tires and can be easily taken, the prosecutors proceeded slowly over several days to allow people to say as much as they wanted, knowing that ultimately they would reveal something incriminating. “They put the questions in an extremely subtle manner, so that in the end the contradictions in their words became apparent,” wrote Rashid al-Din, and “no doubt remained” as to their guilt.38

The public prosecution of the cousins lasted for days, during which witnesses were beaten into confessing their crimes and betraying others. The trials degenerated into public torture sessions. When the Buddhist ruler of the Uighurs was brought in and denied the charges against him, “they so twisted his hands that he fell upon his face in exhaustion. A wooden press was then fastened on his forehead.”39 Others were brought in to testify against him, “and after sipping the unpalatable cup of the roughness of Tartar rods they vomited forth and declared what was hidden in their breasts.” The Uighur ruler was then returned to his people for a public execution; his brother was ordered to cut off his head while his accomplices “were sawn in half.”

“There were seventy-seven persons, all of whom were put to death,” and hundreds received other punishments. Family members were killed in such a way as to prevent the shedding of blood, but Mongke Khan seemed determined to make their deaths as gruesome as possible. Two accused brothers had their “mouths... stuffed with stones until they died,” and then their father was arrested and taken “to join his sons.”40 In this way, the condemned man could not call out his final prayer for his immortal soul to escape from his body.

Perhaps out of jealousy, knowing that Mutugen had been Genghis Khan’s favored grandson, two of Mutugen’s sons were singled out for particularly brutal treatment. For their interrogation and trial, Mongke Khan deliberately chose judges who hated them. “The agents of the Court arrived like so many Angels of Death,” wrote Rashid al-Din.41 One of them, Buri, who had fought in Europe and brought a regiment of Saxon miners from Germany to teach their skills, was ridiculed as a drunk bully and sent to his cousin Batu in Russia for an undisclosed disposal. Another son of Mutugen was brought to the court with his wife, who was tortured and tried in the presence of her husband. The judge had a “bosom filled with an ancient grudge,” and after a perfunctory trial, “he ordered her limbs to be kicked to a pulp.”42 The manner of death of the two men was not specified, but the vengeful court seemed to delight in designing especially horrible fates for each person it condemned.

The original group of seventy-seven family members who had been arrested soon grew to hundreds as the prosecutions spread across the empire and more enemies were identified. After purging the royal family and high-ranking officials, Mongke Khan seemed determined to expand the scope of the purges and to remove anyone with a religious or spiritual connection to his grandfather. The new rulers were the sons of his blood and bone, and they wanted no one around who could claim a more direct, personal tie to him.

One of the court retainers, according to Juvaini, “was cast into bonds and chains and remained imprisoned for nearly two years, during which time, by reason of all manner of question and punishment, he despaired of the pleasure of life.” Finally “he resigned himself to death and surrendering his body to the will of Fate and Destiny confessed to a crime which he had not committed. He too was cast into the river, and his wives and children were put to the sword.”43 Juvaini, like his father, was a strong supporter of Mongke Khan, yet he reported many such atrocities in the great purge of his ascension to power. To give one example, he wrote that Mongke Khan had ordered one accused “to be beaten from the left and the right until all his limbs were crushed; and so he died. And his wives and children were cast into the baseness of slavery and disgraced and humiliated.”44 While the Mongol royal family squabbled among themselves and plotted against each other, the edges of the empire continued to fray. Once he had completed his internal purges, Mongke Khan was determined to restore the empire of Genghis Khan. He sent the army on a new round of foreign conquest to take back lost territory and expand into new lands. His ruthless treatment of his family members was but a prelude to his plans for a much bigger and better Mongol Empire. His foreign enemies had ample reason to fear the worst. And Mongke Khan was already preparing to make their worst fears come true.




