+++
title = "16 Burning the Books"

+++





Of all the religious scholars who had met with Genghis Khan, the young Taoist disciple Li Zhichang had benefited the most, lived the longest, and was destined to die in the cruelest manner. His sect had prospered after the meeting in Afghanistan and Li Zhichang had become an honored figure among the Taoists. He published a book on his discussions with Genghis Khan and, because of his intimate connection to the conqueror, he was revered by many younger Mongols.

In 1251, Mongke Khan placed Li Zhichang in charge of all Taoist institutions under Mongol rule and summoned him to Karakorum. Mongke Khan wanted to establish two things at once. He wished to appear loyal to the memory and laws of Genghis Khan, and inviting someone who had earlier worked with his grandfather would help toward that goal. At the same time, he sought to consolidate power over the various segments of his disjointed empire. Bringing Li Zhichang to his court was central to his effort to control religious groups in his newly centralized administration.

Although Karakorum was the capital of the Mongol Empire, when Li arrived it was little more than a steppe village of mud walls. Preferring life in their *gers* out in the open land away from the town, none of the Mongol elite actually lived there. Karakorum was the servants’ quarters, where they kept bureaucrats and artisans who worked for the court. The capital had a quarter for Chinese workers, a section for the Muslim markets, another for produce, and long warehouses filled with tribute and treasure. Despite its lack of monumental architecture or esthetic appeal, Karakorum, with its numerous houses of worship, was a living embodiment of Genghis Khan’s policy of religious tolerance. The French envoy William of Rubruck arrived in Karakorum at about the same time as Li Zhichang, and he recorded seeing twelve religious buildings, including a church and two mosques. The city also had Taoist, Confucian, and Buddhist temples.

Despite the presence of these religious institutions and the fact that his mother was Christian, Mongke and his brothers relied on traditional shamans. The new khan and his court mostly lived within the felt walls of their *gers* out on the steppe, away from the city with its enclosed gods. Representatives of foreign religions who made their way to Karakorum from China, Europe, and the Muslim world frequently mocked the Mongol court for its dependence on these shamans and fortune-tellers.1 “Their government of the people depends on divination,” William wrote dismissively.2 Mongke Khan told him “heaven gave us diviners, we do what they tell us, and we live in peace.” William confirmed that whatever the shamans “say must be done is executed without delay.” The shamans “predict lucky and unlucky days for the undertaking of all affairs; and so it is that they never assemble an army nor begin a war without their assent.”3

Mongke Khan had so many shamans at his court that in 1253 he was compelled to organize them into two sections of healers and fortune-tellers. He appointed his favorite shaman, Aghucha, to oversee sacrifices. The shamans had many specializations: some were particularly good at controlling the weather, predicting the future, or conducting meat rituals and other ceremonies. William of Rubruck complained that Aghucha was the pope of the soothsayers whose *ger* was always “at about a stone’s throw” from that of the Great Khan.4 The shamans were much closer and had greater access than the assemblage of foreign monks, priests, and imams who made their way to the court.

Within the city of Karakorum, people of different faiths had no choice but to live together. This was deeply unfamiliar for the Christians, and William was not pleased to learn that he would have to live side by side with Orthodox priests from Georgia, Russia, Syria, Greece, and Armenia, and to practice Christian rites in compulsory harmony. They all claimed to worship the same God, yet none of the Christians seemed to like one another, and they had no experience of worshipping together in their home countries. For more than two hundred years the Orthodox Christians and Catholic Christians had waged nearly perpetual war against one another. Each had excommunicated the other and condemned their believers to hell. When the Catholics had not been able to defeat the Muslims in the Crusades, they had often turned their fury on the Orthodox, looting the churches and even the cathedral of Constantinople.

Contrary to Mongol court protocol, William had arrived from Europe with no gifts other than his own haughty claim that his branch of Christianity spoke for God. The Mongol Christians knew well that the first worshippers to acknowledge Jesus had been the three Magi from the East, making the Asian Christians the first followers of Jesus, not the Catholic Europeans. Furthermore, in their scriptures and rituals the Asian Christians used the same language that Jesus had spoken, unlike the Europeans who put his words into their own Latin tongue. Religious freedom, for all its vaunted good, seemed only to encourage members of different faiths to distrust their rivals all the more.

The shamans dominated the court, but the Taoists lorded over all other foreign religions. After Genghis Khan’s meeting with the old sage in Afghanistan, the Taoists had enjoyed a special status. Toregene, Ogodei, and Sorkhokhtani had patronized Muslim, Christian, Taoist, and Buddhist institutions, but only the Taoists could claim that Genghis Khan himself had been their patron, and Li Zhichang was a living witness to that special bond.

In the thirty-odd years since Genghis Khan’s death, the Taoists had become the wealthiest institution in the Mongol Empire—second only to the family of the Great Khan. Through Li Zhichang’s leadership, they had sided closely with Ogodei’s family. If Sorkhokhtani’s sons wanted total power, they would have to break the Taoists in a highly visible way. To complete the revolution against Ogodei and his family, merely killing off the direct rivals was not enough. Mongke needed to destroy their network of allies outside the family as well. Li Zhichang would have to be eliminated. But his case required special handling as the rights he exercised came directly from Genghis Khan.

The fresh memory of the Mongol devastation of the Tangut and the constant Taoist assaults on Buddhist monks and monasteries within China had left the Mongol court with a strategic problem. Taoism was mostly a Chinese religion, but to conquer or forge an alliance with the several small kingdoms surrounding the Jin and Sung territories, Mongke would need to cultivate the support of the Buddhists. All the surrounding kingdoms were Buddhist: the Tibetans in the Himalayas, the Koreans, the Dali kingdom of modern Sichuan province, and farther south the Pagan of Burma and all the kingdoms of modern Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. If these kingdoms perceived the Mongols as anti-Buddhist, they might rally with the Sung emperor to overthrow them. To garner their support, or at least keep them neutral, the Mongols would have to appear to be pro-Buddhist. In addition to removing Li Zhichang personally, the extensive network of the Taoists throughout China would have to be broken if the Buddhists were to be mollified.

Mongke had another reason to favor the Buddhists over the Taoists: Buddhist monks were surprisingly skilled and highly innovative fighters. In 1232, during a battle in Korea, a Buddhist monk had shot an arrow and killed the Mongol commanding general. This was the first time that a monk had brought down a Mongol commander. The Korean monk, Kim Yunhu, admitted to only limited experience in warfare, stating perhaps too modestly, “at the time of the battle I was without bow and arrows.”5 That an untrained monk should bring down one of the mightiest Mongol leaders showed a powerful spirit that greatly impressed the Mongols. Regardless of whether the monk’s success came from skill or from divine inspiration, it captured their attention. The elixirs of longevity offered by the Taoists paled before the martial skills of Buddhist monks who knew how to fight. The Mongols wanted them as allies, not enemies.

Unable to recruit the fighting monks from Korea to join him, Mongke Khan summoned Abbot Fuyu Zhanglao of the ancient Shaolin Monastery in the Chinese province of Henan to Karakorum to organize a branch of his martial arts monastery. Inviting both Li Zhichang and the abbot of Shaolin to the same small city was bound to trigger a confrontation, and that seems to have been precisely what Mongke intended.

The Buddhists could not claim a personal link to Genghis Khan—no famous Buddhist leader had ever met with him, and he had not granted any special privileges to Buddhism. But Buddhists had a patron god of fighting monks by the name of Vajrapani. Buddhists generally abstained from meat, but the monks of Shaolin not only permitted but insisted on the eating of meat, a belief in complete harmony with Mongol tradition. The monks justified eating meat based on an ancient story of how Vajrapani became their patron. One day, Vajrapani was said to have appeared to a Shaolin novice and asked, “Boy, do you wish to become strong?” When the youth answered in the affirmative, Vajrapani told him to eat meat.

“Monks are supposed to renounce meat,” said the young man.

Vajrapani lifted a bowl of meat and “with his long knife” forced the meat on the monk, who refused to swallow it. When Vajrapani threatened to kill him with his thunderbolt club if he did not obey, the frightened monk gulped down the meat.

Suddenly, the boy flexed his muscles, “revealing his powerful sinews and bones. He looked practically like a god.”6 Vajrapani then taught him the sacred secrets of martial arts and thereby started a wholly new tradition of Buddhist martial arts experts devoted to defending their religion.



Li Zhichang was unimpressed by Abbot Fuyu Zhanglao and his Shaolin monks. The Buddhists were fighting monks, but Li was a scholar. He had more confidence in the weapons of words than in the reputed skills of these newcomers. Until this time, Li’s publishing career had helped him with each step of his advancement in the Mongol hierarchy. His book about meeting Genghis Khan had been the main source of his fame and prestige, but during the intervening decades it had faded in importance. He decided to write a new book. To counter the growing resentment against the Taoists, Li Zhichang published a vigorous scholarly defense of the superiority of his Taoist religion over all others, particularly over Buddhism. This proved to be a terrible tactical blunder.

His new book offered a reinterpretation of theological history going back to the beginnings of both Taoism and Buddhism. He had his disciples distribute copies of *The Scripture of Lao Tzu’s Converting the Barbarians and Becoming Buddha.* He followed that book with *Diagrams of the Eighty-one Incarnations of Lao Tzu* to illustrate more clearly his startling claim that Buddhism was an offshoot of Taoism.7 In his highly illustrated text, Li Zhichang identified Buddha as simply one of several western barbarians who had attained enlightenment, not on his own as claimed by his followers, but due to the teachings and work of Lao Tzu, who had been Buddha’s teacher. Li depicted Buddhism as an imperfect copy of Taoism, the original and pure religion. The Buddhist monks from Shaolin were enraged by this blasphemy, and charged that fifty of the claimed eighty-one incarnations of Lao Tzu had been stolen from Buddhism and that in the entire series there was only one genuine incarnation, that of Lao Tzu himself.8 To compare him with Buddha was like comparing a stag to a unicorn.9 The war of words had begun.

Mongol authorities could not charge Li Zhichang or the Taoists with crimes committed at the time of Genghis Khan, because he had given his personal support to them. But the publication of this new book provided them with grounds for new charges. Li Zhichang’s claim that one religion was superior to another directly contradicted the ecumenical teachings and laws of Genghis Khan, and this gave his enemies an excuse to charge him with violating that law.

Sensing weakness and seeing a way to minimize the relationship between Genghis Khan and the Taoists, the Buddhists attacked the Taoists’ strongest claim to power: they began mocking Li’s master, the old sage who had originally met with Genghis Khan in Afghanistan. The sage’s disciples had piously claimed that the sage, who had died the same year as Genghis Khan, had ended life while in prayer, and that at the moment of his death “a strange perfume filled the room.” The Buddhists countered that the Taoist master had died in the outhouse or toilet, where his bed had been moved because he had dysentery, which, despite allegedly being immortal, he had been unable to cure. They circulated a satirical poem playing on his name Eternal Spring and on Taoism’s claim to be the *way* or the *current*.

His body is but a bunch of dried bones.

In one morning Everlasting Spring has turned to Autumn.

In the midst of urine and covered with excrement he died in the toilet.

One Taoist current had become a double stream.10

Li Zhichang had hoped his new work would protect the privileges given to the Taoists, but instead he had fallen into a trap of his own making. Mongke Khan summoned him to prove the outrageous theological claims about Lao Tzu and Buddha in his new book. The enraged Buddhist monks demanded a public retraction of its lies, the destruction of all existing copies, and the transfer of Taoist properties to the Buddhists as compensation for his slander.

Unfortunately, although he was present in Karakorum at the time, Juvaini had little interest in the theological disputes of the Chinese. He was busy assisting his father with preparations for the new campaign in Central Asia, which sought to extend Mongol rule into the lands of the Nizari and on to Baghdad and Damascus. Juvaini seemed far more interested in the finances of the Mongol court and the transactions of the merchants at Karakorum than in the comings and goings of monks. In fact, no financial issue seemed too small to warrant his urgent and detailed attention; the monks were of interest to him only because they had been exempted from paying the taxes imposed on others.

Once Mongke Khan “had been firmly seated on the throne of the Khanate and his attention was no longer concerned with the case of the self-seeking and envious, he turned his mind towards the subjugation of the farthest East and West of the world,” wrote Juvaini. In 1252 “he dispatched Khubilai to the Eastern parts” to continue the conquest of China, and he “proceeded to arrange and organize the affairs of his other brother Hulegu and charged him with the conquest of the Western parts” in Central Asia.11

Juvaini departed in the fall of 1253, but only a few months earlier another foreigner had arrived with a deep interest in the issues.



William of Rubruck reached Karakorum in the spring of 1253, and although these two great chroniclers of Mongolian history overlapped by nearly six months, we have no record of their having met or even having been aware of each other. In contrast to Juvaini, William not only witnessed the religious strife, he participated in it. He wrote that Mongke Khan had sent a message to the Christians, Muslims, Taoists, and Buddhists saying, “each of you says that his doctrine is the best, and his writings—that is books—the truest.” The khan orders you to “meet together and make a comparison.”12 He had summoned them all to a great debate with clear rules: “This is the order of Mongke, and let no one dare say that the commandment of God differs from it,” a Mongol official told the contestants. “No one shall dare wrangle or insult any other, or make any noise by which this business shall be interfered with, on penalty of his head.” The monks listened in obedient silence.

Mongke Khan did not summon shamans to be a part of the debate because theirs was a religion of action, not of abstractions and ideas. As stated in a Mongol chant, theirs was “a religion without books, a religion not on paper, a religion without letters” that relies instead on “a scripture by drum and drumstick, a scripture kept by speaking.”13 The shamans claimed a direct connection to heaven and had no need to argue or debate. The debates would be only among the foreigners, the religions of the books. The shamans were mere spectators to this battle of the scriptures.

Prior to the formal debates, Mongke Khan gave the opposing scholars time to study, meditate, prepare their comments, and practice their arguments. The Mongol organizers assigned William of Rubruck to the Christians, but in their mock debate, he played the part of the Buddhist monk, arguing against Christianity. “We will suppose I belong to that sect, because they say that God is not, now prove that God is,” he told his teammates. He knew that Manichaean thought had infiltrated Buddhist theology. “They all hold the heresy of the Manichaeans that one half of things is evil, and the other half good,” he said, and believe that reincarnated souls “pass from one body to another.”

The Mongols treated all of the competing sects as if they were one single religion. A Mongol official explained this carefully in a directive addressed to King Louis IX imploring him to treat fellow Christians equally, in accordance with the teachings of Genghis Khan. “The King of the Earth has decreed that in the law of God there be no difference between Latins and Greeks and Armenians and Nestorians and Jacobites, and all those that worship the cross. For all of them are as one to us. And this is what we require that the magnificent king not distinguish between them, but that his piety and clemency lord over all Christians.”14

Much to the French envoy’s disgust, when it came time to prepare for the debates, the competing Christian sects not only had to debate on the same team, they were lumped together with the Muslims so that there were only three competing factions: Taoists, Buddhists, and Christian-Muslims. No Confucians had been included. The rival teams had a hard time actually debating the issues or comparing beliefs because each team wanted to quote only from its own scriptures, which they believed sufficed as incontrovertible evidence. Reasoning only from their own premises, all three sides talked past one another.



The debates began in the summer of 1254, the annual season of Naadam, the Mongol games. This year in addition to horse racing, archery, and wrestling—the three sports most loved by the Mongols—there would be theological debate, which would be more interesting to the foreign diplomats and envoys in the city. The real audience, however, was far beyond the Mongol capital. Mongke Khan intended that word of the debates would spread throughout his territories and beyond as an illustration of Mongol justice and religious tolerance, helping to win greater support from the Buddhist people throughout the Mongol Empire.

Unlike the other sports, which took place outdoors, the debates were scheduled in one of the newly erected palaces of the Great Khan. “The palace is like a church,” wrote William of Rubruck, “with a middle nave, and two sides beyond two rows of pillars, and with three doors to the south. \[The Great Khan\] sits in a high place to the north, so that he can be seen by all; and two rows of steps go up to him: by one he who carries his cup goes up, and by the other he comes down.” Nearby “stands his cup-bearer, and also envoys bearing presents; and he himself sits up there like a divinity.” Men were seated on the western side and women on the eastern side. “To the south, beside the pillars on the right side, are rows of seats raised like a platform, on which his son and brothers sit. On the left side, it is arranged in like fashion, and there sit his wives and daughters. Only one woman sits up there beside him, though not so high as he.”15

The rules of the debate largely followed the Mongol rules for wrestling. At the end of each round, a winner was declared, followed by a round of drinking *airag*. It was not long before the Christian-Muslim team was eliminated. They had not been serious contenders, but their initial presence made it appear that the debate was more robust rather than merely pitting the Taoists against the Buddhists.

The Buddhists emerged victorious from the first set of debates. To seal their victory, they brought criminal charges against the Taoists. These charges were sufficiently strong for Mongke Khan to order a judicial investigation. No sooner had the debate ended than the judicial inquiry began. The Taoists were now defendants, and the Buddhists were their accusers.

The primary charge was that of spreading false scripture, with additional charges of having destroyed Buddhist images and sacred objects, seized Buddhist property, and inflicted both material and spiritual damages on Buddhism.16 Li Zhichang seemed not to appreciate the gravity of the situation. The Buddhists envied his privileged status, but the last two Great Khans and their officials had consistently stood beside him and protected him. He failed to grasp just how much things had changed, and he made little effort to construct a viable defense for his alleged crimes, other than to remind people repeatedly that Genghis Khan had given his sect special approval and had granted special rights to his order. When questioned about specific allegations that he and his followers had abused their power, confiscated Buddhist property, falsified documents, distributed false information, forced the conversion of Buddhist priests to Taoism, and abused their tax-exempt status, Li claimed to have no knowledge of any such wrongdoing.17 If such things had occurred, others had done them without his cooperation or approval.

The Shaolin abbot challenged Li Zhichang on each of these points. How could Li Zhichang claim to be the head of his religion, he demanded to know, and not be cognizant of the wrongdoing of his subordinates? Either he knew and had approved of their wrongs, and was therefore also guilty of the crimes, or he did not know and was therefore guilty of dereliction of duty. In either case, he was clearly unqualified to serve the Great Khan. Unaccustomed to being publicly insulted by anyone, far less so in the presence of the khan, Li Zhichang suddenly grasped the danger he was in. He began to sweat heavily in the summer heat and turned red with frustration.18 He had been thoroughly shamed before the court, and now he was about to face his first punishment.

On the twenty-ninth day of the ninth lunar month of 1255, an imperial edict from Mongke Khan decreed that all copies of Li’s slanderous book had to be surrendered to the Buddhist lamas and that all destroyed or damaged Buddhist images must be replaced by new ones of equal value.19 Having shamed the Taoists, Mongke’s limited judgment did not completely resolve the issue of which religion would be dominant, and it did not satisfy the Buddhists. After this initial judicial inquiry, Mongke Khan decided that a full criminal trial under Mongol judges, like the ones he had conducted for members of his family, would not be convincing to the public. A Mongol trial might be interpreted as persecution of the Taoists, or even as an attack on Chinese culture. Mongke Khan sought to pit the Taoists against the Buddhists, such that each side would direct its animosity toward the other rather than toward their Mongol rulers.

Mongke Khan decided he could win Chinese public opinion more effectively if he organized a new round of open debates and let the religions rout one another. He would not be held accountable for putting a religious order on trial or disrespecting a faith esteemed by many Chinese. He could appear to support the Mongol policy of religious tolerance while the rivals wore one another down. As with any battle, whoever emerged victorious from this new round of debate would reveal the Will of Heaven and shape public opinion.

Thus far, the Buddhist side had been represented by the abbot of Shaolin, who practiced a type of Buddhism that was popular across northern China, Korea, and Japan. But Mongke wanted to build support in the southern regions and particularly in Tibet, which Ogodei’s family had controlled until Mongke had snatched it away. The Tibetans practiced a more esoteric form of Tantric Buddhism, which was also popular in Bhutan and among many communities along the Silk Route. Following his strategy of sometimes forcing rivals to combine forces and work together, Mongke Khan chose Namo, a highly educated Buddhist lama from Kashmir, to work with the abbot of Shaolin.20 Namo spoke fluent Mongolian, an advantage not shared by the abbot.

The Chinese were highly critical of this decision. One classical Chinese chronicle, *Zizhi Tongjian Gangmu*, revised and expanded to include the Yuan era, outlined the criticisms of Namo in a lengthy commentary. “The existence of a monarchy is founded on mutual duties, on those of a father to his son, of a sovereign to his subject, of a husband to his wife, of the young men to the old, and of friends to one another,” it began. “As to this Namo, he was a stranger of low extraction... wandering about for a living, he could not fulfill the duties of supporting his father and mother. He shaved his head and opened his tunic, a proof that he did not know the duty a subject owes to his sovereign. Having a dispensation from being married he had no descendants; he knew not the duties either of a husband or a father. He sat on his heels; he did not therefore pay respect due to old age. He renounced society, and retired from the world; he did not therefore know the duties of friendship. He had none of the qualities therefore upon which a State is founded. He received the title of *Ho she,* but what could he teach? How could he be an example to others?”21 The commentator concluded his assessment of Namo and the monks curtly, writing: “Brutes cling together.”



The next round of debate was scheduled for the seventh month of 1256, at the imperial camp south of Karakorum.22 By taking the debate away from the Mongol capital, Mongke further distanced himself from its outcome. The debate had become a showdown, with the abbot of Shaolin leading the prosecution of the Taoist monks.23 One Chinese religious scholar was pitted against another, with the Mongols as neutral bystanders. In fact, Mongke would not even be present at the event.

While Mongke was busy preparing for an invasion of southern China, his brother Hulegu had gathered up his army for a western campaign against Baghdad, the seat of the Muslim caliphate. As the outcome of the debates was now reasonably assured, Mongke Khan assigned control of the Mongolian homeland, left by tradition to the ruler’s youngest brother, to Arik Boke, who would be staying behind while Mongke, Hulegu, and Khubilai left on campaign. All Arik Boke had to do was preside over the debate and then declare the Buddhist team the winner.

Arik Boke was the most traditional of the four brothers. He was a man of the steppe who loved the vigorous Mongol life in the open air. He showed little interest in theological dispute and was not happy to have to stay home and oversee squabbling monks while his brothers fought campaigns in distant lands. He saw himself as a warrior, not a referee. Under his control, the debates stalled while his brothers rode across Asia with their armies.



Juvaini’s writing was always vivid and colorful, but it came alive as he related the events he participated in during the campaign to destroy the Nizari sect in northern Persia. Not only was he present with Hulegu’s army, he nursed an obsessive hatred of the Nizari. He describes the campaign in fascinating detail, offering up a quick history of the sect and relating the incredible conquest of the hitherto impregnable fortress of Alamut. He is open and honest about his hatred of the Nizari, despite their alliance with Genghis Khan.

After the seizure of Alamut, the Mongols began their usual thorough census of everything in it. As a scholar well versed in Persian and Arabic, Juvaini managed to get permission to take possession of the great library and archives, where books and records had been stored for generations. He “received and executed the command to examine what was deposited in their treasury and collected together in their library to order to extract therefrom whatever was worthy.” He approached his assignment with great relish. “Now I was examining the library which they had gathered together over a period of many years, and from amongst the multitude of lying treatises and false teachings throughout their belief \(which they had mingled with copies of the noble Koran and all manner of choice books, interweaving good and evil\) was extracting whatever I found in the way of rare and precious volumes.” From these records, he eagerly “copied whatever was to the point and suitable for insertion in this history, adducing whatever was confirmed and verified.”24

Juvaini is the primary, and virtually exclusive, source for information on the history of the Nizari at Alamut and the interactions between Genghis Khan and Imam Hasan III. Historians sometimes alter the historical record to suit their own needs and beliefs, but rarely does one have the opportunity to completely destroy the evidence. In an indefensible crime for a scholar and a surprising moral lapse in one as talented as Juvaini, he destroyed much of the record.25 It is not just barbarians who burn books: Juvaini burned many of the documents on the grounds that they contained heretical and blasphemous writings. He had strong political motivations to minimize the extent of the relationship between Genghis Khan and the imam, which appeared to be of considerable importance. Juvaini’s destructive act only heightened the mystery.

Everything Juvaini chose to share with posterity pointed to the evil of the heretics whose defeat he celebrated. He quoted from the secret negotiations of the imam with the caliph, but made no mention of the alliance with Genghis Khan.26 There were almost certainly records of the first meetings between the Nizari imam and Genghis Khan, and he certainly would have read them. But in his determination to minimize the relationship, he destroyed them all. He found the choice pieces and picked out what he wanted. Then, “As for the remaining books, which related to their heresy and error and were neither founded on tradition nor supported by reason, I burnt them all.”27 He almost seemed to be bragging. He portrayed the destruction of the Nizari sect and their library as great acts of God. “So was the world cleaned which had been polluted by their evil.”28



Hulegu captured the imam of the Nizari and brought him and his family to Mongolia, where they were executed. The imam’s followers were killed and every effort was made to wipe out the sect. Having removed this obstacle, the Mongols were now ready to move on to Baghdad.

Unlike his brother’s slow and frustrating campaign in China, Hulegu’s campaign into the heart of the Muslim world was proceeding at a great pace. He had crossed territory that had been previously invaded by his grandfather as his army rode through Uzbekistan and across northern Persia. Now he would conquer new territories belonging to the Abbasid Caliph as a step toward his planned invasion of Syria and Egypt. Although some of the vassals conquered by Genghis Khan had broken away from Mongol rule in the intervening thirty years, none had completely recovered demographically, economically, or culturally. Hulegu was mostly reasserting Mongol rule over previously conquered lands. His primary target now was Baghdad, whose ruling caliph had maintained neutrality in Genghis Khan’s war against Khwarizm and had been at least a tacit Mongol ally.

At this point, the caliph made a fatal mistake. Because the Mongols had not succeeded in taking Baghdad when Genghis Khan had invaded Central Asia, he did not believe that they could do so now. When Hulegu’s armies threatened his degenerated but still luxurious capital city, the caliph, as head of the entire Muslim world, successor of the Prophet Muhammad and God’s chosen representative on Earth, expected that hundreds of thousands of Muslims from all nations would rush to his defense. None came.

While the Mongols converged on Baghdad, the caliph raised only a small army with a Kurdish commander to defend him and the city. “The enemy has reached the gate, and we have but a few horsemen along with us in Baghdad, while the number of the infidels is 200,000,” despaired the Kurdish general. He recommended that the caliph flee. “It will be well that the Lord of the Faithful should embark on board a vessel, and give directions for placing his treasures, and his family on ship-board; and we will likewise attend the Lord of the Faithful in the vessel.” He urged him to hide in the islands near Basra “until such time as deliverance comes from Almighty God, and the infidels be vanquished.”29

Moving like a firestorm across the land, Hulegu spread sheer psychological terror before the battle began. After crossing the Tigris River, his army dug a ditch and built a wall around the entire city of Baghdad, delivering a clear message that the inhabitants were trapped like birds in a net, with no escape. Then they slowly began assembling their siege engines and mighty weapons of attack while archers fired propaganda messages across the walls and into the city. Some of the arrows contained safe-conduct passes for all religious scholars and learned people of God, whether Muslim, Christian, or of any other faith.30 The offer did not apply to the caliph.

The caliph had spent more on building palaces and collecting harem girls than on the military, but he nonetheless nourished the illusion that “Allah has given us victory.” He had neglected to pay his army, and many of them now deserted. An Arab poet decried his plight, living in a society where the “vizier is busy with his wealth,” and “the chamberlain is at times intoxicated with drink and at times playing the harp and the lute.” He complained that the caliph’s heir was enticed by sex and “has in every direction a pimp and a prostitute.” Baghdad was a city in which blasphemy was promoted as Islam, a city devoid of the just rule of law or a true religion.31

Unable to conceive that a pagan army could conquer the capital of the Muslim world, Baghdad’s doomed defenders marched out of the city to prepare for the ultimate battle. Their first fatal mistake was to erect their military camp on low ground. The Mongols were masters of the unexpected and always optimized whatever advantage they could find over their enemies. Hulegu’s engineers quickly diverted the river toward the low ground, so “floods of water poured down on them at midnight. And they began to flee from the waters, and their bows, and their arrows, and the sheaths of their swords were soaked with water.” The men were defenseless.

The caliph offered the Mongols ample tribute—“money, precious stones, jewelry, brocade, fine clothes, gold and silver vases and other splendid objects”—and promised to make Hulegu a sultan if he would spare them.32 He released some earlier Mongol envoys from the prison where he was holding them, dressed them in beautiful clothes, and gave them vast amounts of gold and a large number of Arabian horses before dispatching them to plead with the Mongols. He asked Hulegu to spare the lives “of his sons and daughters,” and, in an effort to shift the blame to others, offered the sniveling excuse “that the things which had happened had taken place through evil counselors.” If the Mongols agreed, the caliph promised that the Muslims “would become his slaves, and subjects who would pay tribute.”33

Hulegu scoffed at the foreign title of *sultan*. Only the Mongol Great Khan had the right to grant titles, and only the Mongols had the full support of heaven. Hulegu’s message to the caliph was crisp and unforgiving: “Unless the eyes of your soul have made you blind, look at what the sun and moon have done. Look at what the king of earth and time has given to Genghis Khan.”34 The Mongols captured the city and the caliph together with the caliph’s sons. They “clasped iron fetters on him” and kept him in a tent for a week while Hulegu pondered the caliph’s fate. Before sentencing his prisoner, Hulegu went “in person to the palace of the Caliph and had inspected the treasures, and the rich things, old and new, which were hidden away and laid up in stores, and he uncovered them all and brought them out.”

Hulegu condemned the caliph and ordered his execution. Before stomping him to death under Mongol boots, his men sat the caliph on a felt or leather carpet and sewed it up around him like a sack, so that his blood would not touch the earth. The Muslims claimed that the Mongols feared shedding the blood of Muhammad’s successor, but the truth was that they believed his blood was so evil it would pollute the earth and stain the light of day. Hulegu spared the caliph’s daughters and youngest son, but he had the older sons executed in the same manner.

After forty days of looting, the dead filled the streets. The rains fell, bringing a pestilence to the city. So many flies hatched from the bodies of the dead that they filled the air and people could hardly breathe. The Mongols shattered the caliphate and established a new government made up of Christian and Jewish officials as well as Muslims of different sects, including Sunni, Shiite, and mystical Sufis, to rule Baghdad.

By the summer of 1258, word reached the Mongol court that Hulegu had taken the city of Baghdad and killed the caliph and his heirs. Once again, Juvaini took control of the city’s archives and library. Books were of such high value in Mongol-ruled Baghdad that when food and money became scarce the survivors used them as currency.35 Yet, despite their value, Juvaini destroyed what displeased him or contradicted the vision he wished to portray of history.

The destruction of Alamut and Baghdad, combined with the killing of the caliph and of the imam, made a mockery of Genghis Khan’s edict of religious tolerance. Meanwhile, back home in Mongolia, yet another mortal blow was about to strike against religious freedom.



While his brothers were out extending the empire, Arik Boke had been unable to settle the dispute between the Taoists and Buddhists. Finally, he convened the contending parties, but unaccustomed to playing an impartial role, he quickly made a mess of the debates. Rather than building confidence in the impartiality of Mongol rule, he strengthened the impression that the Mongols had no real religious sensibility.

The Buddhists appeared before Arik Boke and presented the severed head of a statue of the Buddha, charging that the Taoists had sawed it off. Arik Boke had one of the Taoist officials brought before him, and instead of questioning him in a calm manner, he became irate and screamed his questions, after which he suddenly began to beat the hapless monk with a whip to make him confess to the crime. It was not long before the khan grabbed the headless stone statue and began to pummel him with it. Arik Boke yelled in anger while the monk screamed in pain and blood gushed from his head.36

The chronicles do not identify the beaten Taoist monk, who was quickly taken away from court and died shortly thereafter. Only later was it revealed that the murdered monk was none other than Li Zhichang. His death presented a dilemma for all sides. The Taoists were shamed because, like his predecessors, Li Zhichang was believed to be immortal. The Buddhists, for their part, claimed that he had not died at all, but that this was merely a trick by the Taoists to avoid defeat in the debate.37 To prove that Li Zhichang was indeed dead, Arik Boke had his body exhumed from the grave where his disciples had hurriedly buried him. After an impromptu autopsy, the Mongols declared that he had not died from wounds inflicted by a human. Just as the death of Teb Tengeri had been attributed to the anger of heaven, the official cause of death was now said to be a lightning strike. In Mongol eyes, this was the worst form of death, akin to a targeted execution from heaven. It portended badly for the Taoists.

Without their leader and in dire fear of the khan’s wrath, the disheartened Taoists fell into confused disarray. They were too afraid to appear at the next scheduled debate. Rather than demonstrating the philosophical sophistication of the Mongol court, Arik Boke had reconfirmed the widespread suspicion that the Mongols were no more than savage barbarians who responded to every problem with violence. The Buddhists appeared to have won by brute force. The Mongol court sought to suppress the story of the debate’s gory end and to refocus attention on the crimes of the Taoists rather than on the murder of their leader.

The debates could not be allowed to conclude on such a bloody basis. To sort out the mess and rectify the damage to the royal family’s reputation, Mongke Khan, who was fighting in southern China and could not handle the situation personally, reassigned responsibility for resolving the debate from Arik Boke to his brother Khubilai, who had returned to his territories in northern China. Khubilai was the best educated of the brothers, but he had not distinguished himself on the battlefield with quite the glory of Mongke or Hulegu. He first sought a pause in the proceedings, then proposed a fresh start in a new location unstained by the prior fiasco.

Khubilai was determined not to be as hotheaded as his younger brother. He chose to move the debates out of Karakorum, where Arik Boke was in command, and south to his own capital at Shangdu \(Xanadu\) in Inner Mongolia. He designed the event to instill an aura of objectivity and thoughtful reflection, for he knew his reputation among the Chinese would depend on what ensued. The Christians and Muslims would not be invited; instead, Khubilai shrewdly asked the Confucians to join the carefully choreographed spectacle. Their inclusion signaled a new attitude toward Chinese tradition; by accepting the invitation, the Confucians, always the champions of the powerful, helped legitimize Mongol rule over the Chinese cultural and intellectual elite.

With three hundred Buddhists and two hundred Confucians united against two hundred Taoists, the outcome was certain, but this time every detail had to be precisely orchestrated. The abbot of Shaolin continued to lead the Buddhist delegation, and he chose seventeen monks as the primary speakers and leaders of his teams. Khubilai was careful to make sure that all the geographic areas, with as many major cities and monasteries as possible, were represented. In addition to the abbot, he brought in Namo from Kashmir, nineteen-year-old Phagspa from Tibet, who was destined to eventually become Khubilai’s main lama, and others from Ordos, Yunnan, and oasis cities of the far west of China.38 Given the presence of so many learned scholars, several accounts of the proceedings appeared, including *Debates Against Falsehood Held in the Chih-yüan Reign*, *Pien wei lu* \(1264–84\), published in 1291 by Hsiang-mai, another Chinese abbot who served as one of the seventeen leaders of the Buddhist team.39

In his opening speech, Khubilai explained that despite the condemnation and burning of Li Zhichang’s theological works, many Taoists had not changed their minds or their inner feelings. He announced that the losing party would have to assume the lifestyle, food, and dress of the winning party, meaning that Taoists would have to shave their heads or Buddhists would have to grow their hair long. The newly joining Confucians seemed to be exempt from either of these degrading possibilities. Despite being grossly outnumbered, the Taoist monks believed that they were starting fresh and could defend the basic tenets of their religion. Hsiang-mai reported that they were eager to begin the fight and “danced with delight in their long blue skirts with richly embroidered sleeves.”40 Their delightful dancing did not last long as they debated point by point with the Buddhists, joined as ultimate arbiters by the Confucians.

The Taoists preferred to limit all discussion and evidence to the Chinese texts or Chinese translations of foreign scriptures. Khubilai ruled against them, asserting that the Chinese versions were only one among many great historic traditions. He admitted scriptures from any language as evidence in the contest. If the Taoists quoted Chinese emperors as authoritative sources, then kings of India could be quoted with equal authority. The Taoists, knowing only Chinese, had to confront the international assembly of Buddhist monks, who quoted texts from a variety of languages. Khubilai criticized the Taoists’ ignorance of foreign languages. “Lao Tzu is only known here,” he told them, “but Buddha’s name is heard everywhere in the world. How can anyone be compared with Buddha?”41



The Buddhists and their Confucian allies easily refuted the disheartened Taoists in the final round of debates. The defeated Taoists were publicly humiliated for their alleged sins and crimes. Most of their books were banned and many of their scriptures burned in public bonfires. Their privileges were revoked, their monasteries seized, their monks expelled, and, perhaps most damaging of all, they would now have to begin paying taxes on commercial activities like any other business.

Khubilai was fighting a war of public relations while his two brothers continued to expand Mongol rule on the battlefield, with far different rates of success. While Baghdad was being looted, Mongke Khan pressed forward on his campaign into southern China. He fought a slow but steady campaign across Sichuan against the Sung army, which was technologically the most sophisticated on Earth, and probably the largest as well. Although their long confrontation cost the lives of a whole generation of Mongols and Chinese, neither side was willing to yield. In 1259, Mongke broke with the Mongol practice of fighting in the winter and decided to stay in the field through the summer. Mongols and their horses fared poorly in the summer heat; their bows became inefficient in the hot and humid south. Whether because of this or for some other reason, Mongke Khan came down with a fever in midsummer and on August 11, 1259, he died, thirty-two years to the week after his grandfather had died on a similar campaign in China.

People who burn books can easily burn other people. Juvaini had become the censor and the propagandist for the Mongols and in 1259, Hulegu, in admiration for his devotion, appointed him governor of Baghdad. The scholar who wrote with such a passionate pen now turned into a conniving and power-hungry administrator. No trace remained of Genghis Khan’s sense of justice or Shigi-Khutukhu’s stern admonishment against using torture. Juvaini went so far as to have one of his opponents crucified inside a small portable cage in order to secure a full confession. An anonymous chronicler known as the Pseudo Ibn Fowati, who recorded daily events in Baghdad at this time, wrote that the interrogator slapped the accused man’s face, “pummeled his head with a shoe and farted on him and peed in his face,” all the while dragging the cage through the streets of Baghdad for people to see. His tongue was pierced with a metal rod so that “he could no longer make conversation,” as retribution for his having mocked the authorities. Finally, “they cut off his head, they put a goat’s head with a beard in its place, and again they rolled him around the town.”42 Other dissidents faced dismemberment, and one was anally raped in public before being flogged.

Many of those now living in foreign lands were no longer Mongols of a type that Genghis Khan would have recognized. They had become city dwellers. As the focus of the empire moved to distant cities such as Baghdad and Tabriz for Hulegu, or Khubilai Khan’s new capital of Beijing, Mongols deserted the steppe. Karakorum reverted to pastureland, with goats and cows grazing where once ambassadors had trembled before the khan and wine had flowed from a giant silver fountain. Its temples, mosques, and churches crumbled into ruins and disappeared into the earth, buried beneath a new carpet of grass. The howling wind replaced the sound of chanting monks, the muezzin’s call to prayer, and the singing of Christian hymns. The only prayers now came from the occasional pounding drum of a shaman, dancing and singing beneath the stars by the glow of the night fire.

The Muslim caliph was dead. The imam of the Nizari was dead. The Taoist Li Zhichang was dead. The books of Alamut had been burned. The books of Baghdad had been burned. The Taoist scriptures had been burned. The world empire that Genghis Khan had created was still expanding, but the spirit of his laws had been consumed in the flames of ignorance and intolerance.43 Many of those who now praised him ignored his teaching. While honoring him, they forgot his words. While worshipping him, they broke his law. The Mongol Empire was now the empire of Genghis Khan in name only and already religious conflict was beginning to break it apart.




