+++
title = "00 CHAPTER I         PRESUPPOSITIONS OF JIZYAH"

+++
CHAPTER I  
PRESUPPOSITIONS OF JIZYAH

The Muslim psyche is of a peculiar making, vis-a-vis its attitude
towards non-Muslims. According to the Prophet, every child is born in
Islam, but its parents make it a non-Muslim.[1](#1) The Qur'ân declares
the Muslims to be the best community and raised up to guide and govern
humanity[2](#2) as viceregents of God on earth,[3](#3) and Islam to be
the chosen religion[4](#4) destined to triumph over all other
religions.[5](#5) The Qur'ân also says that 'the earth belongs to Allâh.
He causes it to be inherited by whom of His servants He will'.[6](#6) On
the basis of it all the Prophet rules that all land belongs to God or
himself,[7](#7) the natural corollary being that all land belongs,
through God and the Prophet., to the Muslims. In their bid to conquer
Spain, a contingent of the Arabs under Târiq landed on its shores and
Târiq burnt the ship which carried them. On the soldiers' protest as to
how they would return to their homeland, Târiq burst out, in Iqbal's
words:

*Har mulk mulk-i mâ'st ki mulk-î Khuda-i mâ'st*

That is, 'All land belongs to us, because it belongs to our God.' This
serves to vouchsafe to the Muslims the moral right to grab lands in
Jihad from non-Muslims. Indeed, as Ibn Taymiyyah, the 14th-century
Muslim jurist-theologian, would have it, Jihâd simply restores lands to
the Muslims, who enjoy a kind of Divine right over these.

Besides, the Qur'âdn commands the Muslims to despise idol-worshippers as
unclean (*najas*) and, therefore, not to allow them to draw near the
Ka'bah[8](#8) or to inhabit God's mosques, for their works go waste and
they are doomed to be consigned to the hellfire for all time to
come.[9](#9) This is perhaps why the Prophet taught the Muslims to
reside at such a distance from Kâfirs' colony that the latter's light
remains invisible to the former.[10](#10) The Qur'ân teaches that a
Muslim slave is better than an idolater, howsoever good the latter
appear to the Muslims.[11](#11)

Are idolaters unclean in body, in faith, or in both? According to Imâm
Mâlik as also to Hasan BaSarî, idolaters' body is unclean, so that, if
an idolater put his hand into water, the water would become unclean. On
the contrary, according to the Hanafites, idolaters are unclean in
faith. And there is a third school, led by Anwar Shâh Kashmîrî,
according to whom idolaters are unclean in body and faith both. He
claims that even Imâm Abû Hanîfah subscribes to this view when he rules:
'If a Kâfir falls into a well, all its water will have to be drawn out,
even though he is pulled out of the well alive.'

The Qur'ânic verse adjudging idolaters unclean disallows them to draw
near the Ka'bah. The question is: Are they forbidden to draw near other
mosques, too? Imâm Mâlik's reply is in the affirmative. QâDî Abû Bakr
ibn al-'Arabî adds that, though the verse refers to the Ka'bah only, the
ground of 'being unclean' given therein helps generalize the provision
to cover all mosques.

Prior to 9 A.H., the year in which the above verse was revealed,
idolaters did enter and stay in mosques, but there is no such precedent
during the rest of the Prophet's life.[12](#12)

It would be pertinent to point out that, according to Âyat Allâh
Khomeini, 'Eleven things are unclean: urine, excrement, sperm, blood, a
dog, a pig, bones, a non-Muslim man and woman, wine, bear, perspiration
of the camel that eats filth. The whole body of a non-Muslim is unclean,
even his hair, his nails, and all secretions of his body. A child below
the age of puberty is unclean if his parents and grand parents are not
Muslims….'[13](#13)

Again, the Qur'ân forbids the Muslims to take the Kâfirs for their
friends[14](#14) and to be their helpers.[15](#15) It exhorts the former
to fight the latter to the finish, so that Islam gets the better of Kufr
(infidelity/disbelief) for good,[16](#16) wherever possible;[17](#17)
but it commands them to migrate from a place dominated by unruly
Kâfirs,[18](#18) in case they feel powerless to deal with them
otherwise.

In fact, Islam nowhere encourages, prescribes, or envisages friendly
coexistence with the Kâfirs, who, according to it, are not to be
tolerated, much less respected.

It is preposterous to hark back to certain seemingly contrary provisions
in the earlier part of the Qur'ân. One such verse is: 'To you your
religion and to me my religion' (*La kum dînu-kum wa liya
dîn*).[19](#19) Another: 'There is no force in religion' (*Lâ ikrâha fi
'd-dîn*).[20](#20) According to competent classical commentators, the
first verse gives expression to the Prophet's mood of reluctant
tolerance of Kufr, for want of the needed strength to subdue it. As
regards the second verse, Shâh Walî Allâh appears to construe it to mean
that use of force after proclamation of Islam is no use of force.
Besides, classical commentators maintain that these and many such other
verses stand abrogated by the verse of Jihâd.[21](#21) Indeed, Abû Bakr
ibn al-'Arabî, a leading classical commentator, contends that the verse
has abrogated 124 verses teaching forbearance with Kufr.[22](#22) Same
is the case with the teaching that the Prophet's duty is plain
communication of the message of God rather than behave as a tyrant
(*jabbâr*)[23](#23) or guard (*Hafiz*)[24](#24) to compel people to
embrace Islam.

Indeed, the Muslim psyche rules out the possibility of lasting peaceful
coexistence with the Kâfirs, so that al-Marghînânî, the celebrated
author of the Hidâyah, appears to be right when he contends that war
with the Kâfirs is the norm and peace, contingent upon circumstances
beyond the control of the Muslims.

Indeed, Jihâd is prescribed in the Torah also, which the Qur'âdn nowhere
repudiates. The Jihâdic spirit remains dormant in the Meccan Qur'ân,
viz. the part of the Qur'ân revealed in Mecca and becomes manifest in
the Medinan Qur'ân.

Well, the Qur'ânic attitude towards other religions and communities
appears to have passed through the following successive stages:

> 1. Peaceful coexistence and equal respectability of all Semitic
> religions.
>
> 2\. Reluctant tolerance of even idolatrous polytheism, for but a few
> days, though.[25](#25)
>
> 3. Treatment of the Jews of Banû Awf at Medinah as forming a single
> nation (*ummah wâHidah*) with the Muslims.[26](#26)
>
> 4\. Defensive Jihâd /Crescentade (holy war).
>
> 5\. Offensive Jihâd.
>
> 6\. Extraction of Jizyah agreed upon in a no-war pact (*Jizyah
> SulHiyyah*).
>
> 7\. Extraction of Jizyah from a conquered non-Muslim community
> (*Jizyah qahriyyah*).
>
> 8\. Reduction of all Jizyah-paying individuals and communities to the
> status of *Ahl adh-Dhimmah / Dhimmî-s* (ptotectorate/protected
> people), viz. servile subjects of the Muslim state.
>
> 9\. Exclusion of all non-Muslims from the Abrabian peninsula.

The quintessence of the Qur'ânic commands to the Muslims vis-a-vis the
Kâfirs, as perceived, preached, and practised by the Prophet, his
Companions and Followers, and later Crescentadors and theologians, can
be put as under:

> 1\. Try to convert the Kâfirs to Islam.
>
> 2\. If any of them resist,
>
> > \(i\) try to consign them to the grave before God consigns them to
> > the hell-fire, plunder and loot their property
> > (*al-anfâl/al-ghanâ'im*) movable and immovable (*al-amwâl wa
> > al-amlâk*), enslave them, menfolk (*usarâ'*) and womenfolk and
> > children (*sabâyâ*) alike;
> >
> > \(ii\) or, where imposition of Jizyah is permissible, let the Kâfirs
> > escape death and compound their offence of *Kufr* by disgracefully
> > paying Jizyah, abjectly surrendering to the brute force of Islam,
> > and suffering all sorts of indignities and humiliations as
> > *Dhimmî*-s;
> >
> > \(iii\) or, again, if you find yourselves too weak to deal with the
> > Kâfirs as above, take recourse to hejira (*hijrah*) and bide your
> > time.

Jihâd is said to have four forms, as culled by responsible theologians
from the sayings and doings of the Prophet:[27](#27)

> > 1\. Jihâd by heart (*Jihâd bi 'I-qalb*)
> >
> > 2\. Jihâd by tongue (*Jihâd bi 'I-lisân*)
> >
> > 3\. Jihâd by hand (*Jihâd bi 'I-yad*)
> >
> > 4\. Jihâd by sword (*Jihâd bi 's-sayf*)

Which form of Jihâd to adopt depends upon the particular situation which
the Muslim finds himself in.

Jihâd is virtual genocide with a difference, and the difference is made
by Jizyah, as we shall see, in the sequel.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Bukhârî, I, Kitâb al-Janâiz, H.1295.

[2](#2a) Âl 'Imrân (3) 110.

[3](#3a) An-Nûr (24) 55; an-Naml (27) 62.

[4](#4a) Âl 'Imrân (3) 19, 85; al-Mâ'idah (5) 3.

[5](#5a) At-Tawbah (9) 33; al-FatH (48) 28; as 'Saff (61) 9.

[6](#6a) *"Inna 'I-arDa li-' llâh-i; yûrithu-hâ mañ yyashâ'u min
'ibâdi-hî" Al-A'râf* (7) 128.

[7](#7a) *"A 'Iamû ann al-arDa li 'llâh-i wa rasû-ihi"*. Bukhârî, II,
Kitâb al-Jihâd wa 's-Siyar, H.406.

[8](#8a) At-Tawbah (9) 28.

[9](#9a) Ibid., 17.

[10](#10a) Shâh Wali Allâh, *Hujjah Allâh al-Bâlighah, II*, 'Unwân
al-Hudûd (50), Karachi, n.d., p. 468.

[11](#11a) Al-Baqarah (2) 221.

[12](#12a) For a detailed discussion of the concept of 'unclean', see
Anwar Shâh Kashmîrî, *FayD al-Bârî* (on Bukhârî), I, pp. 361-363.

[13](#13a) Bat Ye'or, *The Dhimmî*, tr. from the French by David Masel,
Paul Fenton, & David Littman (rev. & enl. English ed., Rutherford:
Madison: Teaneck: Fairleigh: Dickinson University Press; London &
Toronto: Associated University Press, 1985), pp. 396-397.

[14](#14a) Âl 'Imrân (3) 28, 118; an-Nisâ' (4) 144; al-Mâ'idah (5)
51,54,57, 80; at-Tawbah (9) 16, 23.

[15](#15a) Al-QaSaS (28) 86.

[16](#16a) Al-Baqarah (2) 193; al-Anfâl (8) 39; at-Tawbah (9) 5.

[17](#17a) Al-Tawbah (9) 5.

[18](#18a) Al-Anfâl (8) 72-75; at-Tawbah (9) 20.

[19](#19a) Al-Kâfiûn (109) 6.

[20](#20a) Al-Baqarah (2) 156.

[21](#21a) The verse of Jihâd is: at-Tawbah (9) 5.

[22](#22a) Jalal ad-Dîn as-SuyûTî-, Al-Ittiqân fi *'Ulûm al-Qur'ân, II*,
Urdu tr. by Muhammad Halim Ansari Daulwi (Firozpur: Faiz Bakhsh Steam
Press, 1908), Naw' (chapter) 47, 61-62.

[23](#23a) Qâf (50) 45.

[24](#24a) Al-An'âm (6) 108.

[25](#25a) Recall the verses revealed in praise of the idols of the
Ka'bah, later rejected by the Prophet as Satanic verses. It is reported
that, when the Prophet was in a mood to woo the Qurayshites, he received
in revelation and recited a whole Sûrah in praise of the leading idols
of the Ka'bah, thereby befriending the Qurayshites. Those of his
followers who had migrated to Ethiopia got wind of it and returned.
Their optimism was short-lived, however, as the Prophet recanted before
long, declaring the verses as put into his mouth by the Satan.
Nevertheless, excepting Ibn Mas'ûd who wended his way back to Ethiopia,
all the migrants settled in Mecca. See Muhammad ibn Sa'd Kitâb
al-Wâqidî, generally known as Ibn Sa'd, *Kitâb at-Tabaqât al-Kabîr*,
generally referred to as *Tabaqât* Ibn Sa'd, Urdu tr. by 'Abdu
'Ilahu'I-Imadi, Part I, Hyderabad, 1944, pp. 308-311. This is the
background of al-Hajj (22) 52 of the Qur'ân, which reads thus: 'Never
sent We a messenger or a prophet before thee but when he recited (the
message) the Satan proposed (opposition) in respect of that which he
recited thereof. But Allâh abolisheth that which the Satan proposeth.
Allâh is Knower, Wise.'

[26](#26a) Ibn Hishâm, *Sîrah Sayyida-nâ Muhammad*, Urdu tr. by Abdu
'I-Jalil Siddiqi & Ghulam Rasul Mihr under the title Sîratu
*'n-Nabiyy-i, Kâmil, Delhi*, 1982, Vol.I, p. 554.

[27](#27a) See, for example, Abû MuHammad bin Hazm al-Undulsî, generally
known as Ibn Hazm, *Kitâb al-FaSl fi 'I-Milal wa 'I-Ahwâ' wa 'n-NiHal*,
Cairo, 1321 A.H., IV, p. 135.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
