+++
title = "41 Passing the Baton"

+++



When I reflected on the predicament of Suharto in 1998, when he was forced to resign and hand power over to a vice-president he considered inadequate to succeed him, I was glad that I had resigned as prime minister in November 1990. I was still in command of the political situation and of a humming economy. I was physically still vigorous. But had I not stood down, I might have found myself trapped in the financial crisis, with my faculties less acute and my energy levels down. Instead, for the past nine years I helped to ease the way for my successor, Goh Chok Tong, and his team of younger ministers to take full charge of the Singapore government. Prime Minister Goh retained me in his cabinet as senior minister. Without the pressures of daily decision-making, I was able to reflect on the bigger and longer-term issues and contribute towards more rounded solutions.

My experience of developments in Asia has led me to conclude that we need good men to have good government. However good the system of government, bad leaders will bring harm to their people. On the other hand, I have seen several societies well-governed in spite of poor systems of government, because good, strong leaders were in charge. I have also seen so many of the over 80 constitutions drafted by Britain and France for their former colonies come to grief, and not because of flaws in the constitutions. It was simply that the pre-conditions for a democratic system of government did not exist. None of these countries had a civic society with an educated electorate. Nor did their people have the cultural tradition of acceptance of the authority of a person because of his office. These traditions take generations to inculcate in a people. In a new country where loyalties are to tribal leaders, they must be honest and not self-serving or the country is likely to fail whatever the constitutional safeguards. And because the leaders who inherited these constitutions were not strong enough, their countries went down in riots, coups and revolution.

The single decisive factor that made for Singapore’s development was the ability of its ministers and the high quality of the civil servants who supported them. Whenever I had a lesser minister in charge, I invariably had to push and prod him, and later to review problems and clear roadblocks for him. The end result was never what could have been achieved. When I had the right man in charge, a burden was off my shoulders. I needed only to make clear the objectives to be achieved, the time-frame within which he must try to do it, and he would find a way to get it done.

It was Singapore’s good fortune that we had, for a small, developing country, a fair share of talent, because our own had been reinforced by the talented men and women who came here for their education, and stayed on for employment or business opportunities. Because of our relentless and unceasing search for talent both at home and abroad to make up for the small families of the well-educated, Singapore has been able to keep up its performance. Our greatest task was to find the people to replace my ageing ministers and myself.

My colleagues and I had started to search for younger men as possible successors in the 1960s. We could not find them among the political activists who joined the PAP, so we scouted for able, dynamic, dependable and hard-driving people wherever they were to be found. In the 1968 general elections, we fielded several PhDs, bright minds, teachers at the universities, professionals including lawyers, doctors and even top administrators as candidates. In by-elections in 1970 and 1972, we fielded several more. We soon discovered that they needed to have other qualities besides a disciplined mind able to marshal facts and figures, write a thesis for a PhD or be a professional. Leadership is more than just ability. It is a combination of courage, determination, commitment, character and ability that makes people willing to follow a leader. We needed people who were activists with good judgement and interpersonal skills. The search became more urgent at each subsequent election because I could see that my colleagues were visibly slowing down.

One day in 1974 Hon Sui Sen, then our finance minister, told me that he hoped I would let him stand down at the next general elections. He was feeling his age. I was astonished. He was only 60. How could I let him go? Who would do his job? Over lunch, just the two of us, this conversation had more impact on me than any other exchange I have ever had. He said investors had been confident because they were comfortable with the ministers in charge, especially with me. But they could see that he was getting on and were looking beyond and behind him to see who would replace him. They could not see a younger minister with the potential to be minister for finance. I had many more years to go, but he did not think he could carry on for much longer. He had met many CEOs of American corporations. They had to retire at 65. Several years before a CEO’s retirement, he had to put before the board one or more candidates for them to choose one as his successor. I resolved that I must not be found wanting in this respect, and that I must place Singapore in competent hands before I retired.

To do this I had to find and get into office a group of men to provide Singapore with effective and creative leadership. Had I left it to chance, depending on activists coming forward to join us, I would never have succeeded. We set out to recruit the best into government. The problem was to persuade them to enter politics, get themselves elected and learn how to move and win people over to their side. It was a slow and difficult process with a high attrition rate. Successful, capable professionals and executives are not natural political leaders, able to argue, cajole and demolish the arguments of opponents at mass rallies, on television and in Parliament.

To see how wide the net must be cast for talent, I had only to remember that the best ministers in my early cabinets were not born in Singapore. Three-quarters of them had come from outside Singapore. The net that brought in my generation of leaders was thrown in a big sea that stretched from South China across Malaysia, to South India and Ceylon. Now we were fishing in a small pond and getting fewer big fish.

For years my colleagues and I had assumed that in the ordinary political process, activists from universities, trade unions and party branches would throw up the men who could carry on our work. By 1968 we recognised this was not going to happen. The original team had been thrown up by the traumatic events of World War II, Japanese occupation and the communist insurgency. The weak, the timid and the irresolute were eliminated by natural process. By surviving they proved they could stay on top of the opposition and govern. Their convictions pitted them against the British, and later the communists and the Malayan Malay Ultras. During repeated crises, we had forged deep and abiding bonds between ourselves and the people. These bonds endured. Our final task was to find worthy successors. Mao tried to solve this problem of suitable successors by arranging a Cultural Revolution as a substitute for the Long March. It was not possible for us to simulate a Japanese invasion and occupation, and the subsequent struggle for independence. Our solution was to look for men with the right character, ability and motivation, and hope that when they encountered the inevitable crises, they would emerge tested as leaders.

The general elections of 1968 were a political landmark with 18 new candidates out of 58. We won all the seats and improved the quality of our MPs and ministers. Over 40 per cent were university-educated either in English or Chinese, while 55 per cent had secondary or higher secondary education. Those without much education were trade unionists who had left school early because their families were too poor. The loyalists who had been with us from the difficult early days had to give way to fresh talent when I made promotions to office. At a meeting of MPs in April, soon after the elections, I compared the party to an army where there had to be constant recruitment. Most would join as privates, some as officers. Some would not be more than sergeants. It did not follow that all who joined as officers would become generals. Those who proved their worth, whether or not they had university degrees, would be promoted. I had to prepare the ground for a thorough change of office holders. I protected the interests of the faithful by a Parliamentary Pensions Act. All those who had served for not less than nine years as MPs, parliamentary secretaries and ministers would be entitled to pensions.

Of all my ministers, Hon Sui Sen was the best at talent scouting. It was he who chose Goh Chok Tong to run Neptune Orient Lines, our national shipping line, when it was making a loss; Goh turned it around in a few years. Sui Sen also brought in Dr Tony Tan, who later became our deputy prime minister. He was a physics lecturer at the University of Singapore, then the general manager of Singapore’s largest bank, Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation. Sui Sen talent-spotted S. Dhanabalan, who had worked with him in the EDB and was in the Development Bank of Singapore; he was later to be a minister in charge of several important portfolios.

I systematically scanned the top echelons of all sectors in Singapore – the professions, commerce, manufacturing and trade unions – to look for men and women in their 30s and 40s whom we would persuade to stand as our candidates. Ability can be assessed fairly accurately by a person’s academic record and achievement in work. Character is not so easily measured. After some successes but too many failures, I concluded that it was more important, though more difficult, to assess a person’s character.

In 1970, when the American spaceship Apollo 13 malfunctioned nearly 300,000 miles out in space, I watched the unfolding drama, fascinated. One false move by any one of the three men on board would have left them drifting out into outer space, never to return. They remained calm and collected throughout the ordeal, entrusting their survival to the judgement of the men at ground control whose instructions they followed meticulously. I saw this as proof that NASA’s psychological and other tests conducted on the ground, simulating the weightless and isolated conditions in spaceships, had successfully eliminated those who were prone to panic in a crisis. I decided to have one psychologist and one psychiatrist test our candidates.

They put prospective PAP election candidates who had the potential to be ministers through psychological tests designed to define their character profile, intelligence, personal backgrounds and values. These tests were not conclusive but they helped to eliminate the obviously unsuitable and were an advance on gut reactions during a two-hour interview. From time to time I would disagree with the conclusions of the psychologists, especially where I felt the candidate had been smarter than the interviewer and been able to “fake good” without appearing to do so.

Professor H.J. Eysenck, a psychologist from London University who visited Singapore in 1987, reinforced my view that testing for IQ and personality and character traits was useful. He cited an American oil MNC that employed 40 psychologists for the recruitment and promotion of 40,000 employees. We did not have enough trained psychologists to assess the candidates for important appointments. After a discussion with him, I got the NUS to train more behavioural psychologists to help in selecting people with the right attributes for various jobs.

I also checked with corporate leaders of MNCs how they recruited and promoted their senior people, and decided one of the best systems was that developed by Shell, the Anglo-Dutch oil company. They concentrated on what they termed a man’s “currently estimated potential”. This was determined by three qualities – a person’s power of analysis, his imagination and his sense of reality. Together they made up an over-arching attribute Shell called “helicopter quality”, the ability to see facts or problems in a larger context and to identify and zoom in on critical details. A panel of assessors, at least two of whom must know the person being assessed, could accurately rank executives of broadly similar abilities for helicopter quality. After trying out the system and finding it practical and reliable, I adopted it for our public service in 1983, replacing the British system we had inherited.

Some people are naturally better than others in seeing into or through a person, and make excellent interviewers and assessors. One such outstanding person was Tan Teck Chwee, the chairman of our Public Service Commission from 1975 to 1988. No candidate for recruitment or officer for promotion succeeded in deceiving him. It had nothing to do with Tan’s undoubtedly high IQ. It had much to do with a different part of his mind that enabled him to read a person’s character from his facial expression, tone of voice and body language. Another with this gift is Lim Kim San, a former senior cabinet minister. I put him on every panel for the selection of PAP candidates for election. His assessments were more visceral than cerebral and most times correct. His exact opposite, a cerebral person lacking this gift, was Goh Keng Swee. Often he would pick an officer or an aide and rave about his excellent qualities based on the man’s paperwork. Six to 12 months later, he would be looking for a replacement. He simply could not see through a person. Psychologists call this ability social or emotional intelligence.

My attempt to inject new blood into the leadership was not without stress. Several old guard ministers were concerned about the pace at which they were being replaced. Toh Chin Chye said that I should stop talking about the old guard getting old because they were not getting old that fast, that I was demoralising them. I disagreed. We were all slowing down and visibly ageing, including me and Toh himself. In cabinet he would put an electric heater under the cabinet table to blow warm air over his feet. I could see myself in the mirror. I did not feel the same inexhaustible enthusiasm and zest to see and find out things for myself. More and more I relied on reports, photographs and videos.

Toh and several of the old guard wanted our successors to come up the same way we had done, as activists, not by head-hunting and direct recruitment. Keng Swee, Rajaratnam, Kim San and Sui Sen did not believe there was much chance of reproducing ourselves in that way. After the December 1980 elections, I decided to send a clear signal to all the old guard that the course of self-renewal was irreversible, although the pace would depend on how successful the new MPs proved to be. I left Toh out of the new cabinet. I was concerned that several of the old-timers might rally around him to slow down the pace of self-renewal. I sensed that one old guard minister, Ong Pang Boon, shared Toh’s unease, as did a number of the older ministers of state and parliamentary secretaries including Lee Khoon Choy, Fong Sip Chee, Chan Chee Seng and Chor Yock Eng. I had to drop Toh to pre-empt any split in the leadership. It was painful after so many years working together. The support of the old guard had made possible what we had achieved, but it was our joint responsibility to ensure that Singapore continued to be governed by able, honest and dedicated men. The original team had peaked and was running out of steam.

The new MPs, bright young men who had won scholarships to renowned universities overseas and in Singapore, were taking over key jobs within three to four years of joining the PAP. The veterans felt that they should not have such an easy path to office, but should learn and wait. I did not think young and talented men would sit and wait; either they were going to make it or they would want to move on.

Toh was bitter. I offered to make him our high commissioner in London, but he did not want to leave Singapore because of his young daughter’s education. He found another appointment for himself. He stayed on in Parliament for another two terms, sniping at me and the PAP, never enough to be accused of disloyalty, but enough to be a mild embarrassment. I did not want to put him down publicly.

After I dropped Toh from the cabinet, I told Pang Boon that I would appoint him for another term, but I could not allow any obstruction to self-renewal. He understood and we avoided a clash. When he retired in December 1984, I wrote to him expressing my appreciation for his work from 1959 to 1984, adding,

“I also thank you for helping in the selection of candidates for self-renewal. You had certain reservations. You pointed out that only time and crises can reveal latent defects in a person. I agree with you. You also had misgivings, as had Chin Chye, over the speed of self-renewal and the effect it was having on the morale of old guard MPs. I must take the responsibility for both the method and the pace of self-renewal, though it is reassuring to me that Goh Keng Swee and Rajaratnam supported me. A younger team of ministers and MPs have now become the majority both in cabinet and in Parliament. There is no turning back. I am confident that the younger leaders will be equal to the task, but if not, the responsibility will be mine, shared with Keng Swee and Rajaratnam.”

The one retirement I felt most keenly was Keng Swee’s. In mid-1984, he told me that he had decided, for personal reasons, to step down at the end of the term and would not contest the next elections. He had done enough and it was time to go. For several years after he left, he was invaluable as deputy chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore. He also set up the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation as a separate organisation to handle our national savings and reserves.

The old guard took some time to accept the new blood, and some were never reconciled to seeing them promoted over their heads. I understood their feelings. Fong Sip Chee had been a stalwart PAP cadre member from the 1950s when the PAP was an endangered party. He became an MP in 1963 and was a minister of state from 1981 to 1985. He never understood why he was not more deserving of promotion and believed, wrongly, that it was because he had not been to university. Others like Ch’ng Jit Koon, a minister of state, and Ho Kah Leong, a parliamentary secretary, both Nanyang graduates, supported and worked with the new ministers. It was an emotionally difficult but necessary changeover. I had to do it, whatever my own feelings.

After the 1980 party conference I promoted six young ministers of state to the cabinet. This encouraged other young talent to join and be tested as ministers of state. Besides high helicopter quality, they needed to have political sense and the temperament to establish rapport with grass-roots leaders. Those with these extra qualities I took into cabinet.

For every person who made it we would have interviewed more than ten. The attrition rate was high because, despite all the psychological tests, we could never accurately assess character, temperament and motivation. To succeed, the man \(or woman\) and his spouse and family had to be prepared for loss of privacy and time. Nursing a constituency and attending official functions, plus a lower income than they could earn outside, made political office unattractive. Most of all, the person must have that extra, the capacity to work with people and persuade them to support his policies.

I decided 1988 would be the last elections I would lead as prime minister. After I won, I asked the younger ministers to decide among themselves whom they would support as prime minister. I had helped to select them as MPs and appointed them as ministers. I wanted my successor to have the support of his peers. I had seen how Deng Xiaoping had failed with his appointees, Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang. I also remembered how Anthony Eden, chosen by Winston Churchill, failed. The younger ministers chose Goh Chok Tong.

Chok Tong was not a natural politician. He was tall, gangling and awkward, and spoke English with a heavy Hokkien accent. When he became an MP in 1976 he was self-conscious and without the gift of speech-making. But he had ability, dedication and drive, and was interested in people. Soon after I brought him into the cabinet I advised him to take lessons to improve his public-speaking skills. We found an English woman to teach him and some of the other new ministers to speak in a more relaxed, natural way. From my own experience in learning Mandarin and Hokkien, I knew it was not easy to change childhood speech patterns. I described to Chok Tong my own experience, how for years I spent hours in between work practising Mandarin and Hokkien with teachers to improve my fluency. My old teachers introduced Mandarin teachers to him. He applied himself with determination and became a much more effective communicator.

In the 1990 cabinet, together with Chok Tong, were Ong Teng Cheong, S. Dhanabalan, Tony Tan, Yeo Ning Hong, Lee Yock Suan, S. Jayakumar, Richard Hu, Wong Kan Seng, Lee Hsien Loong, Yeo Cheow Tong, Ahmad Mattar and George Yeo. I had brought together men of integrity and ability with strong commitment to society. After several years of experience working together with the old guard in cabinet, they were as prepared as could be. I resigned that November.

I had been prime minister for 31 years. To have stayed on for another term would have proved nothing except that I was still fit and effective. On the other hand, if in the years that I had left, I was able to help my successor get a grip on his job and succeed, that would be my final contribution to Singapore. I did not suffer any withdrawal syndrome. Chok Tong did not want to move into my old office in the Istana Annexe, which I had occupied for 20 years since I moved from City Hall, but chose to create a new office on the floor above mine. I continued to make a contribution through discussions in cabinet and in bilateral meetings with the prime minister and other ministers.

Chok Tong’s style, the way he worked with his team, was different from mine. He carefully planned the various steps he needed to swing public opinion slowly towards the desired goal. It worked. In the January 1997 elections, the PAP increased its percentage of votes from 61 per cent to 65 per cent for the 36 constituencies contested. It won back two of the four seats lost in 1991. Prime Minister Goh and his ministers were in full command.

A crisis tested Chok Tong and his team in mid-1998 when our currency went down in value, and stock and property prices fell by 40 per cent following the collapse of our neighbours’ economies. Many MNCs retrenched workers in Singapore and transferred their operations to our lower-cost neighbours. The problem was similar to the recession in 1985 when we had overpriced ourselves by allowing higher wages, fees and taxes and other costs. The solution then was a raft of cost-cutting measures, 15 per cent decrease in employers’ contribution to workers’ CPF and lower fees and taxes. Chok Tong’s team worked out a similar package that reduced costs by cutting taxes and lowering employers’ contribution to the CPF from 20 per cent to 10 per cent. Retrenchments slowed down. By the middle of 1999 the economy had revived. Their steady and competent management of the crisis won them the confidence of international fund managers and investors.







September 1999. Cabinet meeting with Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong in the chair. \(SPH/Straits Times\)







1950s. Colonial outpost. *\(SPH/Straits Times\)*







2000. Financial/business hub with reclaimed land and container wharves in the background. *\(SPH/Straits Times\)*







Family reunion Chinese New Year’s eve, 4 February 2000. *\(SPH/Straits Times\)*




