+++
title = "42 My Family"

+++



The communists impressed me by the great importance they placed on the woman a prospective cadre was attached to. They knew a wife could make an enormous difference to a man’s reliability and commitment to the cause. They had objected to my political secretary Jek Yeun Thong’s steady girlfriend, whom they regarded as not politically suitable. He ignored this objection, and without his knowledge they dropped him from their cell network. They were right; she was not supportive of their cause.

I was fortunate. Choo never had any doubts or hesitation about my going on with the fight, whatever the consequences. She told me she had absolute confidence in my judgement. She was a great source of strength and comfort. She has a keen intuition when judging people. While I make up my mind more on analysis and reason, she decides more on “feel” and has an uncanny knack of sensing the real feelings and positions of a person behind the smiles and friendly words. She was often right about who not to trust, although she could not quite explain why – maybe it was the expression on a person’s face, the way he smiled, the look in his eyes or his body language. Whatever it was, I learnt to take her reservations about people seriously. Early in 1962, when I was negotiating with the Tunku to join Malaysia, she expressed her reservations over whether we could work with the Tunku, Razak and the other UMNO and MCA leaders. She said they were different in temperament, character and social habits, that she could not see the PAP ministers getting along with them. I replied we simply had to work with them, because we needed to. We had to have merger and a broader base to build a nation. Within three years, by 1965, she was proved right. We were incompatible and they asked us to leave Malaysia.

Meeting the wives of foreign leaders, she would give me a good reading of the husband’s friendliness or otherwise from the way the wife acted or talked to her. I never took her views as the last word, but I did not dismiss them.

She saved me much time and tedious work, correcting the drafts of speeches that I dictated and the transcripts of what I said in Parliament and in interviews. She is familiar with my vocabulary and can guess my dictated words that my stenographers cannot make out. I made a point, however, not to discuss the formulation of policies with her, and she was scrupulous in not reading notes or faxes that were sensitive.

For my part, the knowledge that she had her profession as a lawyer and if necessary could look after herself and bring up the children on her own freed me from worries about their future. The children were a source of joy and satisfaction. She brought them up well-mannered and self-disciplined, never throwing their weight around, although they had grown up as the prime minister’s children. Our home at Oxley Road was only a seven-minute drive from her office at Malacca Street. She hardly ever attended business lunches with clients. Instead she would return home to have lunch with the children and keep in touch. When she was away at the office she had reliable, long-serving “black-and-white” Cantonese maids, so named for their black pants and white blouses, to mind them. Choo used a cane when the children were particularly naughty or disobedient. I did not physically punish them; a stern rebuke was effective enough. Having a violent father turned me against using physical force.

We had decided in 1959, when I first took office as prime minister, not to live at Sri Temasek, my official residence in the Istana domain. They were very young and we did not want them to grow up in such grand surroundings with butlers and orderlies to fuss over their needs. It would have given them an unrealistic view of the world and their place in it. Watching them grow up constantly reminded me of the need to build a safe and wholesome environment for our children to live in.

All three – Hsien Loong \(born 1952\), Wei Ling \(1955\) and Hsien Yang \(1957\) – were educated in Chinese schools, first Nanyang kindergarten, then Nanyang Primary School for six years. The boys went on to Catholic High School and then to National Junior College. Ling continued in Nanyang Girls’ High School then went to Raffles Institution. They were similar in their academic performance – good at science and mathematics, fair in Chinese, poor at drawing, singing, music and handwork.

We made it a point, and so did they, that they had to make it on their own. All three won the President’s scholarship, awarded to the 5–10 best A level students of their year. The two boys were also awarded SAF scholarships. This required them to undergo military training during their university summer vacations, and to serve the Singapore Armed Forces for at least eight years upon graduation. Choo and I did not encourage them to do law; we left them to decide what they were good at and interested in doing. Loong enjoyed mathematics and wanted to do it at university but was quite sure he did not want it as his career. So he read mathematics at Trinity College, Cambridge, became a “Wrangler” \(first-class honours in maths\) in two instead of the usual three years, then took a postgraduate diploma in computer science with a star for distinction. He was trained in field artillery at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, later spent a year at the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, then a year on public administration at the Kennedy School of Government in Harvard.

Yang liked engineering. Not intimidated by his brother’s record, he also went to Trinity College, Cambridge, and took Firsts in both parts of the engineering Tripos. He went to Fort Knox for armour training, later to Camberley, England for Staff and Command, and to Stanford University, California for a year in business administration.

Ling was fond of dogs and wanted to be a vet. Choo dissuaded her by citing what a vet friend did in Singapore: inspecting pigs at the abattoir before and after slaughter to make sure they were fit for human consumption. That settled her choice. When she won the President’s scholarship, she chose to do medicine in the University of Singapore and graduated as the Honours student, the top student of her year. She specialised in paediatric neurology and was attached for three years to Massachusetts General Hospital and later spent a year at Toronto’s Children’s Hospital.

Loong was always interested in what was going on in the country and in government. As a schoolboy of 11 he accompanied me when I went on constituency visits to rally ground support in the months before we joined Malaysia. He was old enough at 12 to remember the panic and turmoil of the 1964 race riots, including a sudden curfew that caught him at Catholic High School in Queen’s Street wondering how he was to get home. The family driver had the wit to drive my father’s small Morris Minor to take him home in chaotic traffic. Loong had been studying Malay since he was 5, and after Singapore joined Malaysia had started learning to read Jawi, Malay written in the Arabic script. For practice he read the *Utusan Melayu*, Umno’s Jawi newspaper, which published wild communal accusations against the PAP and me. Politics was a part of his extracurricular education.

From his student days in Cambridge he knew he wanted a part in deciding what Singapore was to become and was willing to enter the political arena. After his Maths Tripos examinations, his tutor in Trinity College had urged him to reconsider returning to serve in the SAF, and pursue instead a career in mathematics in Cambridge, since he had done exceptionally well. The president of the Oxford and Cambridge Society of Singapore, when presenting him with the prize as the best Singapore student of the 1974 class, referred to a letter from another tutor of Trinity College. He wrote that Loong had obtained “50 per cent more alpha marks than the next first class candidate” and that “in the recorded history of the Mathematical Tripos such a difference between the top man and the next has never been known before”.

When I met his tutor at his graduation, he told me that Loong had written to him a most rational, thorough and thoughtful letter explaining why he would not go on with mathematics no matter how good he was at it. Later, I asked his tutor for a copy of this letter that Loong had sent him in August 1972:

“Now the reasons for not becoming a professional mathematician. It is absolutely necessary that I remain in Singapore, whatever I do, not only because in my special position if I ‘brain-drained’ overseas the effect on Singapore would be disastrously demoralising, but also because Singapore is where I belong and where I want to be. … Further, a mathematician really has little say in what goes on in the world around him, in the way things are going on in the country. This does not matter at all in a large developed country like Britain, but in Singapore it would matter very much to me. It does not mean that I have to go into politics, but an important member of the civil service or the armed forces is in a position to do a great deal of good or harm. … I would prefer to be doing things and perhaps be cursed by other people than have to curse at someone else and not be able to do any more.”

He was then only 20 but he knew his mind and where his commitments were.

Life is not without its tragedies. Loong married in 1978 Dr Wong Ming Yang, a Malaysian he had met when she was in Girton College studying medicine at Cambridge. In 1982 she gave birth to their second child, a boy, Yipeng. He was an albino and visually handicapped. Three weeks later Ming Yang died of a heart attack. Loong’s world collapsed. His mother-in-law looked after his two children, with Choo pitching in. They had the help of a maid whom Pamelia \(my brother Suan’s wife\) had immediately sent over to meet this emergency. Later, we worried that Yipeng was slow in learning to speak and did not relate to people. When Ling returned from her training in paediatric neurology at the Massachusetts General Hospital, she diagnosed him as autistic. After some years in a preparatory school followed by a school for the visually handicapped, Yipeng’s socialisation skills improved and he was able to join a mainstream secondary school. Ling rediagnosed him as having Asperger’s Syndrome \(a mild form of autism\) and he is intellectually normal. He has turned out to be good-natured and the best-behaved and most likeable of my grandchildren.

While Loong was still unsettled after his bereavement, Goh Chok Tong, then the minister for defence and assistant secretary-general of the PAP, invited him to stand for Parliament in the December 1984 general elections. At that time Loong was a colonel on the general staff and the joint staff in the SAF. Chok Tong, as his minister, had a high assessment of Loong’s potential in politics. Loong was concerned that, as a widower with two young children, he would find it difficult to manage the family as he would have to be absent much of the time on political work. He discussed it with Choo and me. I told him that if he missed the coming elections he would have to wait for four to five years before he would have another chance. With every passing year he would find it more difficult to change and adjust to political life, especially learning to work with people in the constituencies and the unions. Most of all, he had to feel deeply for people, be able to communicate his feeling for them and move them to go with him. At the age of 32, Loong left the SAF and contested the elections in December. He won one of the highest majorities of any candidate in the elections.

I appointed Loong a junior minister in the ministry of trade and industry. His minister immediately put him in charge of a private sector committee to review the economy just as we entered a severe recession in 1985. The committee’s proposals that the government take strong steps to reduce business costs and strengthen competitiveness were a major political test for Loong and the other ministers. In November 1990, when I resigned as prime minister, Loong was appointed deputy prime minister by Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong.

Many of my critics thought this smacked of nepotism, that he was unduly favoured because he was my son. On the contrary, as I told the party conference in 1989, the year before I resigned, it would not be good for Singapore or for Loong to have him succeed me. He would be seen as having inherited the office from me when he should deserve the position on his own merit. He was still young and it was better that someone else succeed me as prime minister. Then were Loong to make the grade later, it would be clear that he made it on his own merit.

For several years Chok Tong had to endure the jeers of foreign critics that he was a seat warmer for Loong. But after Chok Tong won his second general elections in 1997 and consolidated his position as his own man, the jeering stopped. As Chok Tong’s deputy, Loong has established his standing as a political leader in his own right – determined, fast and versatile in ranging over the whole field of government. Almost every difficult or taxing problem in any ministry had his attention. Ministers, MPs and senior civil servants knew this. I could have stayed on a few years longer and allowed him to gather support to be the leader. I did not do so.

When Choo and I were in Johannesburg in October 1992, Loong phoned from Singapore while I was addressing a conference. I immediately rang back, fearing bad news. It was, devastating. A biopsy of a polyp found in his colon had been diagnosed as cancer, a lymphoma. Subsequent news gave us some grounds for relief; the form Loong suffered from was intermediate grade lymphoma which usually responded to chemotherapy. Loong underwent a three-month course of intensive chemotherapy. It cleared up his cancer cells and brought him a remission. The specialists advised that if it did not recur within five years his remission could be considered a cure. We waited anxiously for the five years to elapse. October 1997 came and passed without mishap. Loong had gone through two major crises.

In December 1985 Loong married Ho Ching whom he had known as an engineer in the ministry of defence. She had won the President’s scholarship in 1972 and taken first-class honours in engineering at the University of Singapore. She is now a hands-on chief executive of a government-linked company, Singapore Technologies. It was a happy choice. They have two sons and Ho Ching embraced Loong’s two other children as her own.

Yang married a girl from Singapore, Lim Suet Fern, who was studying law at Girton College, Cambridge and also took a First. They have three sons. After 15 years in the SAF Yang was seconded to Singapore Telecom. He had been asked by his permanent secretary to join the civil service as an administrative officer with the prospect of soon becoming a permanent secretary, and the potential to be head of the civil service. He preferred the challenge of the private sector, and opted to join SingTel. When he was promoted to CEO, my critics again alleged nepotism. It would have been a disaster for him and for the system of meritocracy that I had set up if he had been promoted because of me. The officers he served with and his peers knew better. So did the fund managers. SingTel shares did not weaken. After several years dealing with chairmen and CEOs of major international telecom companies, all talk of favouritism evaporated.

When our children were still in school, years before I raised the unmarried graduate women issue in 1983, Choo and I had told them that when they marry they must be happy to have their children as bright only as their spouses. They married their equals.

Ling, a neurologist, is a deputy director \(clinical services\) of the National Neuroscience Institute at Tan Tock Seng Hospital. She is unmarried, like many other graduate women of her generation. She lives with us, as is normal in Asian families, and travels extensively to conferences on neurology, pursuing her interest in epilepsy and learning disabilities in children.

The family has remained close. When they come for lunch on Sundays, the younger boys work each other up and create boisterous bedlam in the dining room. Most people dote on their grandchildren, spoiling them in the process. We are fond of ours, but feel that their parents are overindulgent. Perhaps we were too strict with their parents, but it has served them well.

My three brothers, Dennis, Freddy and Suan Yew, a sister, Monica, and I have all benefited from a strong, resourceful and determined mother who ensured that we were educated to the best of our abilities and her resources. Dennis followed me to read law at Fitzwilliam House in Cambridge. Later, together with Choo, we practised law in partnership as Lee & Lee, and after a year Eddie Barker, an old friend at Raffles College and in Cambridge, joined us. Freddy became a stockbroker. Suan went to Fitzwilliam to read medicine and came back to build a successful practice. Monica married early. They rallied around to help in many ways when the family was in trouble, as when Loong lost Ming Yang in 1982, and again when he had cancer in 1992.

My siblings and I are especially close to each other. I was not just the eldest brother but also the one who helped our mother to make the major decisions. My father was carefree by nature and early in my teens my mother had coopted me as the substitute head of the family. My brothers and sister still regard me as head of the family as much as the eldest brother. The extended family meet at least twice a year, on Chinese New Year’s Eve for a reunion dinner and on New Year’s Day at my home in Oxley Road. We keep in touch whenever there is anything important, like the arrival of new grandchildren. Now in our 70s and 60s, we are reminded how much we share of our parents’ genes as with each illness our doctors check to confirm that our siblings are not similarly afflicted. We are grateful that three of us have already exceeded the biblical three score and ten.




