+++
title = "43 Epilogue"

+++



As a boy of six, I rode in a bullock-cart on wooden wheels bound in a metal strip, without springs or shock absorbers, enjoying a hilariously bumpy ride on a dirt track to my grandfather’s rubber estate. Fifty years later, in 1977, I flew in a supersonic Concorde from London to New York in three hours. Technology has changed my world.

I have had to sing four national anthems: Britain’s *God Save the Queen*, Japan’s *Kimigayo*, Malaysia’s *Negara Ku*, and finally Singapore’s *Majulah Singapura*; such were the political upheavals of the last 60 years. Foreign troops have come and gone – British, Australian and Indian, then the Japanese, with their auxiliaries, the Taiwanese and Koreans. The British returned after the war and fought the communist insurgency. Then came independence for Singapore. Indonesia mounted Confrontation against Malaysia. The swirling currents of political changes swept me along.

Would my colleagues and I have embarked on our journey had we known the hazards and perils we would face when we formed the People’s Action Party in November 1954? Had we known how complex and difficult were the problems that lay ahead, we would never have gone into politics with the high spirits, enthusiasm and idealism of the 1950s. We could feel the swelling pride of the Chinese in both Singapore and Malaya at the success of communist China. Yet, there we were in the 1950s, a small group of English-educated colonial bourgeoisie, without the ability to reach the Chinese dialect-speaking masses who were the majority, going headlong into the fray. How could we ever hope to compete against the Malayan Communist Party? We did not think in those terms. We just wanted the British out.

We pressed on, oblivious of the dangers ahead. Our visceral urges were stronger than our cerebral inhibitions. Once plunged in, we were sucked ever deeper into the struggle. We had to fight the communists sooner than we expected, contending against their open-front labour, student and cultural organisations, all backed by their armed underground. We solved that problem by merger with Malaya in 1963 to form Malaysia, only to discover that the Ultras in the UMNO Malay leadership wanted a Malay-dominated society. This led to communal riots, endless conflict, and eventually separation and independence in 1965. We found ourselves facing Confrontation by Indonesia. After that ended in 1966, the British announced in 1968 the withdrawal of their armed forces. We overcame one problem only to be faced with an even more daunting one. There were times when it looked hopeless.

We learnt some valuable lessons in those early years as apprentices in the exercise of power. We never stopped learning because the situation kept on changing and we had to adjust our own policies. I had the advantage of several ministers who read widely and were attracted to new ideas but not mesmerised by them – Keng Swee, Raja, Sui Sen. We passed interesting books and articles we had read to each other. When we started, we were ignorant and innocent, but we were saved by being careful to probe and test ideas before we implemented them.


My colleagues and I forged our camaraderie under these intense pressures. In successive crises, we had to put our lives in each other’s hands. We trusted each other, knew each other’s strengths and weaknesses and made allowances for them. We did not take any straw polls to tell us what popular sentiment wanted us to do. Our task was to swing the people around to support what had to be done so that Singapore could survive as a non-communist, non-communal, viable society.

I was fortunate to have had a strong team of ministers who shared a common vision. They were able men determined to pursue our shared goals. The core team stayed together for over two decades. Keng Swee, Raja, Sui Sen and Kim San were outstanding. They were all older than I was and were never inhibited from telling me what they thought, especially when I was wrong. They helped me stay objective and balanced, and saved me from any risk of megalomania which could so easily come with long years in office. I also had Toh Chin Chye, Ong Pang Boon, Eddie Barker, Yong Nyuk Lin, Kenny Byrne and Othman Wok – capable men of integrity, dedicated to the cause.

When we started in 1959 we knew little about how to govern, or how to solve our many economic and social problems. All we had was a burning desire to change an unfair and unjust society for the better. To do that, we had to win political power. Having gained it, we had to retain the support of our people to continue our unfinished job.

I sought out able men and placed them in positions of authority as ministers and top public officers to administer an honest, efficient system and be responsive to the needs of the people. We had to keep the workers on our side and at the same time tend to the needs of investors whose capital, knowledge, management skills and overseas markets would enable us to make a living without our traditional hinterland, Malaysia.

We learnt on the job and learnt quickly. If there was one formula for our success, it was that we were constantly studying how to make things work, or how to make them work better. I was never a prisoner of any theory. What guided me were reason and reality. The acid test I applied to every theory or scheme was, would it work? This was the golden thread that ran through my years in office. If it did not work, or the results were poor, I did not waste more time and resources on it. I almost never made the same mistake twice, and I tried to learn from the mistakes others had made. I discovered early in office that there were few problems confronting me in government which other governments had not met and solved. So I made a practice of finding out who else had met the problem we faced, how they had tackled it and how successful they had been. Whether it was to build a new airport or to change our teaching methods, I would send a team of officers to visit and study those countries that had done it well. I preferred to climb on the shoulders of others who had gone before us.

In retrospect, it was our good luck that Singapore did not come to greater harm from some of the high-risk policies and actions that we embarked on. We worked with the communists in a united front; we could have been chewed up and swallowed as happened to social democrats in Poland and Czechoslovakia after World War II. We acted in the naïve belief that the force of electoral arithmetic would gradually bring about a less communal Malayan society; time has shown that racial loyalties cannot be overcome by the pulls of common economic interests. When faced with bleak economic prospects, I allowed an oil refinery at Keppel, thus placing a great fire hazard next to our major economic asset, the main harbour. And Chinese middle school student riots in the 1950s made such an indelible impression on us that we postponed implementing a national education policy with English as our working language from 1965 until 1978, and so reduced the economic prospects of many cohorts of Chinese students.


I learnt to ignore criticism and advice from experts and quasiexperts, especially academics in the social and political sciences. They have pet theories on how a society should develop to approximate their ideal, especially how poverty should be reduced and welfare extended. I always tried to be correct, not politically correct. Foreign correspondents representing the Western media in Singapore preached their theories and criticised my policies, hoping to influence the voters and the government. It was just as well that the people were as pragmatic and realistic as the government.

Would I have been a different person if I had remained a lawyer and not gone into politics? My work experience would have been more limited and my horizons narrower. In politics I had to range over the whole gamut of the problems of human society. As the Chinese saying goes, “the sparrow though small has all five organs”. Small though we may be, our needs are the same as those of any large country, domestically and internationally. My responsibilities gave me a wide perspective of human societies and a worldview which a lawyer would not have.

But I never allowed myself to forget Singapore’s unique situation in Southeast Asia. To survive, we had to be better organised and more efficient and competitive than the rest of the region or there was no reason for our role as a nodal point between the advanced and the developing countries. After everything had been analysed and argued, I went by my gut instinct of what would work in Singapore. I had persuaded our people to oust the British and join Malaya. Then we found ourselves thrown out of Malaysia. Thereafter it was our duty to make Singapore succeed and give our people a future.

A united and determined group of leaders, backed by a practical and hardworking people who trusted them, made it possible. Did I expect an independent Singapore, with a GDP of S$3 billion in 1965, to grow 15 times to S$46 billion in 1997 at 1965 dollars and to have the 8th highest per capita GNP in the world in 1997 according to the World Bank? I have often been asked this question. The answer is “no”. How could I have foreseen that science and technology, especially breakthroughs in transportation, telecommunications and production methods, would shrink the world?

The story of Singapore’s progress is a reflection of the advances of the industrial countries – their inventions, technology, enterprise and drive. It is part of the story of man’s search for new fields to increase his wealth and wellbeing. Stamford Raffles of the East India Company found an island of 120 fishermen in 1819 and turned it into an emporium on the sea route from India to China. As the commercial centre of the British Empire in Southeast Asia, it prospered through international trade. When steamships replaced sailing ships, and again when the Suez Canal opened in 1869, traffic increased and added to Singapore’s growth.

During the Japanese occupation \(1942–45\) shipping was drastically reduced by the war, amounting to a blockade. Trade declined precipitately, food and medicine became scarce, and half the population of one million left for peninsular Malaya and the Riau islands. Many who remained were half-starved. After the victory of the Allies in August 1945, shipping resumed, bringing food, medicine and other essentials, and the dispersed population returned. Trade and investments brought recovery.

With each technological advance Singapore advanced – containers, air travel and air freight, satellite communications, intercontinental fibreoptic cables. The technological revolution will bring enormous changes in the next 50 years. Information technology, computers and communications and their manifold uses, the revolution in microbiology, gene therapy, cloning and organ reproduction will transform man’s life. Singaporeans will have to be nimble in adopting and adapting these new discoveries to play a role in disseminating their benefits.


People in Singapore learnt quickly from their interaction with foreigners. We sent our brighter students abroad to study in developed countries, at first on scholarships given by these countries, later on scholarships given by the Singapore government. We also noted the increasing social difficulties these advanced societies faced because of their liberal social and welfare policies. I benefited from the lessons others paid for. I met many able foreign leaders who educated me and added to my understanding of the world.

Getting together a team to succeed my colleagues and me was almost as difficult as getting Singapore off the ground after independence. The second generation leaders brought a fresh burst of energy and enthusiasm into the government. Their experiences and ideas are more in tune with the younger generation and can lead Singapore in the new millennium. I derive immense satisfaction watching them gain in confidence and get into their stride.

What does the future have in store for Singapore? City-states do not have good survival records. The Greek city-states no longer exist as states. Most have not vanished physically, but have been absorbed by the hinterland in a larger entity. The city-state of Athens has disappeared. But the city of Athens survives in Greece, with the Parthenon to bear witness to the achievements of the original Athenians. Other cities in big countries have been sacked and destroyed, their people decimated or dispersed, but the nations they were part of have endured and new people have repopulated and rebuilt them. Will Singapore the independent city-state disappear? The island of Singapore will not, but the sovereign nation it has become, able to make its way and play its role in the world, could vanish.

Singapore has existed for 180 years since its modern founding by Stamford Raffles, but for the 146 years before 1965 it was just an outpost of the British Raj. It thrived because it was useful to the world. It is part of the global network of cities where successful corporations of advanced countries have established their businesses. To remain an independent nation, Singapore needs a world where there is a balance of power that makes it possible for small states to survive, and not be conquered or absorbed by larger countries.

Peace and stability in the Asia Pacific depend upon a stable triangular relationship between the United States, Japan and China. China and Japan have competing geopolitical interests. The Japanese invasion and occupation of China still trouble their relationship. The Japanese share more interests with the Americans. A balance between the United States and Japan on one side and China on the other will set the structure and context for other relationships in East Asia. If there is an overall balance, the future of the region is more than fair and Singapore can continue to be useful to the world.

I did not know when I started my political life in the 1950s that we would be on the side of the winners of the Cold War and that Singapore would enjoy economic and social progress that flowed from stability, enterprise and links with the West. We were living through a period of immense political, social and economic change. The most difficult years were from independence in 1965 to British withdrawal in 1971. Only when the main units of the British forces had left and we did not suffer severe unemployment did I feel we were less vulnerable.

The future is as full of promise as it is fraught with uncertainty. The industrial society is giving way to one based on knowledge. The new divide in the world will be between those with the knowledge and those without. We must learn and be part of the knowledge-based world. That we have succeeded in the last three decades does not ensure our doing so in the future. However, we stand a better chance of not failing if we abide by the basic principles that have helped us progress: social cohesion through sharing the benefits of progress, equal opportunities for all and meritocracy, with the best man or woman for the job, especially as leaders in government.




