+++
title = "08 7. Are Jains Hindus?"

+++
**7. Are Jains Hindus?**

**7.1. Joins in the Minorities’ Commission**

One of the least vocal communities in India is the Jain community.  When
the Minorities’ Commission was formed in 1978, the Jains were somehow
overlooked, though Sikhs and Buddhists were invited to join.  No Jain
protest was heard.  It seemed that as a prosperous business community,
the Jains were not too interested in the politics of grievances, and
therefore they didn’t care too much whether they were entitled to
minority status.  In 1996, however, a delegation of prominent Jains
submitted a memorandum to Prime Minister Deve Gowda requesting
recognition of the Jain community as a religious minority.^([1](#1)) In
1997, the Minorities’ Commission did invite the Jains.

The Sangh Parivar was angry at the 1997 move, though it merely confirmed
the minority status accorded to the Jains in the Constitution (Art.25).
The RSS weekly Organiser went out of its way to collect pro-Hindu
statements from Jain sages and lay authorities.  Thus: “Jain saint
Acharya Tulsi has categorically asserted the Jains to be an integral
part of Hindu society.  In a statement released here, the Acharya asked
the Jains to desist from any attempts to put them among minority
communities.  Hinduism is not a specific religion but refers to
nationality or society, according to him.”^([2](#2))

So far, nothing has been gained: if “Hindu” merely means “Indian” (as
the Sangh Parivar often claims), then Acharya Tulsi’s assertion amounts
to no more than the trivial claim that Jains are Indians.  It becomes
more pertinent when he adds: “In a Hindu family, one member can be a
Vaishnavite, another an Arya Samaji and yet another a Jain, all
belonging to Hindu society”.^([3](#3)) Another Jain Muni, Anuvarta
Anushasta Ganadhipati Acharya “pointed out that Jainism is an
inseparable part of Hinduism, even though it believes in a different way
of worship, follows distinct *samskâras* and has its own spiritual
books”.^([4](#4)) And Sadhvi Dr. Sadhana, who leads the Acharya Sushil
Kumar Ashram in Delhi, asserted that “the Jains and the other Hindus are
the inheritors of a common heritage”.^([5](#5))

The Jains are divided in a few castes, some of which intermarry with
(and are thereby biologically part of) Hindu merchant castes: Jain
Agarwals marry Hindu Agarwals but not Jain Oswals.^([6](#6)) They
function as part of the merchant castes in the larger Hindu caste
scheme.  If the observance of caste endogamy is taken as a criterion of
Hinduism, then Jains are Hindus by that criterion.  In September 2001,
the Rajasthan High Court ruled that the Jains are Hindus, not a separate
non-Hindu minority; but in some other states they are counted as a
separate minority.  Clearly, there is no consensus about this in lay
society.

**7.2. Joins in Hindu Revivalism**

Given the actual participation of Jains in Hindu society, it is no
surprise that we find Jains well-represented in the Hindu Revivalist
movement, either formally, e.g. J.K. Jain, BJP media specialist and MP
in 1991-96, and Sunderlal Patwa, Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister in
1990-93, or informally, e.g. the late Girilal Jain, sacked in 1988 as
*Times of India* editor when he developed Hindutva sympathies, and his
daughters Meenakshi Jain and Sandhya Jain.

In a collection of Girilal Jain’s columns on the triangular
Hindu-Muslim-secularist struggle (that is how he understood the
“communal” problem)^([7](#7)), we find his explicit rejection of Jain
separateness: “Though not to the same extent as in the case of Sikhs,
(…) neo-Buddhists and at least some Jains have come to regard themselves
as non-Hindus.  In reality, however, Buddhism and Jainism have been no
more than movements within the larger body of
Hinduism.”^([8](#8)) According to Girilal Jain, what difference there
was between Brahmins and Jain renouncers has been eliminated by
competitive imitation, e.g.: “the Brahman would have adopted
vegetarianism so as not to be outdone by the renouncer qua spiritual
leader”.^([9](#9)) Whatever schisms may have taken place in the distant
past, the ultimate origin is common, and ever since, coexistence was too
close to allow for permanent separateness.

When BJP President Murli Manohar Joshi visited the predominantly Jain
Indian diamond community in Antwerp (August 1992), someone in the
audience asked him whether Jains are Hindus.  Pat came his reply: “Jains
are the best Hindus of all.”

**7.3. Dayananda Saraswati on Jainism**

When considered at the doctrinal level, Jainism may have some aspects
which mainstream Hindus would disagree with.  But the Sangh Parivar has
a policy of deliberate indifference to inter-Hindu disputes, aiming
first of all at uniting all sections of Hindu society “including”
Jainism.  The only written argument against Jainism by Hindu revivalists
was developed more than a century ago by the Arya Samaj.

In the introduction to his *Light of Truth*, Swami Dayananda tones down
the polemical thrust of the chapters devoted to other religions and
sects: “Just as we have studied the Jain and Buddhist scriptures, the
Puranas, the Bible and the Qoran with an unbiased mind, and have
accepted what is good in them and rejected what is false, and endeavour
for the betterment of all mankind, it behoves all mankind to do
likewise.  We have but very briefly pointed out the defects of these
religions.”^([10](#10))

Many schools of thought and religious traditions which contemporary
Hindutva ideologues and even some outside observers would readily
include in “Hinduism”, as part of the prolific offspring of the ancient
Vedic tradition, are rejected in strong terms by the Arya Samaj.  This
class of substandard varieties of Hinduism includes the Puranic
tradition and Sikhism.^([11](#11)) With even more emphasis, the Arya
Samaj rejects the *Nâstika* or non-Vedic traditions.  Chapter 12 of
*Light of Truth* is titled: “An exposition and a refutation of the
Charvaka, the Buddhistic and the Jain faiths, all of which are
atheistic”.^([12](#12))

The Charvaka (“polemicist”) sect, founded in pre-Buddhist antiquity by
one Brihaspati, can be considered a cornerstone in the spectrum of
Indian philosophies because of its radical clarity in proposing one of
the possible extremes in cosmology, viz. atheistic
materialism.^([13](#13)) The several materialistic schools of ancient
Indian philosophy have naturally been highlighted by Marxist scholars,
even with a streak of patriotic pride.^([14](#14)) The ancient Indian
atheists are also quite popular as reference among crusading
“rationalists”, i.e. people devoted to debunking claims of the
paranormal, quite active in South India.^([15](#15)) For this reason,
they belong to the pantheon of the political parties which subscribe to
“rationalism”: Dravida Kazhagam (Dravidian Federation, DK), Dravida
Munnetra Kazhagam (Dravidian Progressive Federation, DMK) and Anna
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (C. Annadurai’s Dravidian Progressive
Federation, ADMK), Tamil chauvinist parties which are (or were)
anti-Brahminical and anti-religious promoters of
“rationalism”.^([16](#16))

By contrast, since it has been extinct as a separate sect for centuries,
Indian Materialism does not figure in modern Hindutva discourse, except
as a referent to contemporary secular materialism.  It is nevertheless
part of an atheistic-agnostic doctrinal continuum to which Jainism and
Buddhism also belong, and for that reason, some references to it may
appear in the following survey of Dayananda’s argumentation.  The major
part of this critique is directed against Jainism rather than Buddhism. 
The reason for this may simply be that Dayananda was more familiar with
Jainism as a living presence in society, at a time when Buddhism was
practically extinct in India.

Contrary to Dayananda’s refutations of Christianity and Islam, his
critique of Jainism and Buddhism is limited to certain highbrow points
of philosophy, and avoids attacks on the morality of the founder or on
the humanity of the religion’s historical career.  We leave the
scholastic points on the epistemology and metaphysics of the Nastika
schools undiscussed because they are hardly relevant for the effective
relationship between the communities concerned, and because similar
differences of opinion can easily be found within Vedic Hinduism itself,
e.g. between dualist and non-dualist Vedanta.^([17](#17)) In this
section on Jainism, we will consider the general argument of religion
against atheism, of rationalism against irrational beliefs and
practices; and the argument against Shramanic sectarianism.

**7.4. Philosophical materialism in India**

Chapter 12 of the *Light of Truth* starts with the classical
counter-arguments against the equally classical arguments of atheism and
materialism.^([18](#18)) Thus, against the position that the conscious
subject (Self) dies along with the body, which makes short work of the
notions of eternal soul, afterlife or reincarnation, Dayananda develops
the well-known argument in defence of the soul as an entity separable
from the body at death: “Your so-called elements are devoid of
consciousness, therefore consciousness cannot result from their
combination.”^([19](#19)) Like begets like, so matter cannot generate
non-matter, yet non-matter (consciousness) is an observed fact of life,
*ergo* there must be an entity which exists apart from matter.  The
conscious subject is an entity separate from the body and not bound to
die along with it.^([20](#20))

We cannot hope to settle a debate on such a fundamental philosophical
question as the “mind-brain problem” here, and will be satisfied with
noting that Dayananda uses the classical argument of religious people
against this type of materialism.  The point is that his is not
necessarily the only “Hindu” position.  Indeed, those who like to argue
for the “tolerance” of Hinduism (including those Hindutva authors who
defend the position that Hinduism and fundamentalism are intrinsically
incompatible) often claim that “a Hindu can even be an atheist”.  Thus,
Balraj Madhok writes: “The theist and the atheist, the sceptic and
agnostic may all be Hindus if they accept the Hindu system of culture
and life.”^([21](#21)) On this premiss, it becomes much easier to
include atheist Jainism in Hinduism.

Surprisingly, even in the hard core of Brahmanical ritualism, we find a
strong atheist element.  The highly orthodox ritualists of the Purva
Mimamsa school developed the doctrine that the Gods, to whom sacrifices
were made in expectation of their auspicious intervention, were mere
terms used to label the unseen phase (in modern terms, the “black box”)
of the purely mechanical process which leads from the ritual performed
to the materialization of the effects desired.^([22](#22)) They were
possibly the first deliberate atheists in world history, yet they were
*Âstikas*, followers of the Veda.

Dayananda, by contrast, made it clear that he did not want to be
associated with atheists, and that the Arya Samaj was a crusading force
against atheism.  Here we are faced with the fact that Dayananda had no
intention of representing the broadest possible spectrum of Hinduism,
unlike the Hindutva movement.  He was a purist who rejected as
unauthentic or un-Aryan all the Nastika (and, at least implicitly, even
some Astika) traditions which did not conform to his own conception of
Vedic doctrine.

Against the doctrines which reject or simply ignore the notion of a
Creator-God, Dayananda argues: “Dead and inert substances cannot combine
together of their own accord and according to some design unless the
Conscious Being-God-fashions and shapes them.”^([23](#23))

At the time of his writing, it was probably too early for a provincial
Indian pandit to realize the implications of the findings of modern
science.  We see dead substances combine and recombine all the time:
even before the first life forms appeared on earth, a lot of chemical
processes took place which scientists have explained entirely in terms
of the Laws of Nature, without needing the hypothesis of divine
intervention.  At face value, Dayananda’s point seems to be close to the
medieval idea that the planets could only move because of angels pushing
them forward; but a more sophisticated reading of his view would be that
at least the first beginnings of life and of the physical processes
require some kind of divine intervention.  Ultimately, the planets and
the force of gravity which explains their motions, and more generally
all substances and the Laws of Nature which govern them, cannot have
come into being without being created by a Creator.

The claim that nothing exists without a cause, and that the world itself
must therefore have a “cause”, viz. a divine Creator, is one of the
classical proofs of the existence of God, the main proof for Muslims and
one of the five proofs given by Saint Thomas Aquinas.^([24](#24)) The
atheist counter-argument is that if an eternal entity is admitted, viz.
the one which theists call God, then the universe itself might just as
well be that eternal and uncreated entity.^([25](#25)) But Dayananda was
entirely unaware of the philosophical debates which had taken place in
the West, and was not very broadly informed even about those in India.

**7.5. The ethical argument for God**

Another argument well-known to Western debaters on the existence of God
is the ethical argument: without any kind of punishment and reward,
people will not be motivated to do good and shun evil, and since the
history of the world tells us about numerous good people ending in
misery and evil people enjoying success, the just punishment or reward
has to be meted out by God in some future life (whether in heaven or in
new incarnations).^([26](#26)) According to Dayananda: “If there were no
God (the giver of the fruits of their deeds to souls), no soul will
ever, of its own free will, suffer punishment for their
crimes.” Dayananda compares it with burglars who will not volunteer for
getting punished, “it is the law that compels them to do so; in like
manner, it is God Who makes the soul reap the fruits of its actions,
good or bad, otherwise all order will be lost; in other words, one soul
will do deeds while the other will reap the fruits thereof.”^([27](#27))

Dayananda’s argument is unlikely to convince those who hold the opposite
view. indeed, one can think up several ways in which people do “reap the
fruits of their actions” without requiring divine intervention, in a
purely mechanical way. Jains conceive of Karma as a mechanical process,
in which experiences in this life are preserved in seed form to
determine the contents of one’s next life, without any need for a
personal God who records man’s sins and metes out appropriate punishment
at some later time.  They share Dayananda’s moralistic view that any
good we do is ultimately rewarded and any evil we do is ultimately paid
for, but they are satisfied with their non-theistic model of
explanation.

Alternatively, the non-moralistic possibility should be faced that we
are *not* bound to “reap the fruits of our actions”: if you kill
someone, he definitely reaps the fruits of your action, viz. by losing
his life, and that is where the causal chain ends.  You yourself also
reap indirectly in the form of that which you wanted to take from the
murdered man (the money he carried, the shared secret which he
threatened to divulge, etc.), but you are not going to undergo
punishment for this murder unless the human law machinery catches up
with you.  It is perfectly conceivable, as indeed the Indian
Materialists hold, that there is no justice in this world except as a
human artefact, that evil is not punished nor good rewarded except (with
luck) in this lifetime by ordinary human means.^([28](#28)) 

In that case, ethical behaviour comes without future reward, whether
divine or mechanical.  Or rather, it will have to be its own reward, by
giving a feeling of serenity, peace of mind.  This approach is a lot
closer to what we can glimpse of the original Vedic conception of ethics
than the “divine punishment”-mongering which the alleged Veda
fundamentalist Dayananda offers.  The Rigveda, at least, is a very
unmoralistic book.  It praises certain virtues (generosity, truthfulness
etc.) without trying to lure anyone into practising them: those who
don’t practise them merely reveal their own ignoble character, but they
are not threatened with any divine punishment for that.  This is but one
of many occasions at which Dayananda holds theistic and moralistic
opinions which are classically enunciated not in his revered Vedas but
in the reviled Puranas and Smritis.

At any rate, anyone familiar with the old debate about the existence of
God and related fundamental questions will notice that Dayananda is not
offering any compelling argument to make committed atheists change their
minds.

**7.6. With the joins against priestcraft**

Swami Dayananda is in agreement with the Nastikas on another issue which
figures prominently in standard atheist discourse: the absurdity and
non-efficacity of funeral rites and other priestly practices.  He
welcomes the atheist argument that if one can benefit one’s ancestors in
heaven by throwing food into the fire, how come one cannot save a
relative on his journey through the desert from hunger and thirst by
similar means?^([29](#29)) Thus, “the practice of offering oblations to
the manes of departed ancestors is an invention of priests, because it
is opposed to the Vedic and Shastric teachings and finds sanction in the
Puranas (…) Yes, it is true that the priests have devised these funeral
rites from motives of pecuniary gain but, being opposed to the Vedas,
they are condemnable.”^([30](#30))

On this point, the contrast between the Arya Samaj and the contemporary
RSS Parivar is complete: whereas the latter tries to group all Hindus
and implicitly condones all existing Hindu religious practices, the
former takes objection to everything which, in its opinion, is not
well-attested in the Vedas.  Veer Savarkar rejected all superstitious
practices too, and even forbade any funeral rites for his own departed
soul, but he never waged an ideological campaign against such practices,
as this would have greatly harmed his effort to unite all Hindus.  In
the case of the RSS Parivar, the same concern for unity stands in the
way of this type of religious purism, except when it comes to
superstitions which directly affect the unity effort, most notably
untouchability, or which harm Hindu interests otherwise, e.g. the taboo
on widow remarriage with its negative effect on the Hindu birth rate.

However, the “protestant” objections to priestcraft, which are in effect
similar to Luther’s objections against Roman Catholic practices, do not
define an antagonism between Hinduism (even if limited to the Vedic
tradition) on the one and Jainism and Buddhism on the other hand.  The
antagonism between ritualists and non-ritualists cuts through both
Hinduism and the Shramanic traditions.  The shift in emphasis from Vedic
*Karmakânda* (ritual) to *Jñânakânda* (contemplation) is a central theme
of the Upanishads, while Buddhism, supposedly a revolt against empty
ritualism (among other things), had its limited array of
non-icon-centred rituals from the beginning, and soon developed its own
rich array of rituals in temples before impressive Buddha statues,
culminating in the near-suffocation of silent meditation by endless
rituals in Tibetan Tantric Buddhism.  Jainism, too, has its network of
temples where idols of the 24 Tirthankaras (“ford-makers”, founding
saints of Jainism) are venerated.

The Arya Samaj itself, though professing a decided skepticism (which
most Westerners would readily qualify as “healthy”) vis-à-vis
*mûrti-pûjâ* (idol-worship), pilgrimages and other rituals, has some
rituals of its own.  Indeed, rather than being a rationalistic rejection
of all ritual per se, it represents a restoration of Vedic ritual to the
detriment of rival ritual practices.  If the ritual of feeding the
departed souls is incapable of affecting the souls of the deceased, why
should the Arya/Vedic ritual of Homa or Agnihotra be taken to have any
effect upon any being whether living or dead?  Here, we are faced with
the common phenomenon that apologists of a religion are very
rationalistic when it comes to evaluating the supernatural claims of
rival traditions, but do not extend the same logic to an evaluation of
their own doctrine.

**7.7. Critique of Jain chronology**

Another example of the same tendency to judge others by more exacting
standards of rationality than one’s own tradition is Dayananda’s
critique of Jain chronology.  The 24 Jain Tirthankaras, among whom the
historical teacher Parshvanath is listed as 23rd and Mahavira Jina as
24th, are credited with astronomical lifetimes and body sizes, e.g. the
first in the list, Rishabhadeva (claimed to be attested in the
Vedas)^([31](#31)) was 500 dhanush (= 500 x ca. 2 metres) tall and lived
for 8,400,000 years.  Dayananda laboriously criticizes this scriptural
hyperbole, and additionally blames it for similarly grotesque claims in
the Puranas: “Let the wise consider if it is possible for any man to
have so gigantic a body and to live so long.  If the globe were
inhabited by people of such dimensions, very few would be contained in
it.  Following the example of the *Jainees*, the *Pauraniks* have
written of persons who lived for 10,000 years and even for 100,000
years.  All this is absurd and so is what the Jainees say.”^([32](#32))

True, if ever there was a human being called Rishabhadeva, he probably
lived for less than 8 million years.  But if the Jain tradition is
highly unrealistic at this point, how should we judge Dayananda’s claim
that the four Vedas were given in complete form at the time of Creation
itself?  This claim, made in accordance with a long-standing Vedic
tradition, implies a rejection of any historical interpretation of all
factual mundane data (e.g. the Battle of the Ten Kings, sung in the
Rigveda).  It necessitates forcing a universal symbolical interpretation
on mundane data such as names of rivers, mountains, places and persons,
and thereby replaces the real and complex meaning of the Vedic text with
a simplistic though elaborate *Hineininterpretieren*.  Worst of all, the
belief that a book has been in existence since millions of years, though
it was written in a historical language which only came into existence
several thousands of years ago as a dialectal development from
Proto-Indo-European, is really little better than the Jain claims about
the sizes and lifetimes of the Tirthankaras.

**7.8. Dayananda on Jain sectarianism **

Swami Dayananda rebukes the Shramanas, particularly. the Jain monks, for
keeping a haughty distance from others: “The Jains are strictly
prohibited to 1) praise a person belonging to another religion or to
talk of his good qualities, 2) to salute him, 3) to talk much to him, 4)
to talk to him frequently, 5) to bestow upon him food and clothes, 6) to
supply odoriferous substances and flowers to enable him to worship his
idol.  Let the wise consider with what feelings of hatred, malice and
hostility the Jainees are actuated in their relations with those who
profess a religion different from theirs.”^([33](#33))

Similarly: “Again, the Jain teachers teach: ‘Just as a ruby, which is
embedded in the head of a venomous snake, should not be sought after,
even so it behoves the Jainees to shun the company of a non-Jainee, no
matter how virtuous and learned he is.’ It is clear, therefore, that no
sectarians are so much biased, perverse, wrong-headed and ignorant as
the Jainees are.”^([34](#34)) Similar quotations to the same effect
include: “Let not the Jainees even look at those that are opposed to the
Jain religion.”^([35](#35))

Here, Dayananda definitely has a point.  The Shramana sects, consisting
of people who had given up all worldly responsibilities and had thereby
acquired ample leisure to concentrate on doctrinal matters, were quite
literally sectarian.  Spending a lot of their time and energy on polemic
against rival sects as well as against non-sect beliefs and practices,
they produced a polemical literature which has no counterpart in
pre-Buddhist Brahmanism.  The need, not so much of a sect’s founder but
of his followers, to set the founder apart from his contemporaries,
automatically leads to a somewhat hostile attitude towards other
traditions, specifically those closely related.  It is part of this same
tradition that contemporary Buddhists and Jains go out of their way to
magnify the differences with Hinduism.

An aspect of Jain history not considered by Dayananda, is the influence
of Islam on the Sthanakvasi branch of Jainism, founded by a Muni who
lived at the court of Mohammed Shah Tughlaq 1325-51, and on its
Terapanthi offshoot.  In imitation of Islam, these communities denounce
temple-going and idol-worship, common enough among the Shwetambara
mainstream (contrastively also known as Murtipujaka Sangha,
“image-worshipping assembly”)^([36](#36)), and from there it is but a
step to assuming that the social separatism enjoined in the passages
quoted by Dayananda is equally due to Islamic influence; that
interpretation has at least been given to me by Hindutva-minded Jains. 
In my opinion, however, the purity notion intrinsic to Jain tradition
(conceived as a need to avoid accumulating Karma) is sufficient as an
explanation for this Jain practice of keeping distance from the
uninitiated.

The allegation of haughtiness and keeping distance would of course fit
orthodox Brahmins as well as Jain sectarians, but the Arya Samaj cannot
be accused of double standards here, i.c. of neglecting to produce a
similar anti-Brahmin invective.  On the contrary, it can take a certain
dubious credit for “hinduizing” the anti-Brahmin rhetoric propagated by
Christian missionaries.  What may, however, be held against the Arya
Samaj, is that it is similarly sectarian itself, sometimes in a more
aggressive way than the Jains as per Dayananda’s description.

In the early decades of the Samaj’s existence, its more zealous
activists would disrupt traditional devotions and insult priests, with
“pope” as a common taunt for Brahmins.  Some would even go into Hindu
“idol temples” and relieve themselves right there to show their contempt
for idolatry in no uncertain terms.^([37](#37)) Dayananda’s own writing
against more traditional forms of Hinduism is very intemperate, full of
harsh words and lacking in patience and human sympathy.  Sectarianism
has made school inside Hindu society.

**7.9. Did Hindus demolish Jain temples?**

During the Ayodhya conflict, Muslim and secularist polemicists tried to
counter the Hindu argument about the thousands of Hindu temples razed by
Islamic iconoclasm with the claim that Hindus had likewise destroyed or
desecrated Buddhist and Jain temples.  While the few cases of alleged
Hindu aggression against Buddhism are either of doubtful historicity or
easily and credibly explainable from other motives than religious
intolerance, there are a few cases of conflict with Jainism which seem
more serious.  They have formed the topic of a debate between Marxist
historian Romila Thapar and Sita Ram Goel.

For a start, in the 12th century, “in Gujarat, Jainism flourished during
the reign of Kumarapala, but his successor \[i.e. Ajayapala\] persecuted
the Jainas and destroyed their temples”.^([38](#38)) According to D.C.
Ganguly: “The Jain chronicles allege that Ajayapâla was a persecutor of
the Jains, that he demolished Jain temples, mercilessly executed the
Jain scholar Ramachandra, and killed Ambada, a minister of Kumârapâla,
in an encounter.”^([39](#39))

Here, the alleged crime is related by the victims, not by the alleged
aggressors (as is usually the case for Muslim iconoclasm).  It is
possible that they exaggerated, but I see no reason to believe that they
simply invented the story.  However, since the Jains had been dominant
(“flourishing”) in the preceding period, one might suspect a case of
retaliation here.  We shall see shortly that in South India, what little
of Hindu aggression against Jainism occurred was due precisely to
earlier oppression by the Jains.

Ganguly adds that Jains had opposed Ajayapala’s accession to the throne:
“After the death of Kumârapâla in AD 1171-72 there was a struggle for
the throne between his sister’s son Pratâpamalla, who was apparently
backed by the Jains, and Ajayapâla, son of Kumârapâla’s brother
Mahîpâla, who seems to have been supported by the
Brâhmanas.”^([40](#40)) Clearly, a political intrigue is involved of
which we have not been given the full story.  Predictably, Goel
comments: “The instance she mentions from Gujarat was only the righting
of a wrong which the Jains had committed under Kumârapâla.”^([41](#41))

Next, there was the attack by the Paramara king Subhatavarman (r.
1193-1210) on Gujarat, in which “a large number of Jain temples in
Dabhoi and Cambay” were “plundered” in retaliation of plundering of
Hindu temples in Malwa by the Gujaratis during their invasion of Malwa
under Jayasimha Siddharaja (d. 1143) who was under great Jain
influence.  Harbans Mukhia cites this as proof that “many Hindu rulers
did the same \[as the Muslims\] with temples in enemy-territory long
before the Muslims had emerged as a political challenge to these
kingdoms”.^([42](#42)) However, it is well-known that the Muslims did
more than just plunder: even temples where there was nothing to plunder
were desecrated and destroyed or converted into mosques in many places,
for the Muslims’ motive was not merely economic.

The most important and well-known case of “persecution of Jains” is
mentioned by Romila Thapar: “The Shaivite saint Jnana Sambandar is
attributed with having converted the Pandya ruler from Jainism to
Shaivism, whereupon it is said that 8,000Jainas were impaled by the
king.”^([43](#43)) To this, Sita Ram Goel points out that she omits
crucial details: that this king, Arikesari Parankusa Maravarman, is also
described as having first persecuted Shaivas, when he himself was a
Jain; that Sambandar vanquished the Jainas not in battle but in debate,
which was the occasion for the king to convert from Jainism to
Shaivism (wagers in which the second or a third party promises to
convert if you win the debate are not uncommon in India’s religious
literature); and that Sambandar had escaped Jain attempts to kill
him.^([44](#44)) This Shaiva-Jaina conflict was clearly not a one-way
affair, and as per the very tradition invoked by Prof. Thapar, Jains
themselves had been the aggressors.

It is even a matter of debate whether this persecution has occurred at
all.  Nilakanth Shastri, in his unchallenged *History of South India*,
writes about it: "This, however, is little more than an unpleasant
legend and cannot be treated as history.”^([45](#45)) Admittedly, this
sounds like Percival Spear’s statement that Aurangzeb’s persecutions are
“little more than a hostile legend”^([46](#46)): a sweeping denial of a
well-attested persecution.  However, Mr. Spear’s contention is amply
disproves by contemporary documents including *firmans* (royal decrees)
and eye-witness accounts, and by the archaeological record, e.g. the
destruction of the Kashi Vishvanath temple in Varanasi by Aurangzeb is
attested by the temple remains incorporated in the Gyanvapi mosque built
on its site.  Such evidence has not been offered in the case of Jnana
Sambandar at all.  On the contrary: “Interestingly, the persecution of
Jains in the Pandya country finds mention only in Shaiva literature, and
is not corroborated by Jain literature of the same or subsequent
period.”^([47](#47))

On the other hand, the historicity of the Jain-Shaiva conflict in
general is confirmed by Shaiva references to more cases of Jain
aggression, none of which is mentioned by Romila Thapar.  Dr. Usha
Sivapriya, before duly quoting classical Tamil sources, argues that the
literatures posterior to Manikkavasaghar (an ancient Tamil sage, author
of *Thiruvasagham*) “had plenty of reference to the nature, torture and
terrorism of Jaina missionaries and rulers in Tamil
kingdom”.^([48](#48)) It all started with the invasion by Kharavela,
king of Kalinga, at the turn of the Christian era: “Kharavela defeated
the Tamil kings headed by Pandiyans and captured Madhurai. The Kalinga
or Vadugha king enforced Jaina rule in Tamil kingdom.  People were
forcibly converted at knifepoint, temples were demolished or locked
down, devotees were tortured and killed.”^([49](#49))

And it continued intermittently for centuries under Pandya and Pallava
rule: “When the Digambara Jaina missionaries had failed in converting
the masses, they tried to torture and kill them. (…) After failing in
the attempt of converting Pandiyans the Digambara Jains tried to kill
the Pandiyan Kings through various means, by sending a dangerous snake,
wild bull and mad elephant.”^([50](#50))

Dr. Sivapriya links the advent of Jainism in Tamil Nadu with an episode
of conquest by non-Tamils. Goel adds: “The persecution of Jains in the
Pandya country by some Shaivas had nothing to do with Shaivism as such,
but was an expression of a nationalist conflict which I will relate
shortly.  What 1 want to point out first is that most of the royal
dynasties which ruled in India after the breakdown of the Gupta Empire
and before the advent of Islamic invaders, were Shaiva (…). The Jains
are known to have flourished everywhere; not a single instance of the
Jains being persecuted under any of these dynasties is known. (…) M.
Arunachalam, in a monograph published eight years before Professor
Thapar delivered the lectures which comprise her pamphlet (…) has proved
conclusively, with the help of epigraphic and literary evidence, that
the Kalabhara invaders from Karnataka had occupied Tamil Nadu for 300
years (between AD 250 and 550), and that they subscribed to the
Digambara sect of Jainism.”^([51](#51))

So, this is where “nationalist” resentment against the conquerors came
to coincide with resentment against Jainism: “It so happened that some
of the Kalabhara princes were guided by a few narrow-minded Jain
ascetics, and inflicted injuries on some Shaiva and Vaishnava saints and
places of worship.  They also took away the *agrahâras* which Brahmanas
had enjoyed in earlier times.  And a reaction set in when the Kalabharas
were overthrown.  The new rulers who rose subscribed to Shaivism.  It
was then that the Jains were persecuted in some places, and some Jain
places of worship were taken over by the Shaivas under the plea that
these were Shaiva places in the earlier period.”^([52](#52))

In such cases, “Professor Thapar does not mention the Jain
high-handedness which had preceded. (... ) Professor Thapar should have
mentioned the persecution of Shaivas practised earlier by the Pandya
king who was a Jain to start with, and who later on converted to
Shaivism and persecuted the Jains.  This is another case of *suppressio
verb suggestio falsi* practised very often by her school.”^([53](#53))

To clinch the issue and confirm that the Pandya incident of persecution
of Jains is atypical and disconnected from Hindu doctrines, Goel adds:
“But the reaction was confined to the Pandya country. Jainism continued
to flourish in northern Tamil Nadu which also had been invaded by the
Kalabharas, where also the Shaivas and Vaishnavas had been molested by
the Jains, and where also the Shaivas had come to power once again.  It
is significant that though Buddhists also invite invectives in the same
Shaiva literature, no instance of Buddhists being persecuted is
recorded.  That was because Buddhists had never harmed the Shaivas.  It
is also significant that the Vaishnavas of Tamil Nadu show no bitterness
against the Jains though they had also suffered under Kalabhara
rule.”^([54](#54))

**7.10. Jains and Virashaivas**

A later offshoot of Shaivism, viz. the Virashaiva or Lingayat sect, also
showed its hostility to Jainism repeatedly.  Indeed, Prof. Thapar’s next
piece of evidence is that “inscriptions of the sixteenth century from
the Srisailam area of Andhra Pradesh record the pride taken by
Veerashaiva chiefs in beheading *shvetambara*
Jains”.^([55](#55)) Concerning such cases, she alleges that: “The desire
to portray tolerance and non-violence as the eternal values of the Hindu
tradition has led to the pushing aside of such evidence.”^([56](#56))

Now, the Veerashaivas were an anti-caste and anti-Brahminical sect.  As
these are considered good qualities, secularists have tried to link them
to the influence of Muslim missionaries (“bringing the message of
equality and brotherhood”), who were indeed very active on India’s west
coast, where and when the Veerashaiva doctrine was developed.  If we
assume there was indeed Muslim influence on the Veerashaiva sect, the
secularists should acknowledge that the Veerashaivas’ occasional acts of
intolerance may equally be due to the influence of Islam.  At any rate
“Brahminism” cannot be held guilty of any misdeeds committed by this
anti-Brahminical sect.

But it seems well-established that the Lingayats did give the Jains a
hard time on several occasions.  Prof. Thapar’s continues: “The Jaina
temples of Karnataka went through a traumatic experience at the hands of
the Lingayats or Virashaivas in the early second millennium
AD.”^([57](#57)) After a time of peaceful coexistence, which Romila
Thapar acknowledges, “one of the temples was converted into a Shaiva
temple.  At Huli, the temple of the five Jinas was converted into a
*panchalingeshwara* Shaivite temple, the five lingas replacing the five
Jinas in the sancta.  Some other Jaina temples met the same
fate.”^([58](#58))

Could this be a case of a peaceful hand-over?  Maybe the community
itself had converted and consequently decided to convert its temple as
well?  After all, the temples were not destroyed.  No, because: “An
inscription at Ablur in Dharwar eulogizes attacks on Jaina temples as
retaliation for Jaina opposition to Shaivite worship.”^([59](#59))

It may be remarked at the outset that the element of *retaliation* sets
this story apart from Christian or Islamic iconoclasm, which did not
require in any way that some form of aggression had first been committed
by the other party.  When Saint Boniface, the Christian missionary to
the Frisians and Saxons, cut down the sacred trees of the Frisians, he
was not taking revenge for any wrong committed by them against him: he
was unilaterally destroying cultic objects of what he believed to be a
false religion (in glorification of his chopping down sacred trees, he
is iconographically depicted with an axe in his hand).  When Ghaznavi
invaded India and took great strategic risks to venture as far as
Prabhas Patan and destroy the famous Somnath temple there, he was not
retaliating but unilaterally initiating an aggression.

In this case, however, the inscription cited by Prof. Thapar herself
justifies the unspecified “attacks” on Jain temples as an act of
retaliation.  This proves that either the Jains had indeed been the
first aggressors, or if they were not, that the Shaivas felt the need to
claim this: otherwise, attacking someone else’s temple didn’t feel right
to them.  Christian and Islamic iconoclasts had no such scruples.  No
Hindu revivalist historian could have mustered better evidence for the
radical difference between the alleged cases of intolerance by Hindus
and the Islamic and Christian religious persecutions, than this brief
information given in passing by Romila Thapar.

There is a second aspect to this inscriptional evidence.  Here again,
Mr. Goel accuses Prof. Thapar of distorting evidence by means of
selective quoting.  The inscription of which she summarizes a selected
part, says first of all that the dispute arose because the Jains tried
to prevent a Shaiva from worshipping his own idol.^([60](#60)) It
further relates that the Jains also promised to throw out Jina and
worship Shiva if the Shiva devotee performed a miracle, but when the
miracle was produced, they did not fulfil their promise.  In the ensuing
quarrel, the Jina idol was broken by the Shaivas.  The most significant
element is that the Jain king Bijjala decided in favour of the Shaivas
when the matter was brought before him.  He dismissed the Jains and
showered favours on the Shaivas.

Again, in this story the conflict is not a one-way affair at all.  We
need not accept the story at face value, as it is one of those sectarian
miracle stories (with the message: “My saint is holier than thy saint”)
which abound in the traditions surrounding most places of pilgrimage, be
they Christian, Sufi, or Hindu.  Goel cites the testimony of Dr. Fleet,
who has edited and translated this inscription along with four others
found at the same place.  He gives summaries of two Lingayat Puranas and
the Jain *Bijjalacharitra*, and observes that the story in this
inscription finds no support in the literary traditions of the two
sects, and that Bijjala’s own inscription dated 1162 AD discovered at
Managoli also does not support the story either.^([61](#61)) The fact
that the inscription under consideration does not bear a date or a
definite reference to the reign of a king, does not help its credibility
either.  And do authentic inscriptions deal in miracles?

I do not think that historians working with conflicting testimonies are
in a position to make apodictic statements and definitive conclusions,
so I will not completely dismiss this inscription as fantasy.  It is
possible that the Jainas had indeed fallen on hard times, and I do not
dispose of material that would refute prof. Thapar’s contention that “in
the fourteenth century the harassment of Jainas was so acute that they
had to appeal for protection to the ruling power at
Vijayanagar”.^([62](#62)) But note that the ruling power at Vijayanagar,
whose protection the Jains sought, was of course Hindu.  Clearly, the
Jains’ experience with Hindus was such that they expected Hindu rulers
to protect religious freedom and pluralism.

Not much is left of the allegation of “Hindu persecution of Jains”, and
in that light, Goel’s conclusion must be considered relatively modest:
“It is nobody’s case that there was never any conflict between the sects
and sub-sects of Sanatana Dharma.  Some instances of persecution were
indeed there.  Our plea is that they should be seen in a proper
perspective, and not exaggerated in order to whitewash or counterbalance
the record of Islamic intolerance.  Firstly, the instances are few and
far between when compared to those listed in Muslim annals.  Secondly,
those instances are spread over several millennia (…) Thirdly, none of
those instances were inspired by a theology (…) Fourthly, Jains were not
always the victims of persecution; they were persecutors as well once in
a while.  Lastly, no king or commander or saint who showed intolerance
has been a Hindu hero, while Islam has hailed as heroes only those
characters who excelled in intolerance.”^([63](#63))

And even if all the claims of a Hindu persecution of Jains had been
true, they would still not prove the non-Hindu character of Jainism. 
From the history of Christianity, Islam and Communism, great persecutors
of outsiders to their own doctrines, we know numerous instances where
the worst invective and the choicest tortures were reserved for alleged
heretics within their own fold.

**7.11. Conclusion**

At the institutional level, the Hindutva opposition to the recognition
of Jainism as a separate non-Hindu religion is largely a losing battle. 
Religious separatism has its own dynamic, feeding egos who feel more
important as leaders of a religion in its own right rather than a mere
sect within a larger tradition.  Anti-Hindu separatists are also assured
of the support of secularist bureaucracies such as the Minorities’
Commission, of the secularist media and of all the non-Hindu religious
lobbies.  All of these are eager to fragment and weaken Hindu society.

Yet, at the sociological level, the Jain community is entirely part of
Hindu society, caste and all.  Even more importantly, a great many Jains
(certainly a larger portion of the community than in the case of Sikhism
or Buddhism) come forward themselves to affirm their Hinduness. 
Historically, Jainism has always enjoyed a place under the umbrella of
Hindu pluralism, suffering clashes with southern Shaivism only a few
times when its own sectarianism had provoked the conflict.

Deciding the question whether Jainism is a sect of Hinduism requires a
proper definition of Hinduism.  The answer varies with that definition. 
If Hinduism means veneration of the Vedas, then Jainism may formally be
taken to be outside the Hindu fold, though it remains closely akin to
Hindu schools of philosophy springing from Hindu thought (particularly
Nyaya-Vaisheshika).  If Hinduism implies theism, then Jainism should
definitely be counted out; but a theistic definition of Hinduism is
highly questionable, eventhough after centuries of theistic
devotionalism, many unsophisticated Hindus would accept it.

On the other hand, if Hinduism means the actually observed variety of
religious expressions among non-Muslims and non-Christians in India,
then there is nothing in Jainism that would make it so radically
different as to fall outside this spectrum.  If Hinduism means all
traditions native to India (as per Savarkar and the original Muslim
usage), then obviously Jainism is a Hindu tradition.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a)“The Jain Community’s Memorandum to the Prime Minister”, *Muslim
India*, Nov. 1996, p.522.

[²](#2a)Subhas Dev: “Jains are Hindus”, *Organiser*, 25-5-1997.

[³](#3a)Subhas Dev: “Jains are Hindus”, *Organiser*, 25-5-1997.

[⁴](#4a)Quoted thus in *Organiser*, 9-3-1997.

[⁵](#5a)Thus quoted in *Organiser*, 9-3-1997.

[⁶](#6a)The origin of the Oswals is that in AD 564, the Rajputs of Osian
or Os, near Jodhpur, adopted Jainism along with *Vaisyadharma* (the
trader caste duties), renouncing their Kshatriya (knightly) status and
occupation, deemed incompatible with Jain non-violence.  The Agarwals
were originally, and since hoary antiquity, a republican clan in East
Panjab, the Agrashreni mentioned by the Mahabharata and by Panini, and
centred in Agrodaka (modern Agroha) and Rohtiki (modern Rohtak).

[⁷](#7a)Editor Meenakshi Jain opens the posthumous collection of her
father Girilal Jain’s columns by announcing (*The Hindu Phenomenon*,
p.v): “Girilal Jain belonged to that minority of Indian intellectuals
who welcomed the movement for the Ram temple as part of the process of
Hindu self-renewal and self-affirmation.”

[⁸](#8a)G. Jain: *The Hindu Phenomenon*, p. 24-25.

[⁹](#9a)G. Jain: *The Hindu Phenomenon*, p.26, quoting Louis Dumont:
*Homo Hierarchicus*, p. 194.

[¹⁰](#10a)Dayananda: *Light of Truth*, p.vii.

[¹¹](#11a)Criticized together in Ch.11 of Dayananda: *Light of Truth*.

[¹²](#12a)It is a different matter that Dayananda’s equation of
*“nâstika”* with “atheistic” is inaccurate.  Buddhism is agnostic rather
than atheistic, while theistic Islam can definitely be included in the
*nâstika* category because it does not pay any respect to the Veda. 
Conversely, dualist Samkhya cosmology is atheistic but not materialistic
nor nastika.

[¹³](#13a)See also the chapter “Concept of Materialism” in M.G.
Chitkara: Hindutva, p.23-32.

[¹⁴](#14a)E.g. Debiprasad Chattopadhyaya: *Lokâyata, a Study in Ancient
Indian Materialism (1959) and In Defence of Materialism in Ancient
India, a Study in Cârvâka/Lokâyata* (1989).

[¹⁵](#15a)About the Indian “rationalists”, a documentary was made by
Robert Eagle and Adam Finch (broadcast on Flemish TV: BRTN TV 1,
26-1-1997). One of their leading lights was Abraham Kovoor, whose
booklets debunking magic tricks employed by godmen or presenting the
case against astrology (e.g. *Begone Godmen!*, 1976) are fairly
popular.  Another is V.R. Narla, see e.g. his polemical book *The Truth
about the Gita*.

[¹⁶](#16a)See e.g. DK spokesman K. Veeramani’s Tamil rationalist paper
*Viduthalai*, or his attack on the Shankaracharya: *Kanchi
Sankarachariar, Saint or Sectarian?*  However, the DMK and ADMK have
moved back to religion, still the mainstream in India: “No longer the
‘rationalists’ they once were, DMK leaders are realising that when your
intention is to get votes, anti-religion ideology has to take a back
seat”, according to G.C. Shekhar: “In Search of God”, *India Today*,
28-2-1997.

[¹⁷](#17a)E.g., on Buddhist epistemology, see Dayananda: *Light of
Truth*, p.512-520.

[¹⁸](#18a)Dayananda: *Light of Truth*, p. 503-506, 525-545.

[¹⁹](#19a)Dayananda: *Light of Truth*, p. 504.

[²⁰](#20a)We may consider it beyond the present endeavour to confront
this argument with advanced scientific notions of a degree of
consciousness present in all material life-forms (the feed-back
mechanisms inherent in biological processes could be considered as a
very material form of consciousness) and even in the behaviour of
quantum-physical particles.  More immediately relevant is the fact that
modern neuro-psychologists are strongly inclined towards accepting the
materiality of consciousness: they consider thoughts as a mere function
of chemical processes in the brain, as suggested by the causal
relationship between depression and lack of vitamins, or between altered
states of consciousness and the intake of certain drugs.  See e.g. Karl
Popper & John Eccles: *The Self, and Its Brain*, and Daniel C. Dennett:
*Consciousness Explained*.

[²¹](#21a)Balraj Madhok: *Rationale of Hindu State*, p.20, with
reference to S. Radhakrishnan.

[²²](#22a)Wide e.g. Lucas Catherine: *De gelaagde religie* (Dutch: “The
layered religion”), Ch.8.

[²³](#23a)Dayananada: *Light of Truth*, p. 508.

[²⁴](#24a)However, as Immanuel Kant admitted, this proof is
inconclusive; discussed in e.g. Hubert Dethier: *Geschiedenis van het
Atheîsme* (“History of Atheism”), p.20-21.

[²⁵](#25a)As argued in Bertrand Russell: *Why I Am Not a Christian* (and
again countered in the review of that book by T.S. Eliot, etc.), and in
India by Jain and Buddhist philosophers, e.g. Dharmakirtti, see
Chandradhar Sharma: *Critical Survey of Indian Philosophy*, p. 139-140,
para “Criticism of God”.

[²⁶](#26a)E.g. figuring prominently in the historical BBC debate on God
between Frederick Copleston s.j. and Bertrand Russell, 28-1-1948,
discussed in Caroline Moorehead: *Bertrand Russell*, p.458.

[²⁷](#27a)Dayananda: *Light of Truth*, p.531. The expression “God, the
giver of the fruits of their deeds to the souls” is an allusion to the
etymology of the word *Bhagvân*, effectively “the Lord”, literally “the
share-giver”.

[²⁸](#28a)I have discussed the non-moralistic as well as the
atheist-moralistic views of Karma in my Philosophy thesis: *De
niet-retributieve Karma-leer*, Leuven 1991.

[²⁹](#29a)Dayananda: *Light of Truth*, p.507.

[³⁰](#30a)Dayananda: *Light of Truth*, p.509.

[³¹](#31a)Mention of Rishabha in the Yajurveda (“*Om nama arhato
Rishabho*…”), along with two from the Vishnu and Bhagavata Puranas, are
given as proof for the pre-Vedic antiquity of Jainism by T.K. Tukol:
*Compendium of Jainism*, p.11-12. However, the oldest mention of one
Rishabha is inside the Rigveda, and not even in the oldest part:
Rishabha, son of Vishvamitra, is listed as composer of hymns 3:13 and
3:14 to Agni; there is nothing typically Jain about these hymns.  For
all we know, the Vedic Rishabha is not the same person as the founder of
Jainism.

[³²](#32a)Dayananda: *Light of Truth*, p.578; similarly, p.577-585.

[³³](#33a)Dayananda: *Light of Truth*, p.547, quoting from the Jain
scripture Vivekasâra, p.121, without further bibliographical data.

[³⁴](#34a)Dayananda: *Light of Truth*, p.549, quoting the Jain scripture
Prakara?a Ratnâkara 2:29.

[³⁵](#35a)Dayananda: *Light of Truth* p.549, quoting Prakarana Ratnakara
2:29.

[³⁶](#36a)See P. Dundas: *The Jains*, p.66.

[³⁷](#37a)A testimony of this type of Arya Samaj activism is given by
S.R. Goel: *How I Became a Hindu*, p. 5.

[³⁸](#38a)Romila Thapar: *Cultural Transaction and Early India:
Tradition and Patronage*, p. 18.

[³⁹](#39a)D.C. Ganguly: “Northern India during the eleventh and twelfth
centuries”, in R.C. Majumdar: *The History and Culture of the Indian
People*, vol.5: *Struggle for Empire*, p.78,

[⁴⁰](#40a)D.C. Ganguly: “Northern India during the eleventh and twelfth
centuries”, in R.C. Majumdar: *The History and Culture of the Indian
People*, vol.5: *Struggle for Empire*, p.78.

[⁴¹](#41a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2 (2nd ed.), p.419-420.

[⁴²](#42a)Harbans Mukhia in R. Thapar, ed.: *Communalism and the Wilting
of Indian History*, p.34.

[⁴³](#43a)Romila Thapar: *Cultural Transaction*, p. 17.

[⁴⁴](#44a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2 (2nd ed.), p.420.

[⁴⁵](#45a)Nilakanth Sastri: *History of South India*, p.424.

[⁴⁶](#46a)Percival Spear: *A History of India*, vol.2, p.56.

[⁴⁷](#47a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temple*, vol, vol.2 (2nd ed.), p.420.

[⁴⁸](#48a)Usha Sivapriya: *True History and Time of Mgnikkavgsaghar from
His Own Work*, p-134.

[⁴⁹](#49a)Usha Sivapriya: *Mânikkavâsaghar*, p.139.

[⁵⁰](#50a)Usha Sivapriya: *Mânikkavâsaghar*, p.137-138.

[⁵¹](#51a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2 (2nd ed.), p.419, with
reference to M. Arunachalam: *The Kalabharas in the Pandiya Country and
heir Impact on the Life and Letters There*, University of Madras, 1979.

[⁵²](#52a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2 (2nd ed.), p.419-420.

[⁵³](#53a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2 (2nd ed.), p.419-420.

[⁵⁴](#54a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2 (2nd ed.), p.420.

[⁵⁵](#55a)Romila Thapar: *Cultural Transaction*, p.18, with reference to
P.B. Desai: *Jainism in South India*.

[⁵⁶](#56a)Romila Thapar: *Cultural Transaction and Early India:
Tradition and Patronage*, p.18. Note here that Veerashaivism is assumed
to be a part of Hindu tradition, as it obviously should be.  Yet, when
its initial anti-caste tendency is praised, it is often presented as an
anti-Hindu or at least non-Hindu “reaction of the non-Aryan natives
restoring their pre-Aryan deity Shiva” and the like.

[⁵⁷](#57a)Romila Thapar: *Cultural Transaction*, p.17; with reference to
P.B. Desai: Jainism in South India, p.82-83, p.401-402.

[⁵⁸](#58a)Romila Thapar: *Cultural Transaction*, p.17.

[⁵⁹](#59a)Romila Thapar: *Cultural Transaction*, p. 18.

[⁶⁰](#60a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temple*s, vol.2 (2nd ed.), p.413, with
reference to the inscription itself, reproduced in *Epigraphica Indica*,
vol.3, p.255.

[⁶¹](#61a)*Epigraphica Indica*, vol.5, p.9-23.

[⁶²](#62a)Romila Thapar: *Cultural Transaction*, p. 18.

[⁶³](#63a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2 (2nd ed.), p.422. An
evaluation of this statement presupposes some familiarity with the Hindu
critique of Islam, which is discussed in K. Elst: *Decolonizing the
Hindu Mind*, p.310 ff.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------


