+++
title = "08 CHAPTER 6 JIHAD IN INDIA’S HISTORY"

+++
**CHAPTER 6**

***JIHAD* IN INDIA’S HISTORY**

The principles of *jihAd* elaborated in countless compendia composed by
Islamic scholars, have been generalized from concrete practices of the
Prophet, and confirmed by Allah through “revelations” in the Quran.  In
turn, these principles have guided all swordsmen of Islam throughout
these fourteen countries and in many lands.

India has had a prolonged experience of *jihAd* from the day when the
first Muslim army stepped into Sindh in 712 CE and won its first
victories after suffering a number of defeats for 78 years.  Lands in
Seistan, Khurasan, Transoxiana and Afghanistan where Hindu religion and
culture had flourished for long, had been subjected to *jihAd* in
earlier years.  We are citing some of the prominent *jihAds* waged in
India by the most famous *mujAhids*.

The citations that follow are from the well-known Muslim chronicles
composed in medieval times.  The only change we have made is to replace
the word “God” by the word “Allah” in order to make the translation more
faithful.  God of the Pagan pantheon has nothing to do with Allah of the
Quran, who is only a projection of the evil in man and his baser drives
for self-aggrandisement, as is obvious from the deeds that Allah
sanctions.

**MUHAMMAD BIN QASIM (712-15 CE)**

After Muhammad bin Qasim had reduced some forts in Sindh, he wrote to
Hajjaj, his uncle and governor of Iraq: “The forts of Siwistan and Sisam
have been already taken.  The nephew of Dahir, his warriors, and
principal officers have been despatched, and the infidels converted to
Islam or destroyed.  Instead of idol temples, mosques and other places
of worship have been built, pulpits have been erected, the Khutba is
read, the call to prayers is raised, so that devotions are performed at
the stated hours. The *takbIr*^([1](#1)) and praise to the Almighty
Allah are offered every morning and evening.”^([2](#2))

**Bounties bestowed by Allah**

The narrative proceeds: “Muhammad took the fort \[of Rawar\] and stayed
there for two or three days.  He put six thousand fighting men, who were
in the fort, to the sword, and shot some with arrows.  The other
dependents and servants were taken prisoners, with their wives and
children... When the number of the prisoners was calculated, it was
found to amount to thirty thousand persons, amongst whom thirty were the
daughters of chiefs, and one of them was Rai Dahir’s sister’s daughter,
whose name was Jaisiya.  They were sent to Hajjaj.  The head of Dahir
and the fifth part of the prisoners were forwarded in charge of Ka‘ab,
son of Mharak.  When the head of Dahir, the women, and the property all
reached Hajjaj, he prostrated himself before Allah, offered
thanksgivings and praises…  Hajjaj then forwarded the head, the
umbrellas, and wealth, and the prisoners to Walid the Khalifa. When the
Khalifa of the time had read the letter, he praised Almighty Allah.  He
sold some of those daughters of the chiefs, and some he granted as
rewards... It is said that after the conquest was effected and the
affairs of the country were settled and the report of the conquest had
reached Hajjaj, he sent a reply to the following effect.  ‘O my cousin! 
I received your life-inspiring letter.  I was much pleased and overjoyed
when it reached me.  The events were recounted in an excellent and
beautiful style, and I learnt that the ways and rules you follow are
conformable to the Law.  Except that you give protection to all, great
and small alike, and make no difference between enemy and friend. Allah
says, - Give no quarter to Infidels, but cut their throats.  Then know
that this is the command of the great Allah…^([3](#3))

**Slaughter and Plunder at Brahmanabad**

“Muhammad Kasim marched from Dhalila, and encamped on the banks of the
stream of the Jalwali to the east of Brahmanabad.  He sent some
confidential messengers to Brahmanabad to invite its people to
submission and to the Muhammadan faith, to preach to them Islam, to
demand the Jizya, or poll-tax, and also to inform them that if they
would not submit, they must prepare to fight…^([4](#4))

“They sent their messengers, and craved for themselves and their
families exemption from death and captivity.  Muhammad Kasim granted
them protection on their faithful promises, but put the soldiers to
death, and took all their followers and dependents prisoners. All the
captives, up to about thirty years of age, who were able to work, he
made slaves, and put a price upon them…^([5](#5))

“When the plunder and the prisoners of war were brought before Kasim,
and enquiries were made about every captive, it was found that Ladi, the
wife of Dahir, was in the fort with two daughters of his by his other
wives.  Veils were put on their faces, and they were delivered to a
servant to keep them apart.  One-fifth of all the prisoners were chosen
and set aside; they were counted as amounting to twenty thousand in
number, and the rest were given to the soldiers. Protection was given to
the artificers, the merchants, and the common people, and those who had
been seized from those classes were all liberated.^([6](#6)) But he
(Kasim) sat on the seat of cruelty, and put all those who had fought to
the sword. It is said that about six thousand fighting men were slain,
but, according to some, sixteen thousand were killed, and the rest were
pardoned.^([7](#7))

**Rates of *Jizyah***

“Muhammad Kasim fixed a tax upon all the subjects, according to the laws
of the Prophet.  Those who embraced the Muhammadan faith were exempted
from slavery, the tribute, and the poll-tax, and from those who did not
change their creed a tax was exacted according to three grades.  The
first grade was of great men, and each of these was to pay silver, equal
to forty-eight dirams in weight, the second grade twenty-four dirams,
and the lowest grade twelve dirams.  It was ordered that all who should
become Musulmans at once should be exempted from the payment, but those
who were desirous of their old persuasion must pay the tribute and
poll-tax. Some showed an inclination to abide by their creed, and some
having resolved upon paying tribute, held by the faith of their
forefathers, but their lands and property were not taken from
them…^([8](#8))

**Hajjaj recommends Harsh Measures**

“The agriculturists in this part of the country were Jats, and they made
their submission and were granted protection.  When all these
circumstances were communicated to Hajjaj, he sent an emphatic answer,
ordering that those who showed fight should be destroyed, or that their
sons and daughters should be taken as hostages and kept. Those who
choose to submit, and in whose throats the water of sincerity
flowed,^([9](#9))were to be treated with mercy, and their property
secured to them…^([10](#10))

**Massacre at Multan**

“A mine was dug, and in two or three days the walls fell down, and the
fort of Multan was taken.  Six thousand warriors were put to death, and
all their relations and dependents were taken as slaves.  Protection was
given to the merchants, artisans and the agriculturists.  Muhammad Kasim
said the booty ought to be sent to the treasury of the Khalifa; but as
the soldiers have taken so much pains, have suffered so many hardships,
have hazarded their lives, and have been so long a time employed in
digging the mine and carrying on the war, and as the fort is now taken,
it is proper that the booty should be divided, and their dues given to
the soldiers. Then all the great and principal inhabitants of the city
assembled together, and silver to the weight of sixty thousand dirams
was distributed, and every horseman got a share of four hundred dirams
weight.”^([11](#11))

**SUBUKTIGIN (977-997 CE)**

“The Sultan therefore sharpened the sword of intention in order to make
an incursion upon his \[Jayapal’s\] kingdom, and cleanse it from
impurity and from his rejection of Islam…  The Amir marched out towards
Lamghan, which is a city celebrated for its great strength and abounding
in wealth.  He conquered it and set fire to the places in its vicinity
which were inhabited by infidels, and demolishing the idol-temples, he
established Islam in them.  He marched and captured other cities and
killed the polluted wretches, destroying the idolatrous and gratifying
the Musulmans.  After wounding and killing beyond all measure, his hands
and those of his friends became cold in counting the value of the
plundered property. On the completion of his conquest he returned and
promulgated accounts of the victories obtained for Islam, and every one,
great and small, concurred in rejoicing over this result and thanking
Allah.”^([12](#12))

**MAHMUD GHAZNAVI (997-1030 CE)**

“Sultan Mahmud at first designed in his heart to go to Sijistan, but
subsequently preferred engaging previously in a holy war against Hind,
and he distributed arms prior to convening a council on the subject, in
order to secure a blessing on his designs, of exalting the standard of
religion, of widening the plain of right, of illuminating the words of
truth, and of strengthening the power of justice.  He departed towards
the country of Hind, in full reliance on the aid of Allah, who guiding
by his light and by his power, bestowed dignity upon him, and gave him
victory in all expeditions. On his reaching Purshaur (Peshawar), he
pitched his tent outside the City…^([13](#13))

**Dealing with a Defeated Enemy**

“Noon had not arrived when the Musulmans had wreaked their vengeance on
the infidel enemies of Allah, killing 15,000 of them, spreading them
like a carpet over the ground, and making them food for beasts and birds
of prey…  The necklace was taken off the neck of Jaipal, - composed of
large pearls and shining gems and rubies set in gold, of which the value
was two hundred thousand dinars; and twice that value was obtained from
necks of those of his relatives who were taken prisoners, or slain, and
had become the food of the mouths of hyenas and vultures.  Allah also
bestowed upon his friends such an amount of booty as was beyond all
bounds and all calculation, including five hundred thousand slaves,
beautiful men and women.  The Sultan returned with his followers to his
camp, having plundered immensely, by Allah’s aid, having obtained the
victory, and thankful to Allah… This splendid and celebrated action took
place on Thursday, the 8th of Muharram, 392 H., 27th November, 1001
AD…^([14](#14))

***JihAd* preferred over Personal Comfort**

“The Sultan, contrary to the disposition of man, which induces him to
prefer a soft to a hard couch, and the splendour of the cheeks of
pomegranate-bosomed girls to well-tempered sword blades, was so offended
at the standard which Satan had raised in Hind, that he determined on
another holy expedition to that land…^([15](#15))

**Plunder Paraded**

“After this he returned to Ghazna in triumph; and, on his arrival there,
he ordered the court-yard of his palace to be covered with a carpet, on
which he displayed jewels and unbored pearls and rubies shining like
sparks, or like wine congealed with ice, and emeralds like fresh springs
of myrtle, and diamonds in size and weight like pomegranates.  Then
ambassadors from foreign countries, including the envoy from Taghan
Khan, king of Turkistan, assembled to see the wealth which they had
never yet even read of in books of the ancients…^([16](#16))

**Sack of Narain (or Nardin)**^([17](#17))

“The Sultan again resolved on an expedition to Hind, and marched towards
Narain, urging his horses and moving over ground, hard and soft, until
he came to the middle of Hind, where he reduced chiefs, who, up to that
time obeyed no master, overturned their idols, put to the sword the
vagabonds of that country, and with delay and circumspection, proceeded
to accomplish his design.  He fought a battle with the chiefs of the
infidels, in which Allah bestowed upon him much booty in property,
horses, and elephants, and the friends of Allah committed slaughter in
every hill and valley. The Sultan returned to Ghazna with all the
plunder he had obtained…^([18](#18))

**Plunder of Nandana**^([19](#19))

“After the Sultan had purified Hind from idolatry, and raised mosques
therein, he determined to invade the capital of Hind, to punish those
who kept idols and would not acknowledge the unity of Allah.  He
collected his warriors and distributed money amongst them. He marched
with a large army in the year 404 H., 1013 AD during a dark night
...^([20](#20))

“The Sultan returned, marching in the rear of this immense booty, and
slaves were so plentiful that they became very cheap; and men of
respectability in their native land, were degraded by becoming slaves of
common shopkeepers. But this is the goodness of Allah, who bestows
honours on his religion and degrades infidelity ...^([21](#21))

**Massacre at Thanesar**

“The chief of Tanesar was on this account obstinate in his infidelity
and denial of Allah.  So the Sultan marched against him with his valiant
warriors, for the purpose of planting the standards of Islam and
extirpating idolatry... The blood of the infidels flowed so copiously
that the stream was discoloured, and people were unable to drink it. 
Had not night come on and concealed the traces of their flight, many
more of the enemy would have been slain.  The victory was gained by
Allah’s grace, who has established Islam forever as the best of
religions, notwithstanding that idolators revolt against it.  The Sultan
returned with plunder which it is impossible to recount - Praise be to
Allah, the protector of the world, for the honour he bestows upon Islam
and Musulmans!...^([22](#22))

**Allah at Asni**

“When Chandal^([23](#23)) heard of the advance of the Sultan, he lost
his heart from excess of fright, and as he saw death with its mouth open
towards him, there was no resource to him but flight.  The Sultan
ordered therefore that his five forts should be demolished from their
foundations, the inhabitants buried in their ruins, and imprisoned.  The
Sultan, when he heard of the flight of Chandal, was sorely afflicted,
and turned his horse’s head towards Chand Rai, one of the greatest men
in Hind, who reigned in the fort of Sharwa \[Siraswa\]…^([24](#24))

**Slaughter at Siraswa**^([25](#25))

“The Sultan summoned the most religiously disposed of his followers, and
ordered them to attack the enemy immediately.  Many infidels were
consequently slain or taken prisoners in this sudden attack, and the
Musulmans paid no regard to the booty till they had satiated themselves
with the slaughter of the infidels and worshippers of the sun and fire. 
The friends of Allah searched the bodies of the slain for three whole
days, in order to obtain booty... The booty amounted in gold and silver,
rubies and pearls, nearly to three thousand thousand dirhams, and the
number of prisoners may be conceived from the fact, that each was sold
for from two to ten dirhams.  These were afterwards taken to Ghazna, and
merchants came from distant cities to purchase them, so that the
countries of Mawarau-n nahr, Irak and Khurasan were filled with them,
and the fair and the dark, the rich and the poor, were commingled in one
common slavery.”^([26](#26))

**MUHAMMAD GHURI (1173-1206 CE)**

The editor introduces Muhammad Ghuri in the *Taj-ul-Maasir* of Hasan
Nizami as follows: “After dwelling on the advantage and necessity of
holy wars, without which the fold of Muhammad’s flock could never be
filled, he says that such a hero as these obligations of religion
require has been found, ‘during the reign of the lord of the world
Mu‘izzu-d dunya wau-d din, the Sultan of Sultans, Abu-l Muzaffar
Muhammad bin Sam bin Husain… the destroyer of infidels and
plural-worshippers etc.,’ and that Almighty Allah had selected him from
amongst the kings and emperors of the time, ‘for he had employed himself
in extirpating the enemies of religion and the state, and had deluged
the land of Hind with the blood of their hearts, so that to the very day
of resurrection travellers would have to pass over pools of gore in
boats, - had taken every fort and stronghold which he attacked, and
ground its foundations and pillars to powder under the feet of fierce
and gigantic elephants, - had sent the whole world of idolatry to the
fire of hell, by the well-watered blade of his Hindi sword, - had
founded mosques and colleges in the places of images and
idols’.”^([27](#27))

The narrative proceeds: “Having equipped and set in order the army of
Islam, and unfurled the *standards of victory and the flags of power*,
trusting in the *aid of the Almighty*, he proceeded towards
Hindustan...^([28](#28))

**Islam imposed on Ajmer**

“Such was the man^([29](#29)) who was sent on an *embassy* to Ajmir, in
order that the Rai (Pithaura) of that *country* might see the right way
without the *intervention* of the sword, and that he might incline from
*the track of opposition into the path of propriety*, leaving his *airy*
follies for the *institutes* of the knowledge of Allah, and
acknowledging the *expediency of uttering the words of martyrdom and
repeating the precepts of* the law, and might abstain from *infidelity
and darkness*, which entails *the loss of this world and that to come*,
and might place in his ear *the ring* of slavery to the *sublime* Court
(*may Allah exalt it!*) which is *the centre of justice and mercy, and
the pivot of the Sultans of the worldand* by these *means and modes
might cleanse the fords of good life from the sins of
impurity*…^([30](#30))

“The army of Islam was completely victorious, and ‘an hundred thousand
grovelling Hindus swiftly departed to the fire of hell’... After this
great victory, the army of Islam marched forward to Ajmir, where it
arrived at a fortunate moment and under an auspicious bird, and obtained
so much booty and wealth, that you might have said that the secret
depositories of the seas and hills had been revealed.

“While the Sultan remained at Ajmir, he destroyed the pillars and
foundations of the idol temples, and built in their stead mosques and
colleges, and the precepts of Islam, and the customs of the law were
divulged and established…^([31](#31))

**Quth-ud-din “cleanses” Kohram**

“The Government of the fort of Kohram and of Samana was made over by the
Sultan to Kutbu-d din... \[who\] by the aid of his sword of Yemen and
dagger of India became established in independent power over the
countries of Hind and Sind… He purged by his sword the land of Hind from
the filth of infidelity and vice, and freed the whole of that country
from the thorn of God-plurality, and the impurity of idol-worship, and
by his royal vigour and intrepidity, left not one temple
standing…^([32](#32))

**Destruction and Conversion of Temples at Delhi**

“The conqueror entered the city of Delhi, which is the source of wealth
and the foundation of blessedness.  The city and its vicinity was freed
from idols and idol-worship, and in the sanctuaries of the images of the
Gods, mosques were raised by the worshippers of one Allah…^([33](#33))

“Kutub-d-din built the Jami Masjid at Delhi, and ‘adorned it with the
stones and gold obtained from the temples which had been demolished by
elephants,’ and covered it with ‘inscriptions in Toghra, containing the
divine commands.’…^([34](#34))

**Iconoclasm at Varanasi**

“From that place the royal army proceeded towards Benares ‘which is the
centre of the country of Hind, and here they destroyed nearly one
thousand temples, and raised mosques on their foundations; and the
knowledge of the law became promulgated, and the foundations of religion
were established.’…^([35](#35))

***GhAzis* in Gujarat**

“In the middle of the month of Safar, 593 H. (Jan. 1197), the
world-conquering Khusru departed from Ajmir, and with every description
of force turned his face towards the annihilation of the Rai of
Nahrwala.... A severe action ensued from dawn to mid-day when ‘the army
of idolatry and damnation turned its back in flight from the line of
battle.  Most of their leaders were taken prisoners, and nearly fifty
thousand infidels were despatched to hell by the sword, and from the
heaps of the slain, the hills and the plains became of one level... More
than twenty thousand slaves, and twenty elephants, and cattle and arms
beyond all calculation, fell into the hands of victors.’ You would have
thought that the treasures of the kings of all the inhabited world had
come into their possession…^([36](#36))

***Kalima* comes to Kalinjar**

“The fort of Kalinjar which was celebrated throughout the world for
being as strong as the wall of Alexander was taken.  ‘The temples were
converted into mosques and abodes of goodness and the calculations of
the bead-counters and the voices of the summoners to prayer ascended to
the highest heaven, and the very name of idolatry was
annihilated... Fifty thousand men came under the collar of slavery, and
the plain became black as pitch with Hindus.’ Elephants and cattle, and
countless arms also, became the spoil of the victors…^([37](#37))

**“Purification” of Delhi**

“The Sultan then returned^([38](#38)) to Delhi, ‘which is the capital of
prosperity and the place of glory,’ and after his arrival, ‘not a
vestige or name remained of the idol temples which had reared their
heads on high; and the light of faith shone out from the darkness of
infidelity, like the sun from a curtain of sorrow, or after its emerging
from an eclipse, and threw its shade over the provinces of Hind and
Sind, the far and near countries of idolatry; and the moon of religion
and the State became resplendent from the heaven of prosperity and
glory’.”^([39](#39))

**ALAUDDIN KHILJI (1296-1316 CE)**

“When Sultan Alau-d din, the Sultan of Delhi, was well established in
the centre of his dominion and had cut off the heads of his enemies and
slain them, the vein of the zeal of religion beat high for the
subjection of infidelity and destruction of idols, and in the month of
Zi’l-hijja 698 H. (1298 AD) his brother Malik Mu’izzu-d din and
Nusrat Khan, the chief pillar of the state and the leader of his armies,
a generous and intelligent warrior, were sent to Kambayat,^([40](#40))
the most celebrated of the cities of Hind in population and wealth… With
a view of holy war, and not for the lust of conquest, he enlisted under
their banners about 14,000 cavalry and 20,000 infantry, which in their
language, are called *dakk*.^([41](#41))

***GhAzis* visit Gujarat Again**

“They went by daily marches through the hills, from stage to stage, and
when they arrived at their destination at early dawn they surrounded
Kambayat and the idolaters were awakened from their sleepy state of
carelessness and were taken by surprise, not knowing where to go, and
mothers forgot their children and dropped them from their embrace.  The
Muhammadan forces began to ‘kill and slaughter on the right and on the
left unmercifully, throughout the impure land, for the sake of Islam,’
and blood flowed in torrents. They plundered gold and silver to an
extent greater than can be conceived, and an immense number of brilliant
precious stones, such as pearls, diamonds, rubies, and emeralds, etc. as
well as a great variety of cloths, both silk and cotton, stamped,
embroidered, and coloured.^([42](#42))

**Plunder and Iconoclasm**

“They took captive a great number of handsome and elegant maidens,
amounting to 20,000, and children of both sexes, ‘more than the pen can
enumerate’... In short, the Muhammadan army brought the country to utter
ruin, and destroyed the lives of the inhabitants, and plundered the
cities, and captured their off-spring, so that many temples were
deserted and the idols were broken and trodden under foot, the largest
of which was one called Somnat… The fragments were conveyed to Delhi,
and the entrance of the Jami Masjid was paved with them, that people
might remember and talk of this brilliant Victory.”^([43](#43))

**Allah appears in South India**

“The tongue of the sword of the Khalifa of the time, which is the tongue
of the flame of Islam, has imparted light to the entire darkness of
Hindustan by the illumination of its guidance... On the other side, so
much dust arose from the battered temple of Somnat that even the sea was
not able to lay it, and on the right hand and on the left hand the army
has conquered from sea to sea, and several capitals of the gods of the
Hindus, in which Satanism has prevailed since the time of the Jinns,
have been demolished. All these impurities of infidelity have been
cleansed by the Sultan’s destruction of idol-temples, beginning with his
first holy expedition against Deogir,^([44](#44))so that the flames of
the light of the law illumine all these unholy countries, and places for
the criers to prayer are exalted on high, and prayers are read in
mosques.  Allah be praised!…^([45](#45))

“On Sunday, the 23rd, after holding a council of chief officers, he
\[Malik Kafur, converted Hindu and commander of the Muslim army\] took a
select body of cavalry with him and pressed on against Billal Deo, and
on the 5th of Shawwal reached the fort of Dhur Sammund^([46](#46)) after
a difficult march of twelve days over the hills and valleys, and through
thorny forests.  ‘The fire-worshipping’ Rai, when he learnt that ‘his
idol-temple was likely to be converted into a mosque,’ despatched Kisu
Mal… The commander replied that he was sent with the object of
converting him to Muhammadanism, or of making him a *zimmi*, and subject
to pay tax, or of slaying him if neither of these terms were assented
to. When the Rai received this reply, he said he was ready to give up
all he possessed, except his sacred thread.”^([47](#47))

**TIMUR (1398-99 CE)**

“About this time there arose in my heart the desire to lead an
expedition against the infidels, and to become a *ghAzi*; for it had
reached my ears that the slayer of infidels is a *ghAzi*, and if he is
slain he becomes a martyr.  It was on this account that I formed this
resolution, but I was undetermined in my mind whether I should direct my
expedition against the infidels of China or against the infidels and
polytheists of India.  In this matter I sought an omen from the Kuran,
and the verse I opened upon was this, ‘O Prophet, make war upon infidels
and unbelievers, and treat them with severity.’^([48](#48)) My great
officers told me that the inhabitants of Hindustan were infidels and
unbelievers. In obedience to the order of Almighty Allah I ordered an
expedition against them…^([49](#49))

‘Then the Prince Muhammad Sultan said: ‘The whole country of India is
full of gold and jewels, and in it there are seventeen mines of gold and
silver, diamond and ruby and emerald and tin and steel and copper and
quicksilver, etc., and of the plants which grow there are those fit for
making wearing apparel, and aromatic plants, and the sugar-cane, and it
is a country which is always green and verdant, and the whole aspect of
the country is pleasant and delightful. Now, since the inhabitants are
chiefly polytheists and infidels and idolators and worshippers of the
sun, by the order of Allah and his prophet, it is right for us to
conquer them.’^([50](#50))

**Ulema and Sufis advocate *JihAd* against Hindus**

“Some of the nobles said, ‘By the favour of Almighty Allah we may
conquer India, but if we establish ourselves permanently therein, our
race will degenerate and our children will become like the natives of
those regions, and in a few generations their strength and valour will
diminish.’ The *amirs* of regiments (*kushunat*) were disturbed at these
words, but I said to them, ‘My object in the invasion of Hindustan is to
lead an expedition against the infidels that, according to the law of
Muhammad (upon whom and his family be the blessing and peace of Allah),
we may convert to the true faith the people of that country, purify the
land itself from the filth of infidelity and polytheism; and that we may
overthrow their temples and idols and become *ghAzis* and *mujAhids*
before Allah.’ They gave an unwilling consent, but I placed no reliance
upon them.  At this time the wise men of Islam came before me, and a
conversation began about the propriety of a war against infidels and
polytheists; they gave it as their opinion that it is the duty of the
Sultan of Islam, and all the people who profess that ‘there is no god
but Allah, and Muhammad is the prophet of Allah,’ for the sake of
preserving their religion and strengthening their law, to exert their
utmost endeavour for the suppression of the enemies of their faith.  And
it is the duty of every Muslim and true believer to use his utmost
exertions in obedience to his ruler.  When the edifying words of the
wise men reached the ears of the nobles, all their hearts were set upon
a holy war in Hindustan, and throwing themselves on their knees, they
repeated the Chapter of Victory.^([51](#51))

“When I girded up my loins for the expedition, I wrote to Hazrat Shaikh
Zainu-d-din^([52](#52)) to the effect that I had determined on a
religious expedition to Hindustan.  He wrote in the margin of my
letter:  ‘Be it known to Abu-1-Ghazi Timur (whom may Allah assist) that
great prosperity in this world and the next will result to you from this
undertaking, and you will go and return in safety.’ He also sent me a
large sword which I made my scepter…^([53](#53))

***Kalima* comes to Kator**

“The ruler of Kator^([54](#54)) had a fort, on one side of which was a
river, and beyond the river a lofty mountain reaching down to the water…
When I advanced into the neighbourhood of the fort I did not perceive a
trace of the infidels, and when I came to the place itself I saw that
they had abandoned it and fled.  I obtained a booty of many sheep and
some other things here, and ordered that they should set fire to the
houses and buildings of the city, in the midst of which the fort was
built, and that they should level it with the ground.  Then crossing the
river in haste and pursuing the track of the enemy, I reached the skirts
of the mountain on the top of which the infidels had taken up their
position in defiles and other strong places.  I immediately gave orders
to my valiant and experienced troops to ascend.  Raising their war-cry
and shouting the *takbIr*, they rushed to the attack…  They all proved
their zeal for Islam on the unbelieving foe, and having overpowered the
infidels they put many of them to death and took possession of their
fastnesses.  Only a few of the enemy succeeded in sheltering themselves,
wounded and worn out with fatigue, in their caverns. I sent Ak Sultan to
them with the message that if they would consent to submit
unconditionally and would all become Musulmans and repeat the creed, I
grant them quarter, but otherwise I would exterminate them to a
man... They all proffered submission, and repeating the necessary
formula, embraced the Muhammadan faith…^([55](#55))

**Blessings from Baba Farid**

“I was informed that the blessed tomb of Hazrat Shaikh Farid Ganj-shakar
(whom may Allah bless) was in this city \[Ajodhan\], upon which I
immediately set out on pilgrimage to it. I repeated the *Fatiha*, and
the other prayers, for assistance, etc., and prayed for victory from his
blessed spirit, and distributed large sums in alms and charity among the
attendants on the holy shrine.^([56](#56)) I left Ajodhan on Wednesday,
the 26th of the month on my march to Bhatnir.^([57](#57))The raja of
that place was called Dul Chain.  He had assembled a body of *Rajputs*,
a class which supplies the most renowned soldiers of India, and with
these he waited ready to do battle…^([58](#58))

**Butchery at Bhatnir**

“So in all directions the brave warriors of Islam attacked the infidels
with lion-like fury, until at length by the grace of Allah, victory
beamed upon the efforts of my soldiers.  In a short space of time all
the people in the fort were put to the sword, and in the course of one
hour the heads of ten thousand infidels were cut off.  The sword of
Islam was washed in the blood of the infidels, and all the goods and
effects, the treasure and the grain which for many a long year had been
stored in the fort, became the spoil of my soldiers.  They set fire to
the houses and reduced them to ashes, and they razed the buildings and
the fort to the ground.  When this victory had been accomplished I
returned to my tent.  All the princes and *amirs* waited upon me to
congratulate me upon the conquest and upon the enormous booty which had
fallen into my hands. It was all brought out and I distributed it among
my brave *amirs* and soldiers.^([59](#59))

**Slaughter at Sirsa**

“When I made inquiries about the city of Sarsuti,^([60](#60))  I was
informed that the people of the place were strangers to the religion of
Islam, and that they kept hogs in their houses and ate the flesh of
those animals.  When they heard of my arrival, they abandoned their
city. I sent my cavalry in pursuit of them, and a great fight ensued. 
All these infidel Hindus were slain, their wives and children were made
prisoners, and their property and goods became the spoil of the
victors. The soldiers then returned, bringing with them several thousand
Hindu women and children who became Muhammadans, and repeated the
creed…^([61](#61))

***JihAd* against the Jats**

“It was again brought to my knowledge that these turbulent Jats were as
numerous as ants or locusts... They had now taken fright, and had gone
into jungles and deserts hard to penetrate.  My great object in invading
Hindustan had been to wage a religious war against the infidel Hindus,
and it now appeared to me that it was necessary for me to put down these
*Jats*. On the 9th of the month I despatched the baggage from
Tohana,^([62](#62)) and on the same day I marched into the jungles and
wilds, and slew 2,000 demon-like *Jats*.  I made their wives and
children captives, and plundered their cattle and property… On the same
day a party of *saiyids*, who dwelt in the vicinity, came with courtesy
and humility to wait upon me and were very graciously
received.^([63](#63))In my reverence for the race of the prophet, I
treated their chiefs with great honour…^([64](#64))

**Selective Slaughter and Pillage at Loni**

“On the 29th I again marched and reached the river Jumna. On the other
side of the river I descried a fort, and upon making inquiry about it, I
was informed that it consisted of a town and fort, called
Loni^([65](#65))…  I determined to take that fort at once…  Many of the
*Rajputs* placed their wives and children in their houses and burned
them, then they rushed to the battle and were killed.  Other men of the
garrison fought and were slain, and a great many were taken prisoners. 
Next day I gave orders that the Musalman prisoners should be separated
and saved, but that the infidels should all be despatched to hell with
the proselyting sword. I also ordered that the houses of the *saiyids,
shaikhs* and learned Musulmans should be preserved but that all the
other houses should be plundered and the fort destroyed.  It was done as
I directed and a great booty was obtained…^([66](#66))

**A Hundred Thousand Hindus slaughtered in One Day**

“Next day, Friday the 3rd of the month. I left the fort of Loni and
marched to a position opposite to Jahan-numa^([67](#67)) where I
encamped…  I now held a Court…  At this Court Amir Jahan Shah and Amir
Sulaiman Shah and other *amirs* of experience, brought to my notice
that, from the time of entering Hindustan up to the present time, we had
taken more than 100,000 infidels and Hindus prisoners, and that they
were all in my camp.  On the previous day, when the enemy’s forces made
the attack upon us, the prisoners made signs of rejoicing, uttered
imprecations against us, and were ready, as soon as they heard of the
enemy’s success, to form themselves into a body, break their bonds,
plunder our tents, and then to go and join the enemy, and so increase
his numbers and strength. I asked their advice about the prisoners, and
they said that on the great day of battle these 100,000 prisoners could
not be left with the baggage, and that it would be entirely opposed to
the \[Islamic\] rules of war to set these idolaters and foes of Islam at
liberty.  In fact, no other course remained but that of making them all
food for the sword. When I heard these words I found them in accordance
with the rules of war, and I directly gave my command for the
*tawAchis*^([68](#68)) to proclaim throughout the camp that every man
who had infidel prisoners was to put them to death and whoever neglected
to do so should himself be executed and his property given to the
informer.  When this order became known to the *ghAzis* of Islam, they
drew their swords and put their prisoners to death. 100,000 infidels,
impious idolaters, were on that day slain. Maulana Nasiru-d-din ‘Umar, a
counsellor and man of learning, who, in all his life, had never killed a
sparrow, now, in execution of my order, slew with his sword fifteen
idolatrous Hindus,^([69](#69)) who were his captives…^([70](#70))

**Selective Slaughter and Pillage at Delhi**

“On the 16th of the month some incidents occurred which led to the sack
of the city of Delhi, and to the slaughter of many of the infidel
inhabitants… The Hindus set fire to their houses with their own hands,
burned their wives and children in them, and rushed into the fight and
were killed… On that day, Thursday, and all the night of Friday, nearly
15,000 Turks were engaged in slaying, plundering, and destroying… The
following day, Saturday, the 17th, all passed in the same way, and the
spoil was so great that each man secured from fifty to a hundred
prisoners - men, women, and children.  There was no man who took less
than twenty.  The other booty was immense in rubies, diamonds, pearls
and other gems; jewels of gold and silver, *ashrafis, tankas* of gold
and silver of the celebrated ‘Alai coinage; vessels of gold and silver;
and brocades and silks of great value. Gold and silver ornaments of the
Hindu^([71](#71)) women were obtained in such quantities as to exceed
all account. Excepting the quarter of the *saiyids*, the ‘*ulama* and
the other Musulmans, the whole city was sacked…^([72](#72))

**A *MujAhid* knows no Rest**

“I had been at Delhi fifteen days, which time I had passed in pleasure
and enjoyment, holding royal Courts and giving great feasts. I then
reflected that I had come to Hindustan to war against infidels, and my
enterprise had been so blessed that wherever I had gone I had been
victorious. I had triumphed over my adversaries. I had put to death some
*lacs* of infidels and idolaters, and I had stained my proselyting sword
with the blood of the enemies of the faith. Now this crowning victory
had been won, and I felt that I ought not to indulge in ease but rather
to exert myself in warring against the infidels of
Hindustan…^([73](#73))

***JihAd* along the Jamuna**

“On the 1st Jumada-l-awwal I placed the left wing of the army under the
command of Amir Jahan Shah, with orders to march up the Jumna, to take
every fort and town and village he came to, and to put all the infidels
of the country to the sword.  The *amir* led off his army to execute my
commands… My brave fellows pursued and killed many of them, made their
wives and children prisoners, plundered their property and goods, and
secured a vast number of cows and buffalos. When by the favour of Allah,
I had secured this victory, I got off my horse and prostrated myself on
the ground to pay my thanks…^([74](#74))

“Pressing on with all haste I passed the jungles and thickets, and
arrived in front of the infidels \[at Kutila\].^([75](#75)) After a
slight resistance the enemy took flight, but many of them fell under the
swords of my soldiers.  All the wives and children of the infidels were
made prisoners, and their property and goods, gold, money and grain,
horses, camels (*shutur*), cows and buffaloes in countless numbers, fell
as spoil into the hands of my soldiers. Satisfied with this rout of the
enemy, I said the afternoon prayers in public in that desert, and I
returned thanks to Allah…^([76](#76))

**Slaughter at Hardwar**

“My brave men displayed great courage and daring; they made their swords
their banners, and exerted themselves in slaying the foe (during a
bathing festival on the bank of the Ganges).  They slaughtered many of
the infidels, and pursued those who fled to the mountains.  So many of
them were killed that their blood ran down the mountains and plain, and
thus (nearly) all were sent to hell.  The few who escaped, wounded,
weary, and half dead, sought refuge in the defiles of the hills. Their
property and goods, which exceeded all computation, and their countless
cows and buffaloes, fell as spoil into the hands of my victorious
soldiers.^([77](#77))

**Allah’s Bloodlust Satisfied**

“When I was satisfied with the destruction I had dealt out to the
infidels, and the land was cleansed from the pollution of their
existence, I turned back victorious and triumphant, laden with spoil. 
On that same day I crossed the Ganges, and said my mid-day prayers in
the congregation, on the banks of that river.  I prostrated myself in
humble thanks to Allah, and afterwards again mounting my horse, marched
five miles down the river and then encamped.  It now occurred to my mind
that I had marched as a conqueror from the river Sind to Delhi, the
capital of the kings of India.  I had put the infidels to the edge of
the sword on both sides of my route, and had scoured the land… I had
crossed the rivers Ganges and Jumna, and I had sent many of the
abominable infidels to hell, and had purified the land from their foul
existence. I rendered thanks to Almighty Allah that I had accomplished
my undertaking, and had waged against the infidels that holy war I had
resolved upon; then I determined to turn my course towards Samarkand, my
capital and paradise.^([78](#78))

**Plunder is Mothers’ Milk to Musalmans**

“Amir Sulaiman Shah… and other *amirs*… said: ‘So long as we your
servants, are able to move hand and foot, we will execute your orders...
and (you) should now order us to march against the infidels of the
Siwalik,^([79](#79)) and to rout and destroy them.’ I replied: ‘My
principal object in coming to Hindustan and in undergoing all this toil
and hardship, has been to accomplish two things.  The first was to war
with the infidels, the enemies of the Muhammadan religion; and by this
religious warfare to acquire some claim to reward in the life to come. 
The other was a worldly object; that the army of Islam might gain
something by plundering the wealth and valuables of the infidels:
plunder in war is as lawful as their mothers’ milk to Musulmans who war
for their faith, and the consuming of that which is lawful is a means of
grace.^([80](#80))

**Sword of Islam in the Siwalik**

“On the 10th Jumada-l-awwal I mounted my horse and drew my sword,
determined on fighting the infidels of the Siwalik… The infidel
*gabrs*^([81](#81)) were dismayed at the sight, and took to flight.  The
holy warriors pursued them, and made heaps of slain.  A few Hindus, in a
wretched plight, wounded and half dead, escaped, and hid themselves in
holes and caves. An immense spoil beyond all compute, in money, goods
and articles, cows and buffaloes, fell into the hands of my soldiers. 
All the Hindu women and children in the valley were made
prisoners.^([82](#82))

“On the following day, the 14th Jumada-I-awwal, I crossed the river
Jumna with the baggage, and encamped in another part of the Siwalik
hills.  Here I learned that in this part of the Siwalik there was a
*raja* of great rank and power, by name Ratan Sen…  In the front of this
valley Raja Ratan Sen had drawn out his forces.  At the first onset, the
Hindus broke and fled, and my victorious soldiers pursued, slashing
their swords killing many of the fugitives, and sending them to hell. 
Only a few of them escaped, wounded and dispirited, and hiding
themselves like foxes in the woods, thus saved their lives. When the
soldiers gave up killing the infidels, they secured great plunder in
goods and valuables, prisoners and cattle.  No one of them had less than
one or two hundred cows, and ten or twenty slaves - the other plunder
exceeded all calculation.^([83](#83))

**“Holy Warriors” at Kangra**

“When I entered the valley on that side of the Siwalik, information was
brought to me about the town (*shahr*) of Nagarkot,^([84](#84)) which is
a large and important town of Hindustan and situated in these
mountains…  I instantly ordered Amir Jahan Shah, whom I had sent to the
front with the forces of the left wing and the army of Khurasan, to
attack the enemy.  The *amir*, in obedience to my order, advanced and
charged the enemy.  At the very first charge the infidels were defeated
and put to flight.  The holy warriors, sword in hand, dashed among the
fugitives, and made heaps of corpses. Great numbers were slain, and a
vast booty in goods and valuables, and prisoners and cattle in countless
numbers, fell into the hands of the victors who returned triumphant and
loaded with spoil.”^([85](#85))

**BABUR (1519-1530 CE)**

Babur, the founder of the Mughal dynasty of Islamic invaders in India,
earned his title of a *mujAhid* when he stormed the small Hindu
principality of Bajaur in the North-West Frontier Province at the start
of his first invasion of India in 1519 CE.  He describes the scene in
his autobiography with great glee.

**Drinking Party amidst Dead Bodies**

“As the Bajauris were rebels and at enmity with the people of Islam, and
as, by reason of the heathenish and hostile customs prevailing in their
midst, the very name of Islam was rooted out from their tribe, they were
put to general massacre and their wives and children were made captive. 
At a guess more than 3000 men went to their death; as the fight did not
reach to the eastern side of the fort, a few got away there.  The fort
taken, we entered and inspected it.  On the walls, in houses, streets
and alleys, the dead lay, in what numbers!  Corners and goers to and
from were passing over the bodies…  With mind easy about the important
affairs of the Bajaur fort, we marched, on Tuesday the 9th of Muharram,
one kuroh (2m) down the dale of Bajaur and ordered that a tower of heads
should be set up on the rising ground.^([86](#86))On Wednesday the 10th
of Muharram, we rode out to visit the Bajaur fort.  There was a
wine-party in Khawaja Kalan’s house, several goat-skins of wine having
been brought.”^([87](#87))

**The Quran sustains the *JihAd* by Babur**

The famous battle he fought in 1527 CE with the Rajput Confederacy led
by Maharana Sangram Singh of Mewar, was hailed as a *jihAd* by Babur. 
In his description of this contest, we find him quoting copiously from
the Quran.

“On Monday the 9th of the first Jumada, we got out of the suburbs of
Agra, on our journey (*safar*) for the Holy War, and dismounted in the
open country, where we remained three or four days to collect our army
and be its rallying-point…^([88](#88))

“On this occasion I received a secret inspiration and heard an
infallible voice say: ‘*Is not the time yet come unto those who believe,
that their hearts should humbly submit to the admonition of Allah, and
that truth which hath been revealed*?’^([89](#89))Thereupon we set
ourselves to extirpate the things of wickedness…^([90](#90))

“Above all, adequate thanks cannot be rendered for a benefit than which
none is greater in the world and nothing is more blessed, in the world
to come, to wit, victory over most powerful infidels and dominion over
wealthiest heretics, ‘*these are the unbelievers, the
wicked.*’^([91](#91))In the eyes of the judicious, no blessing can be
greater than this…^([92](#92))

“Previous to the rising in Hindustan of the Sun of dominion and the
emergence there of the light of the Shahansha’s (i.e. Babur’s) Khalifate
the authority of that execrated pagan (Sanga) - *at the Judgment Day he
shall have no friend*^([93](#93)) - was such that not one of all the
exalted sovereigns of this wide realm, such as the Sultan of Delhi, the
Sultan of Gujarat and the Sultan of Mandu, could cope with this
evil-dispositioned one, without the help of other pagans…^([94](#94))

“Ten powerful chiefs, each the leader of a pagan host, uprose in
rebellion, as smoke rises, and linked themselves, as though enchained,
to that perverse one (Sanga); and this infidel decade who, unlike the
blessed ten, uplifted misery-freighted standards which *denounce unto
them excruciating punishment*,^([95](#95)) had many dependents, and
troops, and wide-extended lands…^([96](#96))

“The protagonists of the royal forces fell, like divine destiny, on that
one-eyed Dajjal who to understanding men, shewed the truth of the
saying, *When Fate arrives, the eye becomes blind*, and setting before
their eyes the scripture which saith, *whosoever striveth to promote the
true religion, striveth for the good of his own soul*,^([97](#97))they
acted on the precept to which obedience is due, *Fight against infidels
and hypocrites*^([98](#98))…^([99](#99))

‘The pagan right wing made repeated and desperate attack on the left
wing of the army of Islam, falling furiously on the holy warriors,
possessors of salvation, but each time was *made to turn back
or, smitten with the arrows of victory, was made to descend into Hell,
the house of perdition: they shall be thrown to bum therein, and an
unhappy dwelling shall it be*.^([100](#100)) Then the trusty amongst the
nobles, Mumin Ataka and Rustam Turkman betook themselves to the rear of
the host of darkened pagans…^([101](#101))

“At the moment when the holy warriors were heedlessly flinging away
their lives, they heard a secret voice say, *Be not dismayed, neither be
grieved, for, if ye believe, ye shall be exalted above the
unbelievers*,^([102](#102)) and from the infallible Informer heard the
joyful words, *Assistance is from Allah, and a speedy victory!  And do
thou bear glad tiding to true believers*.^([103](#103)) Then they fought
with such delight that the plaudits of the saints of the Holy Assembly
reached them and the angels from near the Throne, fluttered round their
heads like moths…^([104](#104))

**Towers of Hindu Heads**

“And victory the beautiful woman (*shAhid*) whose world-adornment of
waving tresses was embellished by *Allah will aid you with a mighty
aid*,^([105](#105)) bestowed on us the good fortune that had been hidden
behind a veil, and made it a reality. The absurd (*bAtil*) Hindus,
knowing their position perilous, *dispersed like carded wool before the
wind, and like moths scattered abroad*.^([106](#106))  Many fell dead on
the field of battle; others, desisting from fighting, fled to the desert
exile and became the food of crows and kites. Mounds were made of the
bodies of the slain, pillars of their heads.^([107](#107))

**Babur becomes a *GhAzi***

“After this success, *GhAzi* (Victor in a Holy-war) was written amongst
the royal titles.  Below the titles (*tughrA*) entered on the
*Fath-nAm*a, I wrote the following quatrain:

For Islam’s sake, I wandered in the wilds,  
Prepared for war with pagans and Hindus,  
Resolved myself to meet the martyr’s death,  
Thanks be to Allah! a *ghAzi* I became.”^([108](#108))

Babur shared a hobby with his ancestor, Timur.  Both of them were mighty
fond of raising towers of severed Hindu heads.

**SHER SHAH SUR (1540-1545 CE)**

“…Upon this, Sher ShAh turned again towards Kalinjar…  The RAjA of
Kalinjar, KIrat Sing, did not come out to meet him.  So he ordered the
fort to be invested, and threw up mounds against it, and in a short time
the mounds rose so high that they overtopped the fort.  The men who were
in the streets and houses were exposed, and the AfghAns shot them with
their arrows and muskets from off the mounds.  The cause of this tedious
mode of capturing the fort was this.  Among the women of RAjA KIrat Sing
was a PAtar slave-girl, that is a dancing-girl.  The king had heard
exceeding praise of her, and he considered how to get possession of her,
for he feared lest if he stormed the fort, the RAjA KIrat Sing would
certainly make a *jauhar*, and would bum the girl.

“On Friday, the 9th of RabI’u-l awwal, 952 A.H., when one watch and two
hours of the day was over, Sher ShAh called for his breakfast, and ate
with his ‘*ulamA* and priests, without whom he never breakfasted.  In
the midst of breakfast, Shaikh NizAm said, ‘There is nothing equal to a
religious war against the infidels.  If you be slain you become a
martyr, if you live you become a *ghAzi*.’  When Sher ShAh had finished
eating his breakfast, he ordered DaryA KhAn to bring loaded shells, and
went up to the top of a mound, and with his own hand shot off many
arrows, and said, ‘DaryA KhAn comes not; he delays very long.’ But when
they were at last brought, Sher ShAh came down from the mound, and stood
where they were placed.  While the men were employed in discharging
them, by the will of Allah Almighty, one shell full of gunpowder struck
on the gate of the fort and broke, and came and fell where a great
number of other shells were placed.  Those which were loaded all began
to explode.  Shaikh HalIl, Shaikh NizAm, and other learned men, and most
of the others escaped and were not burnt, but they brought out Sher ShAh
partially burnt.  A young princess who was standing by the rockets was
burnt to death.  When Sher ShAh was carried into his tent, all his
nobles assembled in *darbAr*; and he sent for ‘IsA KhAn HAjib and Masnad
KhAn KalkapUr, the son-in-law of IsA KhAn, and the paternal uncle of the
author, to come into his tent, and ordered them to take the fort while
he was yet alive.  When ‘IsA KhAn came out and told the chiefs that it
was Sher ShAh’s order that they should attack on every side and capture
the fort, men came and swarmed out instantly on every side like ants and
locusts; and by the time of afternoon prayers captured the fort, putting
every one to the sword, and sending all the infidels to hell.  About the
hour of evening prayers, the intelligence of the victory reached Sher
ShAh, and marks of joy and pleasure appeared on his countenance.  RAjA
KIrat Sing, with seventy men, remained in a house.  Kutb KhAn the whole
night long watched the house in person lest the RAjA should escape. Sher
ShAh said to his sons that none of his nobles need watch the house, so
that the RAjA escaped out of the house, and the labour and trouble of
this long watching was lost.  The next day at sunrise, however, they
took the RAjA alive…”^([109](#109))

“It is related in the *Akbar ShAhI*, that when Sher ShAh rendered up his
life to the angel of death in Kalinjar, JalAl KhAn, his youngest son,
was in the town of RewAn, in the province of Bhata, and his eldest son
‘Adil KhAn, the heir-apparent, in the fort of RunthUr (Ranthambhor). 
The nobles perceived that ‘Adil KhAn would be unable to arrive with
speed, and as the State required a head, they despatched a person to
summon JalAl KhAn who was nearer.  He reached Kalinjar in five days, and
by the assistance of ‘IsA HajjAb and other grandees, was raised to the
throne near the fort of Kalinjar, on the 15th of the month RabI’u-1
awwal, 952 A.H. (25th May, 1545 CE).  He assumed the title of IslAm
ShAh…

“After his accession, he ordered the RAja of Kalinjar, who had been
captured with seventy of his adherents, to be put to death, and directed
that not one of them should be spared…”^([110](#110))

***JIHAD* AGAINST VIJAYANAGARA (1565 CE)**

“Ally Adil Shah,^([111](#111)) intent on adding to his dominions, and
repairing the losses sustained by his father, entered into a close
alliance with Ramraj; and on the occasion of the death of a son of that
Prince, he had the boldness, attended only by one hundred horse, to go
to Beejanuggur, to offer his condolence in person on that melancholy
occasion.  Ramraj received him with the greatest respect, and the King
with the kindest persuasions, prevailed upon him to lay aside his
mourning. The wife of Ramraj, on this occasion, adopted the King as her
son; at the end of three days, which were spent in an interchange of
friendly professions and presents, Ally Adil Shah took his
leave…^([112](#112))

**Islam Tramples upon Human Ties**

“Ally Adil Shah resolved to curb his \[Ramraj’s\] insolence and reduce
his power by a league of the faithful against him; for which purpose he
convened an assembly of his friends and confidential advisers.  Kishwur
Khan Lary and Shah Aboo Toorab Shirazy, whose abilities had often been
experienced, represented, that the King’s desire to humble the pride of
the Ray of Beejanuggur was undoubtedly meritorious and highly politic,
but could never be effected unless by the union of all the Mahomedan
kings of the Deccan, as the revenues of Ramraj, collected from sixty
seaports and numerous flourishing cities and districts, amounted to an
immense sum; which enabled him to maintain a force, against which no
single king of the Mussulmans could hope to contend with the smallest
prospect of success. Ally Adil Shah commanded Kishwur Khan to take
measures to effect the object of a general league; and an ambassador was
accordingly despatched without delay to sound Ibrahim Kootb
Shah^([113](#113)), and to open to him if prudent, the designed
plan…^([114](#114))

**Bickering Believers unite against Unbelievers**

“Ibrahim Kootb Shah, who had been inwardly stung with indignation at the
haughty insolence and the usurpations of Ramraj, eagerly acceded to the
proposed alliance, and offered to mediate a union between Ally Adil Shah
and Hoossein Nizam Shah,^([115](#115)) and even promised to obtain for
the former the fort of Sholapoor, which had been the original cause of
their disagreement.  With this view Ibrahim Kootb Shah despatched
Moostufa Khan Ardistany, the most intelligent nobleman of his court,
to Ally Adil Shah, with orders, if he should find him still sincere in
his intentions towards the league, to proceed from thence to
Ahmudnuggur, and conclude the alliance…^([116](#116))

“After some days it was agreed that Hoossein Nizam Shah should give his
daughter Chand Beeby in marriage to Ally Adil Shah, with the fortress of
Sholapoor as her dowry; and that he should receive the sister of that
Prince, named Huddeea Sooltana, as a consort for his eldest son
Moortuza; that a treaty of eternal friendship should be entered on
between both states, and that they should unite sincerely to reduce the
power of Ramraj; for which purpose it was resolved to march against him
at the earliest practicable period. Hoossein Nizam Shah, Ally Adil Shah,
Ibrahim Kootb Shah, and Ally Bereed Shah,^([117](#117))now began to make
active preparations for the campaign against Ramraj…^([118](#118))

“In the year A.H. 972 (1564 CE), the four princes, at the head of their
respective armies, met on the plains of Beejapoor, and on the 20th of
Jumad-ool-Awul (Dec. 26) of the same year marched from that
neighbourhood.  After some days they arrived at Talikote, and the armies
encamped near the banks of the Krishna; where, as the country on the
north bank belonged to Ally Adil Shah he entertained his allies with
great splendour, and sent strict orders to all the governors of his
dominions to forward supplies of provisions from their districts
regularly all to the camp.”^([119](#119))

**Islam enjoins Treachery towards Unbelievers**

“The battle took place on Tuesday, 23 January, 1565.  The Vijayanagara
army commenced attack in right earnest and the right and left wings of
the confederate army were thrown into such disorder that their
commanders were almost prepared to retreat when the position was saved
by Hussain who opposed the enemy with great valour.  The fighting was
then continued and the loss of life on both sides was heavy.  But it did
not last long and its fate was determined by the desertion of two
Muhammadan commanders under Ramraja.  Caesar Frederick, who visited
Vijayanagara in 1567, said that each of these commanders had under him
seventy to eighty thousand men and the defeat of Vijayanagara was due to
their desertion.  Ramaraja fell into enemy’s hands and was beheaded on
the order of Hussain.”^([120](#120))

**Slaughter, Plunder and Pillage**

“The Hindoos, according to custom, when they saw their chief destroyed,
fled in the utmost disorder from the field, and were pursued by the
allies with such success, that the river was dyed red with their blood. 
It is computed, by the best authorities, that above one hundred thousand
infidels were slain during the action and in the pursuit.  The plunder
was so great that every private man in the allied army became rich in
gold, jewels tents, horses, and slaves, the kings permitting every
person to retain what he acquired, reserving the elephants only for
their own use.  Letters with accounts of this important victory were
despatched to their several dominions, and to the neighbouring states,
while the kings themselves, shortly after the battle, marched onwards
into the country of Ramraj, as far as Anagoondy, and the advanced troops
penetrated to Beejanuggur which they plundered, razed the chief
buildings to the ground, and committed every species of
excess.”^([121](#121))

**Destruction of the *DAr-ul-harb***

“The third day saw the beginning of the end.  The victorious Mussulmans
had halted on the field of battle for rest and refreshment, but now they
had reached the capital, and from that time forward for a space of five
months Vijayanagar knew no rest.  The enemy had come to destroy, and
they carried out their object relentlessly.  They slaughtered the people
without mercy; broke down the temples and palaces, and wreaked such
savage vengeance on the abode of the Kings, that, with the exception of
a few great stone-built temples and walls, nothing now remains but a
heap of ruins to mark the spot where once stately buildings stood.  They
demolished the statues, and even succeeded in breaking the limbs of the
huge Narasimha monolith.  Nothing seemed to escape them.  They broke up
the pavilions standing on the huge platform from which the kings used to
watch festivals, and overthrew all the carved work.  They lit huge fires
in the magnificently decorated buildings forming the temple of
Vitthalaswami near the river, and smashed its exquisite stone
sculptures.  With fire and sword, with crowbars and axes, they carried
on day after day their work of destruction.  Never perhaps in the
history of the world has such havoc been wrought, and wrought so
suddenly, on so splendid a city; teeming with a wealthy and industrious
population in the fun plenitude of prosperity one day, and on the next
seized, pillaged, and reduced to ruins, amid scenes of savage massacre
and horrors beggaring description… The loot must have been enormous. 
Couto states that amongst other treasures was found a diamond as large
as a hen’s egg, which was kept by the Adil Shah.”^([122](#122))

**AKBAR (1556-1605 CE)**

“HImUin was excessively arrogant on account of his troops and
elephants.  He advanced, fought, and routed the Mughals, whose heads lay
in heaps, and whose blood flowed in streams.  He thus at first
vanquished the Mughal army; but as the brilliancy of the star of Prince
Akbar’s fortune was not destined to be diminished, it chanced that, by
the decree of the Almighty, an arrow struck HImUn in the forehead.  He
told his elephant driver to take the elephant out of the field of
battle...

“When ShAh KulI Beg was told of what had occurred, he came up to the
elephant, and brought it into the presence of Bairam KhAn.  Bairam KhAn,
after prostrating himself, and returning thanks, caused HImUn to descend
from the elephant, after which he bound his hands, and took him before
the young and fortunate Prince, and said, As this is our first success,
let Your Highness’s own august hand smite this infidel with the
sword. The Prince, accordingly, struck him, and divided his head from
his unclean body (Nov. 5, AD 1556).”^([123](#123))

“…The king struck Hemu with his sword and he won the title of
Ghazi…”^([124](#124))

“Akbar was now informed that HAji KhAn, a *ghulAm* of Sher KhAn AfghAn
\[Sher ShAh\], a brave and able general, was setting up pretensions to
rule in Alwar and that HImU’s father and wife, and all his property and
wealth, were in that country.  So the Emperor sent NAsiru-l Mulk \[PIr
Muhammad SarwAni\] with a select force to attack him.  HAji KhAn, in
dread of the Imperial army, fled before it arrived.  Alwar and all the
territory of MewAt thus came into the Imperial power.  The fugitives
proceeded to DewatI-mAjarI, a strong place, which was HImU’s family
home.  Much resistance and fighting followed.  HImU’s father was taken
alive, and brought before NAsiru-l Mulk, who tried to convert him to the
faith; but the old man said, ‘For eighty years I have worshipped God in
the way of my own religion; how can I now forsake my faith?  Shall I,
through fear of death, embrace your religion without understanding
it?’ MaulAna PIr Muhammad treated his question as unheard, but gave him
an answer with the tongue of the sword.  He then returned with much
spoil and fifty elephants to the Emperor.”^([125](#125))

***JihAd* at Chittor (1567-1568 CE)**

“…The emperor prayed to the Almighty in the month of Ramzan/March of the
same year saying ‘O Allah thou should come to the help of the army of
Muslims.’ He further desired that the army should launch a sudden attack
on the fort from all sides.  The army came up like a huge pack of
pigeons and, entered the fort by slaughtering those soldiers, who were
guarding its gate.  They pierced a group of the enemy by their arrows
and killed them.  Then they scaled the wall of the fort with much
courage and jumped into it.  Naturally the fire of battle blazed forth…

“Thus the emperor became the owner of the flag of battle, i.e.
victorious and the rebels (Kafirs) became the prey of arrows.  The
breeze of the grace of Allah began to blow.  The heart of enemy began to
wreathe in pain.  By the time of prayer the full volume of sound was
blown and delivered the final attack on the Satans.  Realizing their
helpless condition that wretched race began to slaughter their women and
children with their own hands, and set fire to them, reducing (them) to
ashes.

“Despite all, there was only one victorious army and the vanquished one
were thousands.  In short, many of the misguided persons were killed by
swords.  The number of the dead was about thirty thousand.

“As a result of this victory, most of the persons of the army became
rich, and under the emperor’s government (or in his kingdom) they became
men of substance.  Everyone achieved the desired object.  Everybody got
in his army his cherished ambition.  Men of sport enjoyed the beautiful
ladies.  Those who were covetous of hoarding property, benefited
themselves fully.  Every one was very happy over the success and every
soul got a fresh lease of life by this triumph...

“If proper attention is to be paid to understand the exceptional
qualities and graces of the character of His Majesty, then it would
become clear that the feelings and mind inside and outside are the
mirror of Divine injunctions because on that day an extraordinary effect
appeared from the limbs and organs of his body which is beyond
comprehension.  *His pure heart and noble mind were turned inwards and
in consequence of this purity he made a pilgrimage to the tomb of
Qutb-ul-Qutabi Khwaja Muinuddin Chishti* in his dream and he paid full
attention and due reverence to that paradise like tomb. On Sunday, 26th
of Ramazan/15th March, of the aforesaid year he went for the
pilgrimage.  He stayed there for ten days and then left for
Agra.”^([126](#126))

***Fathnama-i-Chitor* (March 1568)**

Several *fathnamas* (letters of victory) issued by Akbar at various
occasions include *Fathnama-i-Chitor* issued by Akbar after the conquest
of Chitor. *It was issued from Ajmer*, where he stayed for some time en
route to Agra, on Ramazan 10, 975/March 9,1568.  The text of the
aforesaid *Fathnama* follows:^([127](#127))

‘“Praise be to Allah who made good His promise, helped His servant,
honoured His soldiers, defeated the confederates all alone, and after
whom there is nothing.”^([128](#128)) All Praise and thanksgiving
behoves that great Opener (*fattah*) of forts and kingdoms, in whose
grasp are the keys of the conquests of the just and religious *Sultans*,
and with whose patent of favour and authority are decorated the
*manshurs* of the *Khilafat* and sovereignty of the victorious
emperors. The Merciful one (*Karim*) whose omnipotence has ensured the
victory of the believers through the promise: “to help believers is
incumbent upon us,”^([129](#129)) the Omnipotent one who enjoined the
task of destroying the wicked infidels on the dutiful *mujahids* through
the blows of their thunder-like scimitars laid down: “Fight them!  Allah
will chastise them at your hands and He will lay them low and give you
victory over them.”^([130](#130))“Glorified is He, and High Exalted from
what they say,”^([131](#131))  “His sovereignty is not dependent on any
friend and helper.”

‘Whereas the Sovereign one, universal be His bounty and exalted His
glory, has, in conformity with “I am to appoint thee a leader of the
mankind”,^([132](#132)) assigned to us government of the *mumalik* of
Hindustan which is one of the biggest countries of the world, and the
*Munshi* of the office (*diwan khana*) of munificence and the Supreme
Sovereign has adorned the radiant mandate (*manshur*) of our *Khilafat*
and monarchy with the *Parwana* “Surely we established him in the
land”^([133](#133))and decorated it with the ornament of “That is the
bounty of Allah, which He giveth unto whom He will”.^([134](#134))  All
the people who are Allah’s trusts, being in the security of Peace from
the hardships and misfortunes of the age, are busy in discharging the
obligations of obedience and worship of the Almighty under our
benevolent Protection, we deem it our duty to render thanks and express
gratitude for this great favour.  In accordance with “Proceed whither
you wish, you are victorious,” in whatever direction we Proceed fortune
and felicity come forward to greet us and whither we turn the reign of
our resolution the success and victory hasten to our Presence.  In
conformity with the happy injunction – “This is of the grace of my Lord
that He may try me whether I am grateful or ungrateful”^([135](#135)) -
we spend our precious time to the best of our ability in war (*ghiza*)
and *Jihad* and with the help of Eternal Allah, who is the supporter of
our ever-increasing empire, we are busy in subjugating the localities,
habitations, forts and towns which are under the possession of the
infidels, may Allah forsake and annihilate all of them, and thus raising
the standard of Islam everywhere and removing the darkness of polytheism
and violent sins by the use of sword.  We destroy the places of worship
of idols in those places and other parts of India. “The praise be to
Allah, who hath guided us to this, and we would not have found the way
had it not been that Allah had guided us.”^([136](#136))

‘The purport of the discourse is that during these victorious times,
after the elimination of Ali Quli and (his) ungrateful faction we
arrived at the Capital Agra like “the noble, victorious”,^([137](#137))
and with a view to augment the materials of our recreation of hunting of
elephants we encamped in the confines of Sivi Supar and Gagrun which are
on the border of the country of Chitor.  There it was brought to our
notice that Rana Udai Singh, may Allah annihilate him, from whom it was
expected that he would come forward to welcome, pay respects and kiss
the royal threshold or would send his son with *Peshkash*, has adopted,
due to excessive pride and conceit, an obstinate and arrogant attitude.
(He) is collecting provisions in the fort of Chitor which is his
hereditary place of residence and is distinguished in the forts of India
in strength and grandeur, with the intention of entrenching himself
there.  Since the thoughts of war (*ghiza*) and *Jihad* dominated the
enlightened mind, it (Rana’s behaviour) made the King angry and
increased (his) zeal for the divine religion.  Despite the fact that
most of the royal troops had returned to their *Jagirs* after the last
victory and only a few, who happened to be present at the Capital,
accompanied the royal cavalcade on this hunting (excursion), we turned
our rein to suppress that infidel.  Fearful of the approach of the
imperial standards he left his uncle, Sahidas Jaimal and Udiban Patta
who are renowned for their valour among the infidels, may Allah forsake
them and lead them to the abode of perdition, and who are considered to
be equal to a thousand horsemen in intrepidity and prowess, with five
thousand chosen Rajputs, one thousand troops from his (Rana’s) own
contingent and ten thousand other men to guard the fort. (The Rana)
himself hastened with his troops to Udaipur and Kombalmir which are
located in the security of the mountains and jungles.  When at the town
of Rampur, which is one of the well-known towns attached to Chitor, it
became known that he was entertaining such plans, the royal mind decided
upon subjugating the fort (of Chitor) with the divine help and only then
to take other steps that may appear feasible.  In this way we arrived in
front of the fort with the intention of besieging it on Thursday, 20
Rabi II/Oct. 24, 1567.  A fort rose in view such as Alburz with all its
majesty would appear an insignificant rock at its foot and Tur and
Hindukush would fit as walls in its rampart.  Its canopy vies with the
Crystalline sphere in its height.  Its circumference is about three
*farsangs* and the calculators are unable to count its battlements.

‘Though the siege of the fort looked impossible, but by the grace of
Almighty and with the secret help of the accomplished people, any
direction that we have taken we have achieved there what we have wished;
the very same day we inspected the surroundings of the fort carefully,
and entrusted each place to one of the courageous servants (*Khans*,
*Sultans* and *Amirs*) of the exalted court who were present.  The
mountain traversing warriors, who brave the fields of battle and seek
*Jihad* with all their heart and soul and consider martyrdom to be the
greatest reward in this as well as the other world, sought permission to
take themselves to the towers and fortifications and putting their trust
in Allah and relying on the divine help, which is the source of strength
to the imperial authority, carry out brave assaults and bring the fort
under control by force.  Since those ignoble people had collected such
large quantities of weapons for defending the fort like mortars (*deg*),
zarbzan, cannon (*top*), matchlock (*tufang*), catapult (*manjaniq*),
*jarr-i saqil*, naphtha (*naft*) and *nawak* that would last for thirty
years even if continuously used, and since they had great confidence in
these weapons and in the strength of the fort as well as their own
prowess, we did not let them (the royal officers) fight with a view to
protecting the people of Islam, may Allah preserve them till the day of
resurrection, lest some of them may get killed in rashness. (We) sent
for the dragon-like *rads* (cannon), mortars and other pieces of
artillery which were left at the capital.  We also ordered the
manufacture of cannon and mountain-breaking mortars in the camp and
decided that tunnels be dug and after the arrival of battering ram
(*sarkob*) and *sabat* (covered passage) an attack be launched.  We
appointed some troops of the left wing to sack, kill and (take) captives
the people of Udaipur, and the troops and men of Rana who were there
while he himself was perched at a distance of ten *Kos*.  We sent
another army to plunder and sack Rampur.  The troops returned with
immense booty after despatching many of the worthless infidels to the
abode of perdition.  After the arrival of the artillery (*topkhana*),
completion of the covered passage (*sabat*), explosion of the mines
causing conflagration and (the consequent) blowing up of the towers and
battlements, we directed the troops to establish themselves at the foot
of the rampart and surround the fort from every side.  The doomed ones
(Rajputs) being fully informed this time of the strength and prowess of
the army of Islam and the asperity and haughtiness of their ruler they
started imploring for intercession and respite with abject submission
and some of the chiefs came out (with this petition).  Notwithstanding
the fact that they had caused death of many people of Islam both nobles
and common soldiers, with matchlock-fire, continuous showering of stones
through the *manjaniq*, they sued (for peace) on such impossible terms
which could not be conceded.  They were permitted to return.  Next day
we went in person to the *sabat* of Muhammad Qasim Khad, *mir-i bahr*,
which was nearest to the fort and issued orders for *Jang-i Sultani* to
be launched.

‘The armies of Islam. placing their reliance in (the revelation) “Allah
is sufficient for us and most excellent protector”,^([138](#138))
fearlessly and boldly commenced the assault.  Within (the fort) the
vigilant bands of jew-like infidels set ablaze the fire of conflict and
brawl by discharging fire-raining *manjaniqs* and cannon (*top*) one
after the other.  The lions of the forest of intrepidity and the
panthers of the mountain of bravery, in their extreme courage stretched
their coveting hands to the Sash of the Constellation Orion and with
great expedition snatched the diadem from the head of Bahram.

‘In conformity with the commandment, “And prepare against them what
force you can,”^([139](#139)) the troops excelled each other and with
complete unity betook themselves to the towers and the walls of the fort
that were breached by the artillery fire.  From that multitude, groups
like the pigs bit by arrows rushed out of doors and blocked the entry of
the combatants.  In return they (the royal troops) fought back by
throwing arrows and stones and scattered those retreating ones (the
Rajputs).  They sent a tremor through the ranks of the enemy with
incessant and frightful cannonade setting fire to the harvest of their
lives.

‘Three days and nights passed in this manner.  The two sides did not
stop fighting even for a moment.  All the attempts of these fox-like
people at fraud and deception were frustrated by the lions of the jungle
of intrepidity.  At last on the night of Tuesday, 25th of Shaban, 975
A.H. (23 February 1568) in conformity with “…they shall not be able to
ward off the fire from their faces nor from their backs, nor shall they
be helped”^([140](#140)) the continuous rain of fiery balls and
cannonade became so intense in conformity with “Nay, it shall come on
them all of a sudden and cause them to be confounded”^([141](#141)) that
those condemned ones were no longer able to resist. The call from beyond
– “If ye help Allah, He will help you and will make your foothold
firm”^([142](#142)) - was coming to the exalted hearing and every moment
the Divine Inspirer made audible the good tidings: “Now surely Allah’s
help is nigh.”^([143](#143)) The revengeful warriors and the brave ones
skilled in the use of daggers, deadly set against the enemy and drenched
in the blood, delivered concerted assault and succeeded in removing the
wooden planks with which those accursed ones had blocked the breaches. 
Seeing this, Jaimal, one of the three chiefs, who had taken the lead in
the battle and was looking after the fort from the beginning to the end
advanced with a body of men to stop the breach.  In the meanwhile some
artillery men belonging to that wretched band fired their guns one after
the other (and in their flashes) Jaimal, and those accompanying him
could be seen (from afar).  As for the last three days and nights we
have been present there (battery of Qasim Khan) often firing with
muskets and arrows and since it was destined for Jaimal that he should
hasten to the lowest parts of hell at our own Allah-worshipping hands,
when he came in view the matchlock (*tufang*) we were holding, was ready
as is said, “When Allah wills any-thing, He provides its means.” No
sooner he was seen and the gun discharged then the worthless infidel was
struck in forehead and hearing the call, “where so ever you may be,
death will overtake you, even though you were in lofty
towers,”^([144](#144)) proceeded to the abode of perdition.  This caused
great consternation among the high and low of that cattle-like
community. (Subsequently) the other chiefs continued to resist but they
could not repulse the brave from the openings.  At the dawn, the
excellent archers whose skill is such that they could pierce the eye of
an ant at dark night and the lancers who could pick up the crumbs of the
breach from the ground, putting the elephants in front delivered another
assault. (They) forced their entry into the fort through sheer bravery
and prowess and started discharging arrows and fighting with lances.

‘The hand of destiny had covered the deceitful eyes of that erroneous,
arrogant and scanty host with the nocturnal blindness of ill-luck “And
they thought that there would be no affliction and so they became blind
and deaf”^([145](#145)) and had blocked upon them the way of success and
escape in accordance with “They could neither go forward nor turn
back.”^([146](#146))The people of Islam were busy praying: “Our lord!
bestow on us endurance, make our foothold sure, and give us help against
the disbelieving folk,”^([147](#147)) and the refreshing message - “Help
from Allah and present Victory.  Give good tidings to
believers”^([148](#148)) - was coming to them from heaven.  They
advanced in groups against the wicked unbelievers to get hold of the
opening. (They) stood in the foremost rank without flinching and got an
upper hand.  They felled them (the Rajputs) one upon the other with the
strokes of (their) blood-thirsty sword, leaving all around heaps of the
slain.  Pursuing the remnant who were fleeing in different directions
– “As they were frightened asses, fleeing from the lion”^([149](#149)) -
despatched them to the lowest part of the hell - when the star of
success and good fortune rose from the horizon of the sublime
message, “Victory comes only by the help of Allah, the Mighty, the
Wise”^([150](#150)) the whole victorious troop entered the fort. In
accordance with the imperative Command “And kill the idolators all
together,”^([151](#151)) those defiant ones who were still offering
resistance having formed themselves into knots of two to three hundred
persons, were put to death and their women and children taken
prisoners. According to the promise, “Allah promised you many
acquisitions which you will take,”^([152](#152)) immense booty and
spoils in cash and kind were acquired. “So the roots of the people who
were unjust were cut off, and all praise is due to Allah, the Lord of
the worlds.”^([153](#153))

‘The receptacle of nobility, the support of kingdom, the pillar of the
mighty state, the prop of the magnificent empire, the confidant of the
resplendent *Khilafat*, the foremost among the great *Khans* of the age,
the climber of the ladder of authority and dignity, the devoted and
sincere and the well-wishing one, the intrepid cavalier, the adorner of
the ranks in the field of valour and bravery, Mubarizuddin Mir Mohammad
Khan Bahadur, and the receptacle of nobility, the support of kingdom,
the pillar of the mighty state, the prop of the magnificent empire, the
best among the sinceres of the age, worthy of confidence and favour, the
rider of the field of battle and valour, Qutbuddin Mohammad Khan Bahadur
and the rest of the great *Khans* and noble *Sultans* alongwith the
*Saiyids*, *Ulama*, *Mashaikh*, the *Ghazis* of *Shariat* and other
dignitaries, residents, inhabitants, *Chaudhris*, *Qanoongos*, the
*ri’aya* and peasants (*muzari’an*) of Sarkar Punjab respectively, being
jubilant at the happy tidings carried by this auspicious *Fathnama*,
which is, in fact, a foretaste of the victories to follow, should offer
infinite thanksgivings.  They should also pray in the auspicious
moments, when the prayers are more likely to be granted, for the long
life of our noble self, the perpetuity of the empire and for the grant
of greater competence to us for fulfilling obligation of *Jihad*, divine
worship and acts of piety.  Further they should continuously be
expecting that day after day doors of fresh victories and successes will
be opened before us.

‘Whereas after the management of the affairs of Chitor we have turned
the reins of our determination towards the capital Agra,

The horse beneath the thigh and overhead canopy of victory, The victory
and success keeping company and divine help guiding the way.

‘Allah willing within these few day we will reach the seat of the
Khilafat.  The pillar of the state knowing that our thoughts are
directed towards the management of his affairs and the fulfilment of the
hopes and aspirations of all the well-wishers may send regular reports
about the development (in his region).  Any request that he might like
to make should be communicated (to the court) so that it may be
granted. Written by the royal order (to be obeyed permanently) at Ajmer
on 10th of the month of Ramzan 975 A.H., 9 March 1568.”^([154](#154))

**AHMAD SHAH ABDALI (1757 and 1761 CE)**

***JihAd* at Mathura and Vrindavan (1757 CE)**

“But the Jat peasantry were determined that it was over their corpses
that the ravager should enter the sacred capital of Braja. …eight miles
north of MathurA, JawAhir Singh barred the invader’s path with less than
10,000 men and offered a desperate resistance (28th February,
1757). From sunrise the battle raged for nine hours, and at the end of
it ‘ten to twelve thousand infantry lay dead on the two sides taken
together, the wounded were beyond count’…^([155](#155))

The Hindu Bethlehem now lay utterly prostrate before the invaders. 
Early at dawn on 1st March the AfghAn cavalry burst into the unwalled
and unsuspecting city of MathurA, and neither by their master’s orders
nor from the severe handling they received in yesterday’s fight, were
they in a mood to show mercy.  For four hours there was an
indiscriminate massacre and rape of the unresisting Hindu population -
all of them non-combatants and many of them priests… ‘Idols were broken
and kicked about like polo-balls by the Islamic heroes.’ \[*Husain
Shahi*, 39.\] Houses were demolished in search of plunder and then
wantonly set on fire.  Glutted with the blood of three thousand men,
SardAr JahAn Khan laid a contribution of one lakh on what remained of
the population and marched away from the smoking ruins the same night.

“After the tiger came the jackal.  ‘When after the massacre Ahmad ShAh’s
troops marched onward from MathurA, Najib and his army remained there
for three days, plundered much money and buried treasure, and carried
off many beautiful females as captives.’ \[Nur, 15 *b*.\] The blue waves
of the JamunA gave eternal repose to such of her daughters as could flee
to her outstretched arms; some other happy women found a nearer escape
from dishonour by death in their household wells.  But for those of
their sisters who survived there was no escape from a fate worse than
death.  A Muslim eyewitness thus describes the scene in the ruined city
a fortnight later.  ‘Everywhere in the lanes and bazaars lay the
headless trunks of the slain and the whole city was burning.  Many
buildings had been knocked down.  The water of the JamunA flowing past
was of a yellowish color, as if polluted by blood.  The man \[a Muslim
jeweller of the city, robbed of his all and fasting for several days\]
said that for seven days following the general slaughter the water had
turned yellow.  *At the edge of the stream I saw a number of huts of
vairAgis and sannyAsis* \[*i.e., Hindu ascetic*\], *in each of which lay
a severed head with the head of a dead cow applied to its mouth and tied
to it with a rope round its neck*.’

“Issuing from the ruins of MathurA, JahAn Khan roamed the country round,
and plundering everywhere as directed.  VrindAvan, seven miles north of
MathurA could not escape, as its wealth was indicated by its many
temples.  Here another general massacre was practised upon the
inoffensive monks of the most pacific order of Vishnu’s worshippers (c.
6th March).  As the same Muhammadan diarist records after a visit to
VrindAvan: ‘Wherever you gazed you beheld heaps of the slain; you could
only pick your way with difficulty, owing to the quantity of bodies
lying about and the amount of blood spilt.  *At one place that we
reached we saw about two hundred dead children lying in a heap*.  Not
one of the dead bodies had a head…  The stench and effluvium in the air
were such that it was painful to open your mouth or even to draw
breath.’

**Abdali’s attack on Gokul**

“Moving a fortnight behind his vanguard, the AbdAli king himself came
upon the scene.  He had stormed Ballabhgarh on 3rd March and halted
there for two days.  On 15th March he arrived near MathurA, and wisely
avoiding that reeking human shambles crossed over to the eastern bank of
the Jamuna and encamped at MahAvan, six miles south-east of the city. 
Two miles to his west lay Gokul, the seat of the pontiff of the rich
VallabhAcharya sect.  The AbdAli’s policy of frightfulness had defeated
his cupidity: dead men could not be held to ransom.  The invader’s
unsatisfied need of money was pressing him; he sought the help of ImAd’s
local knowledge as to the most promising sources of booty.  A detachment
from his camp was sent to plunder Gokul.  But here the monks were
martial NAgA *sannyAsis* of upper India and RajputAna.  Four thousand of
these naked ash-smeared warriors stood outside Gokul and fought the
AfghAns, till half of their own number was killed after slaying an equal
force of the enemy.  Then at the entreaty of the Bengal *subahdAr’s*
envoy (Jugalkishor) and his assurance that a hermitage of *faqirs* could
not contain any money, the AbdAli recalled the detachment. ‘All the
*vairAgis* perished but Gokulnath \[the deity of the city\] was saved’,
as a Marathi newsletter puts it.” \[Rajwade, i. 63.\]^([156](#156))

Describing Afghan atrocities at this time, Munshi SadAsukh DehlawI
wrote, “I have myself seen the depredations of the Afghans round Dehli
and Mattra.  God defend us from them!  It makes the very hair of the
body stand on end to think of them.  Two hundred thousand men were
destroyed in these massacres, and the hordes of the enemy were without
number.  *Such atrocities, forsooth, were perpetrated in compliance with
their religion and law!  What cared they for the religion, the law, the
honour and reputation of the innocent sufferers? It was enough for such
bigots that splendour accrued by their deeds to the faith of Muhammad
and ‘Ali*!”^([157](#157))

***JihAd* at Panipat (1761 CE)**

“Next morning the sun revealed a horrid spectacle on the vast plain
south of PAnipat.  On the actual field of the combat thirty-one distinct
heaps of the slain were counted, the number of bodies in each ranging
from 500 upwards to 1000 and in four up to 1500 a rough total of
28,000.  In addition to these, the ditch round the Maratha camp was full
of dead bodies, partly the victims of disease and famine during the long
siege and partly wounded men who had crawled out of the fighting to die
there.  West and south of PAnipat city, the jungle and the road in the
line of MarAtha retreat were littered with the remains of those who had
fallen unresisting in the relentless DurrAni pursuit or from hunger and
exhaustion.  Their number - probably three-fourths non-combatants and
one-fourth soldiers - could not have been far short of the vast total of
those slain in the battlefield.  ‘The hundreds who lay down wounded,
perished from the severity of the cold.’

*“After the havoc of combat followed massacre in cold blood*.  Several
hundreds of MarAthas had hidden themselves in the hostile city of
PAnipat through folly or helplessness; and these were hunted out next
day and put to the sword.  According to one plausible account, the sons
of Abdus Samad Khan and Mian Qutb received the DurrAni king’s permission
to avenge their father’s death by an indiscriminate massacre of the
MarAthas for one day, and in this way nearly nine thousand men perished
\[*Bhau Bakhar*, 123.\]; these were evidently non-combatants.  The
eyewitness Kashiraj Pandit thus describes the scene: ‘*Every DurrAni
soldier brought away a hundred or two of prisoners and slew them in the
outskirts of their camp, crying out, When I started from our country, my
mother, father, sister and wife told me to slay so may kAfirs for their
sake after we had gained the victory in this holy war, so that the
religious merit of this act* \[*of infidel slaying*\] *might accrue to
them*.  In this way, thousands of soldiers and other persons were
massacred.  In the Shah’s camp, except the quarters of himself and his
nobles, every tent had a heap of severed heads before it.  One may say
that it was verily doomsday for the MarAtha people.’

**Spoils of the Victors**

‘“The booty captured within the entrenchment was beyond calculation and
the regiments of Khans \[i.e. 8000 troopers of AbdAli clansmen\] did
not, as far as possible, allow other troops like the IrAnis and the
TurAnis to share in the plunder; they took possession of everything
themselves, but sold to the Indian soldiers handsome Brahman women for
one *tuman* and good horses for two *tumans* each.’ \[Nur, 50 *b*.\] The
Deccani prisoners, male and female reduced to slavery by the victorious
army numbered 22,000, many of them being the sons and other relatives of
the sardArs or middle class men.  Among them ‘rose-limbed slave girls’
are mentioned… Besides these 22,000 unhappy captives, some four hundred
officers and 6000 men fled for refuge to ShujA-ud-daulah’s camp, and
were sent back to the Deccan with monetary help by that nawab, at the
request of his Hindu officers.  The total loss of the MarAthas after the
battle is put at 50,000 horses, captured either by the AfghAn army or
the villagers along the route of flight, two hundred thousand draught
cattle, some thousands of camels, five hundred elephants, besides cash
and jewellery.  ‘Every trooper of the Shah brought away ten, and
sometimes twenty camels laden with money. The captured horses were
beyond count but none of them was of value; they came like droves of
sheep in their thousands.’”^([158](#158))

**The Key is held by the Quran**

The *mujAhids* who mounted the various *jihAds* in India lived in
different centuries - from the first quarter of the 8th to the second
half of the 16th (CE).

They belonged to different races and came from different countries -
Arabia, Turkistan, Iran, Afghanistan, India (in case of Hindu converts
to Islam).

They spoke different languages - Arabic, Turkish, Persian, Pushto.

Yet, they used the same self-righteous language for the Hindus, and
enacted similar sanguinary scenes.

Again, the Muslim historians, who described these *jihAds* with abundant
admiration, also functioned at different times and places.  They wrote
in two different languages - the earlier ones in Arabic and the later
ones in Persian.  Babur wrote in Turkish.

Yet, their accounts follow the same pattern.  The accounts read as if
the historians have only filled the blanks in a prescribed proforma. 
Or, to change the metaphor, the different stories read like varied
scripts of the same drama staged by different directors.  Only the
*dramatis personae* change from performance to performance.

How do we account for this repetition of the repertoire?

The key is held by the Quran.  That is the only thing which all mujAhids
and their historians, have shared in common.

The same logic leads to another and a very ominous conclusion. *JihAd*
cannot be regarded as something which happened only in the past.  On the
contrary, it is an ever-present possibility in India.  The Quran will
create a *jihAd* whenever and wherever the “infidels” provide an
opportunity.  Pious Muslims in every place and at all times, are taught
to see, or seek, or provoke situations in which solutions prescribed by
the Quran can be practised.  
 

**Footnotes: **

  

^([1](#1a))The Muslim war-cry of *AllAhu*-akbar.

^([2](#2a))Elliot and Dowson, *History of India as told by its own
Historians*, Volume I, p. 164.  Translation is that of the *Chachnama*
by an unknown Muslim author.

^([3](#3a))Ibid., pp. 172-73.

^([4](#4a))Ibid., p. 176.

^([5](#5a))Ibid., p. 179.

^([6](#6a))Muslim conquerors spared the common people from death or
enslavement only to turn them into hewers of wood and drawers of water
for the new master class and keep the economy going.

^([7](#7a))Ibid., p. 181.

^([8](#8a))Ibid., p. 182.

^([9](#9a))Those who became Muslims.

^([10](#10a))Ibid., p. 190.

^([11](#11a))Ibid., p. 205.

^([12](#12a))Ibid., Volume II, p. 22.  Translation is that of
*TArIkh-i-YamIni* of al-Utbi.

^([13](#13a))Ibid., pp. 24-25.

^([14](#14a))Ibid., p. 27.

^([15](#15a))Ibid., p. 33.

^([16](#16a))Ibid., p. 35.

^([17](#17a))Narayanpur in Alwar district of Rajasthan.

^([18](#18a))Ibid., p. 36.

^([19](#19a))Capital of the Hindu Shahis after they lost Udbhandapur
near Peshawar.

^([20](#20a))Ibid., p. 37.

^([21](#21a))Ibid., P. 39.

^([22](#22a))Ibid., pp. 40-41.

^([23](#23a))Bhur King Chandrapal of Asni near Fatehpur in Uttar
Pradesh.

^([24](#24a))Ibid., p. 47.

^([25](#25a))Town near Saharanpur in Uttar Pradesh.

^([26](#26a))Ibid., pp. 49-50.

^([27](#27a))Ibid., p. 209.

^([28](#28a))Ibid., p. 212.  Emphases in the original translation.

^([29](#29a))Sadr Kiwam-l mulk Ruhu-d din Hamza.

^([30](#30a))Ibid., p. 213.  Emphases in the original translation.

^([31](#31a))Ibid., p. 215.

^([32](#32a))Ibid., pp. 216-17.

^([33](#33a))Ibid., p. 219.

^([34](#34a))Ibid., p. 222.

^([35](#35a))Ibid., p. 223.

^([36](#36a))Ibid., p. 230.  What Hasan Nizami does not tell at this
point is that the army of Islam had to beat a hasty retreat from Gujarat
in the face of a fierce Hindu counter-offensive.

^([37](#37a))Ibid., p. 231.

^([38](#38a))Hindus had reconquered Delhi after their first defeat.

^([39](#39a))Ibid., pp. 238-39.

^([40](#40a))Khambat or Cambay in Gujarat.

^([41](#41a))Ibid., Volume III, pp. 42-43.  Translation of
*TArIkh-i-WassAf* of Abdullah Wassaf.

^([42](#42a))Ibid., p. 43.

^([43](#43a))Ibid., p. 44.

^([44](#44a))Devagiri in Maharashtra, renamed Daulatabad by Muhammad bin
Tughlaq.

^([45](#45a))Ibid., p. 85.  Translation of *TArIkh-i-‘AlAi* of Amir
Khusru, poet and sufi disciple of Nizamuddin Awliya, the far-famed
Chishtiyya sufi of Delhi.

^([46](#46a))Dwarasamudra in Karnataka, Capital of the Hoysala Kingdom
at that time.

^([47](#47a))Ibid., pp. 88-89.

^([48](#48a))Quran, 66.9.

^([49](#49a))Ibid., 394-95.  Translation of *MalfUzA-i-TimUri* of Timur.

^([50](#50a))Ibid., pp. 396-97.

^([51](#51a))Ibid., p. 397. *SUrat-ul-FAtihat*, the opening chapter of
the Quran.

^([52](#52a))A well-known sufi.

^([53](#53a))Ibid., p. 398.

^([54](#54a))A town in North-West Frontier Province.

^([55](#55a))Ibid., pp. 403-05.

^([56](#56a))No one from among the devotees of Baba Farid, the famous
Chrishtiyya sufi, is known to have disapproved of the crimes committed
by Timur.

^([57](#57a))Modern Hanumangarh in the Ganganagar district of Rajasthan.

^([58](#58a))Ibid., pp. 421-22.

^([59](#59a))Ibid., p. 427.

^([60](#60a))The ancient name of Sirsa, now headquarters of a district
in Haryana.

^([61](#61a))Ibid., pp. 427-28.

^([62](#62a))A town in Jind district of Haryana.

^([63](#63a))The *saiyids* had no sympathy with the Jats who were their
neighbours; instead, they were delighted to witness their slaughter.

^([64](#64a))Ibid., P. 429.

^([65](#65a))A town opposite Delhi across the Jamuna.

^([66](#66a))Ibid., pp. 432-33.

^([67](#67a))Firoz Shah Tughlaq’s palace on the Ridge, now Bara Hindu
Rao Hospital.

^([68](#68a))Drum-beaters.

^([69](#69a))This speaks volumes about Maulanas produced by Islam.

^([70](#70a))Ibid., pp. 435-36.

^([71](#71a))The word “Hindu” in this citation has been left out in
Mohammad Habib and K.A. Nizami (ed.), *A Comprehensive History of
India*, Volume V. *The Sultanat*, published by the People’s Publishing
House, New Delhi, 1970, p. 122.  Our “secular” historians are very
honest indeed.  Habib heads the list.

^([72](#72a))Ibid., pp. 445-46.

^([73](#73a))Ibid., p. 448.

^([74](#74a))Ibid., pp. 451-54.

^([75](#75a))A town on the east bank of the Jamuna.

^([76](#76a))Ibid., pp. 457-58.

^([77](#77a))Ibid., p. 459.

^([78](#78a))Ibid., pp. 459-60.

^([79](#79a))Region round Dehradun and neighbouring districts of
Himachal Pradesh.

^([80](#80a))Ibid., p. 461.

^([81](#81a))A term used for Zoroastrians of Iran to start with, it
became a term of contempt for Hindu warriors, meaning vagabonds.

^([82](#82a))Ibid., pp. 462-63.

^([83](#83a))Ibid., pp. 463-64.

^([84](#84a))Ancient name of Kangra, now a district headquarters in
Himachal Pradesh.

^([85](#85a))Ibid., pp. 465-66.

^([86](#86a))In his *Glimpses of World History*, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru
has shown great fondness for Babur, including the letter’s hobby of
making towers of severed Hindu heads.

^([87](#87a))*Babur-Nama*, translated into English by A.S. Beveridge,
New Delhi reprint, 1979, pp. 370-71.

^([88](#88a))Ibid., p. 547.

^([89](#89a))Quran, 57.15.

^([90](#90a))*Babur-Nama*, p. 554.

^([91](#91a))Quran, 80.42.

^([92](#92a))*Babur-Nama*, p. 560.

^([93](#93a))Quran, 69.35.

^([94](#94a))*Babur-Nama*, p. 561.

^([95](#95a))Quran, 3.20.

^([96](#96a))*Babur-Nama*, p. 562.

^([97](#97a))Quran, 29.5.

^([98](#98a))Ibid., 66.9.

^([99](#99a))*Babur-Nama*, p. 563.

^([100](#100a))Quran, 14.33.

^([101](#101a))*Babur-Nama*, p. 569.

^([102](#102a))Quran, 3.133.

^([103](#103a))Ibid., 61.13.

^([104](#104a))*Babu-Nama*, p. 572.

^([105](#105a))Quran, 43.3.

^([106](#106a))Ibid., 48.3.

^([107](#107a))*Babur-Nama*, p. 572-73.

^([108](#108a))Ibid., pp. 574-75

^([109](#109a))*TArIkh-i-Sher ShAhI* of Abbas Khan Sherwani in Elliot
and Dowson, Volume IV, pp. 407-09.

^([110](#110a))*TArIkh-i-DAUdI* of ‘Abdullah in Elliot and Dowson,
Volume IV, pp. 478-79.

^([111](#111a))Sultan of the Adil ShAhi dynasty of Bijapur.

^([112](#112a))*TArIkh-i-Farishtah*, translated into English by John
Briggs as *History of the Rise of the Mahomedan Power in India*, New
Delhi reprint, 1981, Volume III, p. 71.

^([113](#113a))Sultan of the Qutb ShAhI dynasty of Golkunda.

^([114](#114a))Ibid., pp. 74-75.

^([115](#115a))Sultan of the NizAm ShAhi dynasty of Ahmadnagar.

^([116](#116a))Ibid., p. 75.

^([117](#117a))Sultan of the BarId ShAhi dynasty of Bidar.

^([118](#118a))Ibid., p. 76.

^([119](#119a))Ibid., pp. 76-77.

^([120](#120a))R.C. Majumdar (ed.), *The History and Culture of the
Indian People*, Volume VII, The Mughal Empire, Bombay, 1973, p. 425.

^([121](#121a))*TArIkh-i-Farishtah*, op. cit., p. 79.

^([122](#122a))Robert Sewell, *A Forgotten Empire*, New Delhi reprint,
1962, pp. 199-200.

^([123](#123a))*TArIkh-i SalAtin-i AfaghAna* of Ahmad Yadgar, translated
in Elliot and Dowson, Volume V, pp. 65-66.

^([124](#124a))*TArIkh-i-Akbari* of Muhammad Arif Qandhari, translated
into English by Tanseem Ahmad, Delhi, 1993, p. 74.

^([125](#125a))*Akbar-NAma* of Abul Fazl, translated in Elliot and
Dowson, Volume VI, p. 21.

^([126](#126a))*TArIkh-i-Akbari*, op. cit., pp.149-51. Emphasis added.

^([127](#127a))*Proceedings of Indian History Congress*, New Delhi,
1972, translated and annotated by Ishtiaq Ahmed Zilli, pp. 350-61.

^([128](#128a))Opening fines of the Prophet’s speech after the Conquest
of Mecca.

^([129](#129a))Quran, 30.47.

^([130](#130a))Ibid., 9.14.

^([131](#131a))Ibid., 17.43.

^([132](#132a))Ibid., 2.124.

^([133](#133a))Ibid., 18.84.

^([134](#134a))Ibid., 62.4.

^([135](#135a))Ibid., 27.40.

^([136](#136a))Ibid., 7.43.

^([137](#137a))Ibid., 80.16.

^([138](#138a))Ibid., 8.62.

^([139](#139a))Ibid., 8.60.

^([140](#140a))Ibid., 21.39.

^([141](#141a))Ibid., 21.40.

^([142](#142a))Ibid., 47.7.

^([143](#143a))Ibid., 2.214.

^([144](#144a))Ibid., 4.78.

^([145](#145a))Ibid., 5.71.

^([146](#146a))Ibid., 36.67.

^([147](#147a))Ibid., 2.250.

^([148](#148a))Ibid., 61.13.

^([149](#149a))Ibid., 74.50-51.

^([150](#150a))Ibid., 8.10.

^([151](#151a))Ibid., 9.36.

^([152](#152a))Ibid., 48.20.

^([153](#153a))Ibid., 6.45.

^([154](#154a))See also Abul Fazl, *Akbar NAma*, translated into English
by H. Beveridge, Volume I and II Bound in One, New Delhi reprint, 1993,
pp. 441-46 and 464-80.  It is significant that this despicable
lickspittle of Akbar does not even mention the *Fathnama* cited above. 
But his use of words like “martyrs”, “holy warriors”, and “*ghAzis*” for
the Islamic gangsters and extremely abusive language for the Rajput
warriors, leaves no doubt that he also viewed the sack of Chittor as a
*jihAd*.

^([155](#155a))Jadunath Sarkar, *Fall of the Mughal Empire*, Volume II,
Fourth Edition, New Delhi, 1991, p.69.

^([156](#156a))Ibid., pp. 70-71.  Emphasis added.

^([157](#157a))*MuntakhAb-ut-TawArIkh*, translated in Elliot and Dowson,
Volume VIII, pp. 405-06.  Emphasis added.

^([158](#158a))*Fall of the Mughal Empire*, op. cit., Volume II, pp.
210-11. Emphasis added.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


