+++
title = "16 (4) THE WRIT APPLICATION   MATTER NO. 227 OF 1985 IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA. Constitution Writ Jurisdiction. (ORIGINAL SIDE)"

+++
**(4)**

**THE WRIT APPLICATION**  
   
 

**MATTER NO. 227 OF 1985**  
**IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA.**  
**Constitution Writ Jurisdiction.**  
(ORIGINAL SIDE)

**In the Matter of**  

An application Under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and Writs,
directions and orders thereunder.

*AND*

**In the Matter of**  
Section 95 of the Code of Criminal  
Procedure, 1973.

*AND*

**In the Matter of**  
Sections 153A and 295A Indian Penal  
Code.

*AND*

**In the Matter of**  

The Koran, an Islamic book, published and sold in India in the original
Arabic and in its translations in Urdu, Bengali, Hindi, English, etc.

*AND*

**In the Matter of**

1.  Chandmal Chopra, son of late Tikam Chand Chopra, aged 53, at present
    residing at 25, Burtolla Street, Calcutta - 7, and

2.  Sital Singh, son of late Lal Singh at present residing at No. 1,
    Munshi Sadruddin Lane, Calcutta - 7.

<div align="right">

**-PETITIONERS**

</div>

**Versus**  

The State of West Bengal, represented by the Secretary, Department of
Home, Government of West Bengal, having his office at Writers’ Building,
Calcutta - 1.

<div align="right">

**-RESPONDENT.**

</div>

To  

The Hon’ble Mr. Tarun Kumar Basu, the Acting Chief Justice and His
Companion Justices of the said Hon’ble Court.

The humble petition of the petitioners abovenamed most respectfully

**S H E W E T H :**

1\. The petitioners are the citizens of India and are engaged in various
types of social work.

2\. The respondent is a public authority having in terms of Section 95
Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, read with Sections 153A and 295A Indian
Penal Code, a public duty to forfeit to the Government every copy of a
book which incites violence, disturbs public tranquility, promotes, on
ground of religion, feelings of enmity, hatred and ill-will between
different religious communities and insults other religions or religious
beliefs of other communities in India.

3\. The Koran, also spelt as ‘Qur’an’, the so-called religious book of
the Muslims the world over, written originally in the Arabic and
available throughout India in the original Arabic or in its translation
in Urdu, Bengali, Hindi, English, etc., is ex facie guilty of each one
of the above offences.

4\. For example, in Surah 9, ayat 5, the book says, “When the sacred
months are over, slay the idolaters wherever you find them. Arrest them,
besiege them and lie in ambush everywhere for them.”

In Surah 48, ayat 29, it says, “Muhammad is Allah’s apostle.  Those who
follow him are ruthless to the unbelievers but merciful to one another… 
Through them Allah seeks to enrage the unbelievers.”

In surah 49, ayat 15, it says, “The true believers are those who have
faith in Allah and His apostle and never doubt; and who fight for His
cause with their wealth and persons.”

In surah 8, ayat 39, it says, “Make war on them (idol-worshippers) until
idolatry is no more and Allah’s religion reigns supreme.”

In surah 2, ayat 193, it again says, “Fight against them until idolatry
is no more and Allah’s religion reigns supreme.”

In surah 2, ayat 216, it has made fighting “obligatory” for every
Muslim.  In surah 9, ayat 41, it exhorts Muslims to “march on and fight
for the cause of Allah”, whether unarmed or well-equipped.

In surah 9, ayat 123, exhorting Muslims to make war on infidels 16 who
dwell around you”, it says, “Let them find harshness in you.”

In surah 66, ayat 9, an exhortation is given to the prophet to make war
on the unbelievers and “deal sternly with them.”

In surah 9, ayat 73, it again exhorts the prophet to “make war” on the
unbelievers and to be “harsh” with them.

In surah 8, ayat 65, it asks the prophet to exhort the Muslims to fight,
saying, “If there are twenty steadfast men among you, they shall rout a
thousand unbelievers.” More or less the same thing is repeated in ayat
66 of the same surah 8.

In surah 47, ayats 4 to 15, the Koran calls upon the Muslims to “strike
off” the heads of the non-Muslims when the two meet in the battlefield,
without minding risking their own lives, for if any of them are killed
fighting in the name of Allah they are assured of admission in the
paradise.

In surah 8, ayat 12, the Koran exhorts the Muslims to “strike off” the
heads of the non-Muslims and to “maim them in every limb.”

In surah 69, ayats 30 to 37, the Muslims are asked to capture
non-Muslims and bum them in hell-fire after fastening them with chains.

In surah 8, ayats 15 to 18, the Muslims are exhorted not to run away
while fighting the non-Muslims and thus incur the wrath of Allah.

In surah 25, ayat 52, the Muslims are exhorted not to yield to the
non-Muslims but to fight them strenuously, while according to surah 9,
ayat 39, if anybody does not fight, he will be punished by Allah
sternly.

In surah 9, ayat 111, the Koran exhorts the Muslims to kill and be
killed because, it says that Allah in exchange of promise of heavenly
garden has already purchased the lives and the worldly belongings of the
Muslims.

In surah 3, ayats 157 and 158 a believer is told that if he is killed
while fighting the unbelievers, he will get Allah’s mercy all the more.

In surah 8, ayats 59 and 60, the believers are told to muster all the
men and the entire cavalry against the unbelievers so that it may strike
terror into non-believers.

In surah 9, ayats 2 and 3, the believers are exhorted to proclaim a
woeful punishment to the unbelievers.

In surah 9, ayat 29, the Muslims are exhorted to fight the Christians
and the Jews until they embrace the true faith, that is, Islam.

In surah 4, ayat 66, it is stated that the prophet does not take people
captives; he simply kills them.

In surah 4, ayat 84, the believers are roused to fight.  In surah 29,
ayat 6, it says, “He that fights for Allah’s cause fights for himself.”

In surah 9, ayat 14, it exhorts the believers to “fight them.  Allah
will chastise them at your hands, and He will lay them low and give you
victory over them…”

In surah 9, ayats 20 and 21, the believers are assured that “those that
have embraced the faith and fled their homes and fought for Allah’s
cause with their wealth and their persons are held in higher regard by
Allah.  It is they who shall triumph.  Their Lord has promised them joy
and mercy, and gardens of eternal pleasure where they shall dwell for
ever.”

In surah 3, ayat 142, a dangerous statement is made in the
interrogative, “Did you suppose that you would enter paradise before
Allah has proved the men who fought for him and endured with fortitude?”

5\. The book promotes religious enmity, hatred and ill-will between
different religious communities in India.

For example, in surah 60, ayat 4, it says, “We renounce you (i.e.
idol-worshippers); enmity and hate shall reign between us until you
believe in Allah only.”

In surah 58, ayat 22, it says, “You shall find no believers in Allah and
the Last Day on friendly terms with those who oppose Allah and His
apostle, even though they may be their fathers, their sons, their
brothers, or their nearest kindred.”

In surah 9, ayat 23, it says “Believers! do not befriend your fathers or
your brothers, if they choose unbelief in preference to faith. 
Wrong-doers are those that befriend them.”

In surah 3, ayat 28, it says, “Let believers not make friends with
infidels in preference to the faithful; he that does this has nothing to
hope for from Allah.”

In surah 3, ayat 118, it says, “Believers! do not make friends with any
men other than your own people.”

In surah 4, ayat 144, it says, “Believers! do not choose the infidels
rather than the faithful for your friends.  Would you give Allah a clear
proof against yourself?”

In surah 9, ayat 7, it says, “Allah and His apostle repose no trust in
idolaters.” In surah 8, ayat 55, It says, “The basest creatures in the
sight of Allah are the faithless who will not believe.”

In surah 25, ayat 55, it says, “Yet the unbelievers worship idols which
can neither help nor harm them.  Surely the unbeliever is his Lord’s
enemy.”

In surah 5, ayat 72, it says, “He that worships other Gods besides Allah
shall be forbidden Paradise and shall be cast into the fire of Hell. 
None shall help the evil-doers.”

In surah 9, ayat 28, it says, “Believers! know that the idolaters are
unclean.”

In surah 5, ayat 14, it says, “Therefore, we stirred among them (i.e.
the Christians) enmity and hatred, which shall endure till the Day of
Resurrection”

In surah 5, ayat 64, it says, “That which Allah has revealed to you will
surely increase the wickedness and unbelief of many of them (i.e. the
Jews).  We have stirred among them, (i.e. the Christians) enmity and
hatred, which shall endure till the Day of Resurrection…”

In surah 5, ayat 18, it says.  “The Jews and the Christians say, ‘We are
the children of Allah and His loved ones.’ Say, ‘Why then does He punish
you for your sins’?”

In surah 5, ayat 51, it says, “Believers! take neither Jews nor
Christians for your friends.  They are friends with one another. 
Whoever of you seeks their friendship shall become one of their
members.  Allah does not guide the wrong-doers.”

6\. The book insults other religions or religious beliefs of other
communities in India.

For example, in surah 5 ayat 17, it says, “Unbelievers are those who
declare, ‘Allah is the Messiah (i.e. the Christ), the son of Mary.’ 
Say, ‘Who could prevent Allah from destroying the Messiah, the son of
Mary, together with his mother and all the people of the earth’?”

In surah 4, ayat 157, it says, “They denied the truth and uttered a
monstrous falsehood against Mary.  They declared, ‘We have put to death
the Messiah Jesus, the son of Mary, the apostle of Allah.’ They did not
kill him nor did they crucify him but they thought they did.”

In surah 98, ayat 6, it says, “Me unbelievers among the people of the
Book (i.e. the Christians and the Jews) and the pagans shall bum for
ever in the fire of Hell.  They are the vilest of all creatures.”

In surah 68, ayats 10 to 13, it says, “Give no heed to the disbelievers;
they desire you to overlook their doings that they may overlook yours. 
Nor yield to the wretch of many oaths, the mischief-making slanderer,
the opponent of good, the wicked transgressor, the bully who is of
doubtful birth to boot.”

In surah 22, ayats 19 to 22, it says.  “Garments of fire have been
prepared for unbelievers.  Scalding water shall be poured upon their
heads, melting their skins and that which is in their bellies.  They
shall be lashed with rods of iron.”

In surah 22, ayats 56 and 57, it says, “Those that have embraced the
true faith and done good work shall enter the gardens of delight, but
the unbelievers who have denied Our revelations shall receive an
ignominious punishment.”

In surah 5, ayats 36 and 37, it says, “As for the unbelievers, if they
offered all that the earth contains and as much besides to redeem
themselves from the torment of the Day of Resurrection, it shall not be
accepted from them.  Theirs shall be a woeful punishment.”

In surah 15, ayat 2, it says, “The day will surely come when the
unbelievers will wish that they were Muslims.”

In surah 72, ayats 14 and 15, it says, “Some of us are Muslims and some
are wrong-doers.  Those that embrace Islam pursue the right path, but
those that do wrong shall become the fuel of fire.”

In surah 41, ayat 33, it says.  “And who speaks better than he who calls
others to the service of Allah, does what is right, and says, ‘I am a
Muslim’?”

In surah 4, ayat 125, it says, “And who has a nobler religion than the
one who surrenders himself to Allah?”

In surah 3, ayat 85, it says, “He that chooses a religion other than
Islam, it will not be accepted from him and in the world to come, he
will be one of the last.”

In surah 8, ayat 38, it says, “Tell the unbelievers that if they mend
their ways (i.e. embrace Islam) their past will be forgiven but if they
persist in sin (i.e. idol-worshipping) let them reflect upon the fate of
their forefathers.”

In surah 31, ayat 13, it says, “Luqman admonished his son.  ‘My son’, he
said, ‘serve no other God instead of Allah, for idolatry is an
abominable sin’.”

In surah 29, ayat 41, it says, “The false Gods which the idolaters serve
besides Allah may be compared to the spider’s cobweb.  Surely the
spider’s is the frailest of all dwellings if they but know it.”

In surah 37, ayats 22 to 25, it says, “But We shall say, ‘Call the
sinners, their wives and the idols which they worshipped besides Allah,
and lead them to the path of Hell.  Keep them there for questioning -
But what has come over you that you cannot help one another’?”

In surah 7, ayat 173, it makes the Muslims say, “Our forefathers were
indeed idol-worshippers, but will you destroy us, their descendants, on
account of what the followers of falsehood did?”

In surah 21, ayats 66 and 67, it says, “He answered, ‘Would you then
worship that, instead of Allah, which can neither help nor harm you? 
Shame on you and on your idols!  Have you no sense?”‘

In surah 21, ayats 98 to 100, it says, “You and all your idols shall be
the fuel of Hell; therein you shall all go down.  Were they true Gods,
your idols would not go there; but in it they shall abide for ever. 
They shall groan with pain and be bereft of hearing.”

In surah 6, ayats 22 and 23, it says.  “On that day when We gather them
all together, We shall say to the idolaters: ‘Where are your idols now,
those whom you supposed to be your Gods?’ They will not argue, but will
say, ‘By Allah, our Lord, we have never worshipped idols’.”

In surah 6, ayats 40 and 41, it makes the believers say, “Say, ‘When
Allah’s scourge smites you and the Hour of Doom suddenly overtakes you,
will you call on any but Allah to help you?  Answer me, if you are men
of truth.  No, on Him alone you will call, and if He pleases, He will
relieve your affliction.  Then you will forget your idols’.”

In surah 6, ayat 149 it says, “The idolaters will say, ‘Had Allah
pleased, neither we nor our fathers would have served other Gods besides
Him’.”

In surah 2, ayat 221, it says, “You shall not wed pagan women, unless
they embrace the faith.  A believing slave-girl is better than an
idolatress, although she may please you.  Nor shall you wed idolaters,
unless they embrace the faith.  A believing slave is better than an
idolater, although he may please you.  These call you to Hell-fire, but
Allah calls you, by His will, to Paradise and to forgiveness.”

In surah 24, ayat 3, it says, “The adulterer may marry only an
adulteress or an idolatress, and the adulteress may marry an adulterer
or an idolater.”

In surah 5, ayats 116 to 118, there is given this imaginary dialogue
between Allah and Jesus Christ, which is highly insulting to the
Christians: “Then Allah will say, ‘Jesus, son of Mary, did you ever say
to mankind, worship me and my mother as Gods besides Allah?’ ‘Glory to
You,’ he will answer, ‘How could I say that to which I have no right? 
If I had ever said so, You would have surely known it.  You know what is
in my mind, but I cannot tell what is in Yours.  You alone know what is
hidden. I spoke to them of nothing except what You bade me. I say, Serve
Allah, my Lord and your Lord. I watched over them whilst living in their
midst, and ever since You took me to You, You Yourself have been
watching over them.  You are the witness of all things.  They are Your
own bondsmen.  It is for You to punish or to forgive them.  You are the
Mighty, the Wise one’.”

In surah 25, ayats 17 to 19, there is given another imaginary
conversation, this time between Allah, the idols and the
idol-worshippers, which is highly insulting to Christians, Buddhists,
Hindus, etc.  “On the day when He assembles them with all their idols,
He will say: ‘Was it you who misled My servants, or did they wilfully go
astray?’ They will answer: ‘Allah forbid that we should choose other
guardians besides You.  You gave them and their fathers the good things
of life, so that they forgot Your warnings and thus incurred
destruction.’ Then to the idolaters Allah will say: ‘Your idols have
denied your charges.  They cannot avert your doom, nor can they help
you.  Those of you who have done wrong shall be sternly punished’.”

7\. While the Koran abounds with saying which incite violence, insult
the religious beliefs of other communities and even exhort the Muslims
to kill and murder non-Muslims, the problem is aggravated by yet another
fact which has been true in the past and is universally true in our own
times that unlike other communities Muslims are, and even fresh converts
tend to become, highly orthodox people and follow the sayings of the
book with a fanatical zeal with the result that whichever country has
their sizable number amongst its population can never have peace on its
soil.  The examples of communal strifes and conflicts in most European
states have not yet passed into history.  What is happening in Lebanon
is very much in our perception.  An example of orthodoxy is Pakistan
whose Hindu population has been obliterated through murder or through
forcible conversion.  Even Ahmediyas are being persecuted there because
they regard Mirza Ghulam Ahmed (1839-1908 AD), the founder of their
religion, as another prophet along with Muhammad which is contrary to
Koran because according to the Koran Muhammad is the last prophet. 
Baha’i religion, even though a Muslim sect and founded by Baha-ul-lah in
Iran in the nineteenth century and which has some one million followers
in India along with some 400,000 in Iran, has been banned in Indonesia
on the ground that it stresses men’s spiritual unity, which is
unconformable with Koranic preachings.  In Iran, Baha’is are being
subjected to worst persecution; many have been executed, many more
jailed without trial.  Even Baha’i students have been expelled from
schools and colleges in Iran.  Another example of orthodoxy or religious
intolerance is furnished by Iran and Iraq, both Muslim countries but
both of which are out to fight tooth and nail with each other because
one happens to be a Shia nation while the other a Sunni nation.  In our
country, violent conflict resulting in numerous deaths between Shias and
Sunnis is almost an annual ritual.  Another example of religious
fanaticism is provided by the fact that the Muslim countries the world
over have ganged up together to crush Israel, because it happens to be a
Jewish state and as already stated in para 5 above, the Koran makes most
uncharitable remarks about the Jews.

8\. The offending expressions contained in the Koran and quoted in
paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 above are not so offensive in their translation in
which they are so quoted as they are in the original verses in Arabic or
in Urdu, the very sound of whose inimitable symphony not only sends the
Muslims to tears and ecstasy but arouses in them the worst communal
passions and religious fanaticism which have manifested themselves in
murder, slaughter, loot, arson, rape and destruction or desecration of
holy places in historical times as also in contemporary period not only
in India but almost all over the world.

9\. In this way, the publication of the Koran in the original Arabic as
well as in its translations in various languages including Urdu, Hindi,
Bengali, English, etc., amounts to commission of offences punishable u/s
153A and 295A of the Indian Penal Code and accordingly each copy of the
book must be declared as forfeited by the respondent u/s 95 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

10\. By letter dated 16th March, 1985, the petitioner No. 1, requested
the respondent to declare each copy of the Koran, whether in the
original Arabic or in its translation in any of the languages, as
forfeited to the Government within seven days of the receipt of the
letter.  By the same letter the respondent was also requested to treat
the letter as notice demanding justice.  A copy of this letter is
annexed hereto marked ‘A’.

11\. The respondent, however, has not complied with the said request.

12\. Being aggrieved by the failure of the respondent to accede to the
said request, your petitioners beg to move this petition before this
Hon’ble Court on the following

> > **G R O U N D**
> >
> > The respondent, by not declaring, inspite of a specific request,
> > copies of the ‘Koran’ to be forfeited to the Government, even though
> > its publication amounts to commission of offences punishable under
> > Sections 153A and 295A, Indian Penal Code, has failed to discharge
> > its statutory duty as enshrined in Section 95 of the Code of
> > Criminal Procedure, 1973.

13\. There is no other adequate, efficacious and alternative remedy
available to your petitioners and the reliefs prayed for herein, if
granted, will afford complete and efficacious remedy to your
petitioners.

14\. The petition is being made bonafide and in the interest of the
public.

In the circumstances aforesaid your petitioners humbly pray to your
Lordships for

A. A rule nisi on the respondent to show cause as to why a writ of
mandamus be not issued to it directing it to declare each copy of the
Koran, whether in the original Arabic or in its translation in any of
the languages as forfeited to the Government.

B. The rule issued in terms of prayer ‘A’ above be made absolute.

C. Such further or other order and/or orders be made and/or directions
be given as may be deemed fit and proper.

And your petitioners as in duty bound shall ever pray.

<div align="right">

Sd/- Chandmal Chopra.  
Sd/- Sital Singh

29th March, 1985.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------


