+++
title = "22 Previous"

+++
DISTRICT JABALPUR

*The 15th November 1954.*

The Chairman explained the object of the State Government in appointing
the Committee.

**Shri Sohanlal Agarwal, Secretary, Vedic S.R. Samiti and Secretary,
Arya Samaj:** The facts stated in the memorandum presented by me are
given as a result of my experience.  Government do not make any
provision for schools and, therefore, missionaries have got an
opportunity of working in Jabalpur.  Christian mothers are put in charge
of children.  No national songs are sung in the schools.  Quarters are
provided for lady teachers and there is strict control over them. 
Church is situated in school premises.  This atmosphere is responsible
for missionary activities.  Facilities afforded by Government are
enjoyed by Christian students.  Christian students have been maintained
at the cost of institutions at some places.  Hindu Gods and Goddesses
are ridiculed in schools.  On 21st December 1953, a rehearsal of a drama
was being given in a Christian Mission School of Methodist Church. 
Kalimata worship was condemned and Christian religion impressed in the
drama.  Shri Ambikaprasad Saraf, a teacher in the school, very strongly
protested against this.  Hindu students also protested and the drama was
not played.  Shri Ambikaprasadji’s services were terminated.  Some Hindu
students were rusticated.  Education Department held enquiries into the
matter but it was one-sided because they did not ask any of the Hindu
teachers and students.  The teacher was appointed by the Education
Department in another school.  The students were admitted to the school
and Bible reading was also stopped.  A student was beaten and no action
was taken though a complaint was made to the police.  The boy’s father
will be produced before you whenever desired.  August 15th was
celebrated on the 13th in the Johnson’s Girls’ School, because 15th was
Sunday and it is considered a religious day.  A drama was staged in
which an Indian National Flag was pulled down and ten girls in the drama
desired that the Cross Flag should he pitched high above it.  We will
prove this allegation. A copy of the next of the drama will be handed
over to you.  If I am not telling the truth, I stand for prosecution. 
The names of President, Vice-President and Prime Minister of the Indian
Republic are decried in American Christian magazines abroad.  We will
supply you a copy of such a magazine.  Foreigners support the offices
here.  A Christian pracharak, Mr. Pande had been to my house for
preaching. He gave a book.  A police report was made about this.  It was
also observed that some small toy arms were freely distributed to
children.  Powdered milk is distributed to Fatma Club freely in the
Gondpura.  Christians collect boys, sing a song and distribute them alms
and milk.  We have got witnesses who will say what allurements have been
given to them.  Why people are living in Christian compounds and how and
why they were brought there may also be examined which will throw light.

**Shri Chaddha:** Government do not care to know what the higher
Christian officers are doing.  I am referring in particular to a
complaint against Shri Franklin about the enquiry made by him in the
school affair.  That school receives grant from Government.  I started
agitation against Bible teaching in schools in 1928.  Boys were taken to
church in my own presence, and in those boys my child was also taken. 
Two girls were taken away-one to Raipur and the other to Bastar.  This
happened some few years back.  An European lady did this.  The girl was
about 15 to 16 years of age.  I took the girl in my possession very
skillfully.

**Shri Gangaprasad Vidyarthi, ex-Student, Arya Samaj, Ganjapara:** In
Pendra Road Sanatorium, one Agriculturist was requested to become
Christian because he was not able to continue to meet the cost of
treatment there.  One Mohemedan boy fell in love with a Christian girl. 
He was asked to become a Christian even though she was willing to marry
the Mohemedan.  The boy was aged about 19 to 20.  Western form of dress,
including tie, is compulsory in a girls’ school at Wright Town.  This
should be stopped.

**Shri Satpalnand, ex-Forest Officer:** In Raipur, where I was a Forest
Sub-Divisional Officer, there was Raipur Forest Tramway.  In Singhpur,
there was a quarter of Mennonite Mission.  They got 8,600 acres of land
from a reserve forest from higher authorities.  It was a virgin forest. 
This was intended for a scheme of colonization of arrested cases of
lepers and their offsprings.  This was the name of the scheme and they
received a huge grant from Government.  On making enquiries at the
colony later, I found that the inmates had come from Dhamtari boarding. 
I want to point out their manner of work.

**Shri Govindsingh Dhurve, Student, Robertson College (a tribal from
Dindori area):** Before 15 years money was advanced by missionaries free
of interest in Dohania.  Some five years back a case took place, details
of which may be gathered from Shri Varma.  Preachers harass people and
force conversion on them.  Christians are prohibited to take water
during summer.

**Principal, Johnson Girls’ High School:** The programme for
Independence Day in our school was not planned in a great hurry. 
Meetings were held on 6th July and 9th August to chalk it out.  It was
unanimously voted by 26 members present.  The function was planned with
great responsibility.  No one from outside the institution was present
at the programme, as none could be invited.  We traced the history of
the independence of India from 1857 and that is the reason why British
flag was brought in.  Mother India was represented as having the
broadest heart that any nation should have.  Mother India was shown as
having the kindest heart to welcome the British people and the flag of
Pakistan was brought in to show that Mother India is friendly to
Pakistan.  So also about U. S. A. Cross is the symbol of love and
sacrifice.  The flag of India was raised the highest. Wrong statements
appeared in the press.  We had other programme of best rejoinings on the
15th and therefore the drama was performed on the 15th.  We went
unitedly to the church and offered special prayers. I have given a
report of my special meeting to the City Magistrate.  Gandhiji loved the
Cross. I would not have thought of misunderstanding the Cross.  A copy
of the text of the drama will be supplied.

**Headmaster, Christian High School (Disciples of Christ and Methodist
Mission):** Regarding the hostel allegation, I want to say that the
hostel is meant for those boys who come from different Missions and the
expenses are borne by the different Mandalis who send them there. 
Non-Christians coming from outside place are also allowed to stay
there.  About 19 Hindu students have so far stayed in the hostel.  The
hostel is not maintained by the school, but is run by different
Missions.  We do not get a single pie for the hostel from Government. 
We get grant from Government for the school.  Every one has to pay Rs.
80.  Non-Christians boys have lessons in moral teaching and Christian
boys have Bible teaching.  Bible classes are compulsory for Christian
students.  Teaching of Bible is not a part of curriculam.  We have a
syllabus prepared for it.  Sadachar Dharma is one of the books
prescribed in the syllabus.

About the allegation about staff, we have an equal number of Christians
and Non-Christians on our staff.  The management never rusticated any
student.  Only a threat was given for the sake of discipline.  There was
certain word in the drama to which I objected.  The idea of the play
given here is incorrect.  Message of Christ was presented in the form of
a story.  The position which indicated that the non-Christians should do
as the Christians are doing, was considered objectionable.  On 28th
October 1954 a teacher Ambikaprasadji resigned and he got a job in
Government school.

**Shri J. V. Hulasiray, District Superintendent of the Methodist Church
in Jabalpur:** The drama about which allegation has been made was not
staged but only a rehearsal of it was taken.  This is not
objectionable.  Seven Hindu teachers are confirmed on the staff of the
school and one of them receive special salary.

**One non-Christian gentleman:** said at the Circuit House meeting at
Jabalpur (on 18-11-1954) that the scope of the Committee is not
understood properly by the people and some of them are taking undue
advantage of the setting up of the Committee.

------------------------------

KATNI

*17th November 1954.*

Shri Malviyaji explained the purpose of the Committee and introduced the
members.

**President, Nagar Congress Committee:** Allurement of service and money
is shown to people to become Christians.  One Panjabi from Ordnance
Factory was offered Rs. 1,000 for conversion.  Loans are also advanced
by Missionaries.  We render all assistance to Christians.

**Thakur Jagpathi Singh:** Decrying Hindu deities and some teaching is
done every Sunday by Christian Missionaries.  A Gond came from Mouza
Thuthia some time back.  He said that children in the village may be
converted to Christianity soon, unless some steps were taken by
Government.  One gentleman said that there is practically no activity at
Katni.  There may be some activity in Kymore labour colony.

**Arya Samaj people,** who came later, said that there is enough to say
against Christians in Katni and neighbouring villages.  They had nothing
in particular, but were willing to supply any information asked from
them.  Copies of questionnaire have been handed over to them with a
request to send their replies in due course.

------------------------------

**JABALPUR**

*The 18th November 1954.*

 

[TABLE]

------------------------------

DINDORI

*The 18th November 1954.*

**Shri Katarae Maharaj, Retired Kanungo:** We owe the progress of
education to missionaries.  There is no force or fraud for conversion. 
I am disappointed to see the treatment given by Hindu religion.

**Lallu Maharaj:** Most of the teachers in Dullapur are persons who have
been converted during the last few years.  Several Baigas and Dhulias
have been converted.  Poor persons are shown allurement and advantage is
taken of their ignorance.

**Shri Bilthare, M.L.A.:** Last year, when Jaisingh Gond was with me,
there were several complaints of forceful conversion. Father at Ginwani
had beaten some man for return of wife.  The Father was American.  A
police report was made.  Generally, a group of four to six villages is
called a Tapra.  Prayers are offered in the Tapra every Sunday.  In the
beginning, these are optional.  But later, people are compelled to
attend the prayers.  I know a case of Karanjia in Dindori tahsil, where
a Gond boy was written as Christian, son of Dr. Rambo.  He has gone to
his house. I have his certificate.  It was published in, the press.

**Katare Maharaj:** Free medicines are distributed at Dullapur.

------------------------------

PATANGARH

*The 20th November 1954.*

**Mukhia:** We worship Bada Deo, which consists of some trees.

**Shri Harnamsingh Rajgond:** Father Elwin came here in 1938 from
Karanja.  Elwin did not convert.  No other missionaries came here.

------------------------------

BETUL

*18th January 1955.*

The Chairman explained the purpose of the Committee and how the
questionnaire was framed.  He narrated how the Committee wanted to
conduct the enquiry.  Shri Raman, President of the Lutheren Evangelical
Mission, was present among other Christians.  He informed the Chairman
that the questionnaire was not criticised by his Mission.

2\. The Missionaries present at the meeting said that the conception of
the Cross and of the attainment is not to be found in any other
doctrine.  The ideas in the different religions may be the same but the
missionaries were preaching the Christ and the Cross, whereas others
were not doing it.

3\. **Shri Dharmadhikari, pleader:** In our secular State we do not mind
philanthropic and other activities of Missionaries.  The Missionary
activities are aimed at converting peoples to the Christian religion by
providing certain privileges or amenities.  We object to this. 
Generally people do not get converted by conviction.  If sufficient time
is given, I assure the Committee that I can quote specific instances
such blind conversions.  Almost all the converts have been drawn from
the lower strata of Hindu Society.  A religion must have spiritual urge
among the men and not merely provide amenities or facilities.  The need
for religion is for those who are sufficiently intelligent to understand
its meaning.  Those who are not capable of understanding it, follow
their ancestral religion and traditions. I do not object to people
taking to Christianity by conviction.  Therefore we must make sure that
an illiterate person does not accept Christianity by any allurement but
he does so by conviction.  If you want me to prove this point I think I
shall be able to do it.  I have no allegations to make so far as the
local missions are concerned.  They are doing valuable work in this
area.  Their work may provide indirect inducement in the form of better
housing, free education, free medical aid, raising the standard of
living and everything else that is better in life, because the Hindu
society has refused to recognise them as “men”.  No one should be
allowed to make conversion unless he has got capacity to formulate an
idea of a religion.  There must be a test of this before some tribunal. 
The tribunal should satisfy that the person changing his religion is
doing so by conviction.

**Shri Raman:** In regard to the allegations of Shri Dharmadhikari that
only illiterate people are converted.  I quote an example of one Mr. R.
P. Deshpande from Betul proper.  He was an educated and well-to-do Hindu
before conversion.  Regarding the test proposed by Shri Dharmadhikari, I
wonder if a secular State like ours should concern itself with
individual religion and interfere with it.

**Shri Babulal Mishra, Pleader:** Conversion should stop because it is a
danger to the political unity of India.  It may lead to the creation of
Isaisthan like Pakistan.  Government may be secular but the loyalty of
the people should be such that there should be no ground for them to
look beyond their State.

**The Christian Missionaries** present at the meeting informed the
Committee that there might be a few black sheep but the people would be
generally national minded.  For example, if there is a war between
Sweden and India, we will stand by this country.  We speak of “Thy
Kingdom” but we do not mean any worldly kingdom.  We mean the Kingdom of
God in Heaven.  One gentleman belonging to Scheduled caste observed that
there should be no comparison of different religions.  There were not
man converts in that area.

------------------------------

AMLA

*The 18th January 1955*

The Chairman at the outset explained the object of the Committee in
undertaking the tour and the basis of its questionnaire.  The total
number of Christians in Amla is 160, out of whom 90 are Roman Catholics.

**Shri Raman:** We have a baptism register.  There are 700 Protestants
and Evangelical Lutheran Church is working here since 1923.  Formerly it
was called Swedish Mission.  Most of the converts come to church.  In
our denomination we have infant baptisma if the parents are Christians. 
I do not know a single case where a student has been converted in any of
our schools.  We come under the National Christian Council.  I had been
to Sweden twice.  Poor people in that country contribute when they are
told the need of funds for India.  In my presence I have seen certain
old ladies emptying their purses and widows giving their marriage rings
for this purpose.  1/8th of our funds are spent on education.  The rest
are spent in institutional activities.  Since the time I witnessed the
poor people contributing everything for the sake of religion, I have
decided not to collect funds now.  I simply make an appeal and others
collect funds.  No conversions have taken place in this area so far. 
There are no missions as well as Christians in the interior.

All the work evangelistic, medical and education comes under the
Church.  We get half the amount required for expenditure from Sweden and
half comes from India.  Our budget is to the extent of four lakhs
excluding payment of foreign missionaries.  Their pay comes direct from
Sweden.  Other half comes from grants-in-aid from Government and our
local collections.  Every Christian individual contributes one anna per
rupee and offerings in cash are also made during Sunday prayers.  Even
Europeans give this contribution and Sunday offerings.  I will submit a
full account of the contribution to the Committee with a detailed note. 
It is not that all people pay exactly 6 percent.  Some pay more and some
pay less.

Even if anybody does not pay, we do not make any difference in our
treatment towards him.  We have preachers going about in the villages. 
There has not been much apposition to them so far on the other hand, we
have received reports that villagers attend their prachar meetings in
large numbers and they get good response from them.  I hear that at one
place two different villages were keenly anxious to invite the preacher
first.  This was somewhere in Betul Tahsil, if I remember correctly.  We
have converted about 154 persons in 7 years time.  Our jurisdiction is
over Sagar, Betul and Chhindwara districts. Our preachers do not decry
other religion. They simply profess their own religion.  We have
training schools for our preachers in Betul.  Catholics do not solemnize
marriages between Catholics and Protestants.  They do so only when the
couple agrees that their children will be Catholic.  Our Church is the
same as Shri Lakra’s in Surguja district, but the society is different.

------------------------------

CHICHOLI

*19th January 1955*

Attendance 100 Villagers represented 10.

As usual the Chairman initiated the proceedings by explaining the object
of the State Government in appointing the Committee and the method the
Committee propose to adopt in the conduct of the enquiry.  Among others,
Shri Raman and local foreign missionaries were present.

**Shri Thune of Kondhal:** I cooked food and ate along with other
Christians.  This was given publicity in my own caste by Christians and
I was declared to have been converted.  I used to go to Church some
times.  I was required to pay Rs. 40 as fine (dand) for coming back to
my own caste.  On conversion to Christianity my topknot was not
removed.  My Christian name was Premlal.  I was under the Swedish
denomination.  I worship Bada Deo, I am not a Gond.

**Smt. Mullo Gond of Kondhal:** My husband took food from Christians and
therefore he was outcast.  He is dead.  I am still out of my caste
because of this.  My caste-fellows demand Rs. 40 to Rs. 50 for allowing
me in their caste.

**Smt. Radia, caste Nhai (Barber) of Kondhal:** My cousin was converted
by promising a beautiful girl in marriage and he was also some food to
eat.  His first wife from my caste is still alive.  He has also a
Christian wife.

**Shri Kanhailal Machiwar of Chicholi:** Majority of the tribals live in
Bhainsdehi and they are of low caste, illiterate and poor.  We have no
objection if Christian missionaries preach their religion.  We object to
their method of allurement.  A rich man of Bhainsdehi named killedar was
converted on the understanding that his loan would be paid off by
missionaries.  Kanhailal Nhai was married to a Christian woman, although
his first wife was alive.  Harijans are not allowed to draw water from
Christian wells.  They are allowed to do so on conversion to
Christianity.

**Shri Raman** interrupted saying that at Kondhal there is no necessity
for today to go into Mission compound for water, because there are
enough wells in Harijan basti.

**Shri Kanhailal:** Almost all conversions in this area are as a result
of Christian khanapina.  Bible is taught in Christian schools, which are
recognised by Government.  In my school days the classes were held on
Sundays.  The following couplet is taught in the schools:-

B©gm \_gr \_{a{ àmU \]Mm\`m$&  
Vyhr \_{a{ am\_ a\_¡\`m, Vyhr \_{a{ H¥$îU H$Ýh¡\`m$&

In a disease which is contagious, a washerman does not touch the clothes
of a person who has got wounds whereas a Christian does so and the
persons whom he helps by this act is said to be converted to the
Christianity.  Those who are ignorant about Christ think that Christ is
nothing else but Ram and Krishna and with this belief they attend
churches.  Mission schools are run with the main object of preaching,
and education is only a secondary subject.

During the Second World war Christian missionaries recruited about 100
sons in this district.  The object of conversion appears to be to
increase their numbers.  So far as I know, about 300 persons have been
converted to Christianity in this area up to 1947.  Since 1947, to date
about 4,000, might have been converted.  I am a Malguzar of 25 villages.

**Shri Ratan and Balaji Sonar supported the statement made by Shri
Kanhailal:** Shri Ratan also said that orphan boys are taken away by
missionaries from one place to some other and converted by rendering
them necessary help.

**Shri Brijbhushan of Chicholi:** The missionaries preach against our
Government by saying that during the British regime silver coins were in
use whereas now paper is given to villagers.  They also criticise
Government’s prohibition policy.  Mr. Moss’s preachers say this in their
prachar meetings.  I had heard them say so, in presence of Mr. Moss. 
These speeches are anti-national.  Mr. Moss, who was a Padri here, used
to give (during the National Movement of 1942.) a secret account of
local activities to the D. C. and Commissioner, who were also
Christians.

**Shri Kundansao of Chicholi, Chairman, Education Committee, Janapada
Sabha, Betul:** Mr. Moss helped British Government in 1942 in arresting
national workers and used to supply secret information to Britishers. 
No Christian in this area takes part in our national festivals.  Mr.
Moss left this area in 1950.

Shri Gare, Gond of Harawadi sent his sons to mission school in the hope
that they would receive education, but the boys were shown allurement of
marriage by missionaries.  They were taken to Chhindwara school and now
it is understood that they have been converted.

**Shri Laxminarayan Dixit of Chicholi:** Christians have always been
found to be against the national movement.  They have often asked their
followers to support the British Government.  I know these things from
my experience of prachar between 1920 to 1940.

**Shri Tejilal, cultivator of Chicholi:** It so happened that I was
going to my fields and I over-heard the talk between a missionary and a
local preacher.  The preacher was told that he should preach to people
very cleverly and watchfully.  He need not preach to many but he should
fix up his target on an individual and be after him for conversion.  At
Chudia, about a month back a preacher said in his personal conversation
that the Congress-raj has not done any good to the common people.

**Shri Raman** informed the Committee that the inferior methods alleged
to be practised in this area were disliked by his Mission.  Had it been
an intention of adopting such methods during the British regime the
Swedish mission or any other mission for that purpose would have been
successful in swelling the Christian population in the area by
thousands.  The present population of Christians at Chicholi is only 8.

The Missionary palak in generally replying to the allegation put forth
in the meeting said that wells owned by Christians in this district and
particularly at Kondhal, were open to all because Christians do not
recognise castes.  There are no Harijans in Kondhal.  The local people
are mostly Gonds.  Therefore, the question of not allowing Harijans to
draw water from Christian wells at Kondhal should not arise.  The number
of Christians in this area is every small.  Some of them might have been
absent at national programmes.  But this should not mean that all
Christians do not take part in national festivals.

------------------------------

PADHAR

*The 19th January 1955.*

Attendance about 50.                        Villages represented 7.

Chairman explained the object of the Committee and introduced the
members.

**Shri Bhikaji Gond of Dolidhana:** One Ramji of my village was
converted about 5 years back.  He was told that he would be cultivation
and other help because there was a quarrel with him. We recognise Bada
Deo, i.e., Mahadeoji.  Missionaries preach their religion.  I made
complaints as well as requests to Government to give me a candidate who
would be able to teach my small daughter.  This is about 2 years back. 
One Jagat, Gond, gave a boy to the Mission.  We consider ourselves to be
Hindus.  The Methodist Mission was active here.

**Shri Raman:** We run a primary school here and we have also a church. 
We teach Bible in the school because majority of the students are
Christians.  There are 35 students in the Boarding.  The population of
this village is about 500.  A school and a hospital are necessary here. 
In Koraband Dhana (mohalla) of Silot village 5 to 6 families of Katias
are reported to have been converted.  This was about 8 years back.

**Christian Missionary:** We have no missionary work here.  We simply o
in the villages for preaching. I do not know a single student who has
seen converted from the Mission school here.

------------------------------

NIMPANI

*The 19th January 1955.*

Attendance about 100.                        Villages represented 12.

Shri Malviyaji explained the object of the Committee and introduced the
members.

**Patel of Dondi:** Missionary preachers come to our village and
sometimes stay for about 8 to 15 days.  They preach women in the
afternoon when the man folk is out. I do not know what they preach. 
Almost every year they come to the village.  There is one old Christian
in my village.

**Patel of Nimpani:** Mission preachers come to my village and stay in
the basi.  Gonds and Kotwars attend their preachings.  I do not go. I
learn that the preachers ask people to give up stone worship and take to
the worship of Christ.  They give free medicines at Padhar hospital. I
am 40 years of age and during my life time about 72 persons might have
been converted.

There is no particular complaint against Christians in this area.

------------------------------

SHAHAPUR

*The 19th January 1935.*

Attendance-About 125.                   Villages represented--6.

The Chairman explained the object of the Committee and how the
questionnaire has been framed.  He also introduced the members.

**Shri Ayodhyaprasad Gupta of Shahapur, Arya Samajist:** In Mission
hospitals, male or female servants or patients are required to embrace
Christianity.  Those patients, who do not change their religion, are
required to pay the hospital bills before discharge.  I am speaking only
of the Swedish Mission.

Shrimati Bhandarkar and Shri Bernard, both officers of the Education
Department, did not recommend grant to our Janpad school.  Instead they
gave grant to the Mission school because both are Christians.  We were
asked to deposit Rs. 500 before Government recognition could be
granted.  After one year of the deposit about Rs. 150 more were required
to be paid.

**Headmaster of the Janpad School:** The school has been going on since
the last 3 years. . A promise was given by Education Department officers
that if Rs. 500 were deposited, it would receive Government grant.  The
Mission Middle School has been started since this school was closed.

**Shri Raman:** The Mission Middle School was in existence since long,
although it was not getting Government grant.

We received grant after we conducted the school for 2 years at our own
cost.  Shri Gupta further went on to say that pamphlets are distributed
to school boys regarding Christian religion.  He read out from a copy of
a first year Motidhana student Greta P. Lall.  The subject is Church
History.

Shri Raman replied that Miss Greta is a student of the Bible school and
not of a regular primary school.  The copy read out may be of that
class.

Shri Ayodhyaprasadji went on that there is Christian prayer in the
school every day.  He read out a cutting and said that in Maradwani
several Hindu idols have been thrown away.  I was present at certain
meetings where Hindu idols were burnt away and Christian idols held in
high esteem.

**One Budhu Gond of Pathiari** (about 1½  miles from Shahapur) gave his
one-and-a-half year aged son to a Christian woman.  Now they are not
returning him unless he says Rs. 100.  Budhu Gond is not here.  One
Christian lady interrupted to say that the boy is now with the
Missionary Society at Padhar and the society will decide whether the boy
should be returned to his parents.

**Shri Ayodhyaprasadji:** Shrimati Masso Katian, aged about 30 years has
two sons.  She has been given two dhoties and three dusas by
Missionaries.  She says that she does not want to 90 back to the Hindu
religion.  Masso is not yet converted.  Kanhaiya Kirhad had given a
daughter to Missionaries.  She was about 8 years of age.  Her father had
given the girl to Missionaries, as perhaps he was unconscious when the
daughter was given.  The girl is now learnt to be with Dr. Rangilal.

**Shri Nandkishore:** He explained the temple case of Shahapur.  He said
“The land was given to my brother-in-law.  He is about 8 to 10 acres. 
The land on which the temple stood was not sold. I was present at the
time of the transaction.  It was some time in 1941.  The temple was in
good condition then.  The well nearby was also in good condition.  I was
ill and had been to Surat for treatment before 1½  years.  About 11
months ago I came back.  My sister-in-law is in Piparia.  Before I left
for Surat the Shivling and the temple were intact.  This may be about
two years back. I had brought a ‘Kalas’ (dome) with me for putting it on
the temple, because I recovered from illness.  When I came I was not
well. I expressed my desire to my friends at Shahapur.  They informed me
that the temple had been destroyed.  I do not know anything, about its
destruction.

Shri Ayodhyaprasad informed that one Mr. Doma had done this in about
1951.  “When I was going by that road, I saw some 10 to 20 Christians
destroying the temple with some labourers.  The temple was repaired some
time in 1940.  The ‘Sikhar’ (work of masonary on which the dome is put)
was alright there.  There was no daily worship because it is not
necessary”.  Rama Kotwar informed that when he was going by the road
before 3 years, he saw the temple being destroyed.  He told Mr. Doma not
to destroy it, but Mr. Doma informed him that he had purchased the
property and the temple was his property.

**Shri Gupta** complained that “the name of the village is being tried
to be changed from ‘Motidhana’ to ‘Prabhudhana’ by Christians.  Mr. Doma
was manager there for about 3 years.  The church building at Motidhana
was constructed during Mr. Doma’s time.  When the temple destruction was
going on, I informed the village patel, Suklin Master but fie did not
say anything.  Then I informed the patel of this village, but he told me
that it was not his village and therefore he could not interfere”.

**Sibloon Bhawse, Patel of Motidhana:** “In 1941 when the land was
purchased, there was a horizontal crack to the temple building. As there
were no repairs for about 5-6 years, the wall broke down.  The bricks
were in mind and as a result of rains, half the wall gave way.  About 2
years later, some more portion of the wall gave way.  In course of time,
the whole of the temple was in a dilapidated condition and people used
to take away the bricks. I do not know about the idol in the temple
because I never went there.  I am a Christian. I was present at the time
of registration the sale-deed and the area of the temple was excluded
from sale.  About well, it was written in the document that it would
only be used by Christians, if required, though the owner may be some
others, viz., non-Christians.

**Shri Girdharising:** “I was a shopkeeper, and used to go to
Padhar-Bazar.  About 2 to 3 years back in the month of March April (Fag)
I was going by the road and saw that near the temple there was a tall
saheb and a cart of the patel.  Labourers were taking out the bricks.  I
used to go there every week. I had seen the temple that it was quite
alright before one month of the destruction.  One week prior to the date
of destruction it was alright.  This was the case before 2-3 years.  I
saw the building, which was alright and bricks were taken out of the
Chabutara.

The Christians informed that a procession of students went by the Church
with the slogans ""odX{er B©gmB© ^maV N&gt;m{S&gt;m{'' when the
congregation was in prayers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
