+++
title = "02 2 Sanãtana Dharma Versus Prophetic Creeds"

+++
**2**  
**Sanãtana Dharma Versus Prophetic Creeds**

The one Vedic verse which modern Hindus quote most frequently is the
third quarter (caraNa) of Rigveda 1.164.46 – *Ekam sad viprãh bahudhã
vadanti* (it is of One Existence that the wise ones speak in diverse
ways).

The full mantra reads as follows:

> *Indram mitram varuNam agnim ãhuh,*  
> *atho divyah sa suparNo garutmãn,*  
> *ekam sad viprãh bahudhã vadanti,*  
> *agnim yamam mãtarišvãnam ãhuh.*

(They hail Him as Indra, as Mitra, as VaruNa, as Agni, also as that
divine and noble-winged Garutmãn. It is of One Existence that the wise
ones speak in diverse ways, whether as Agni, or as Yama, or as
Mãtarišvãn.)

Why do modern Hindus quote only one-fourth and not the whole *mantra*?
Why do they forget or refuse to cite the rest of it, or at least
consider three-fourth of it as irrelevant or superfluous? And why do
they assign a disproportionate weight to just one word, ekam, out of the
five words which comprise what they consider to be the weighty
one-fourth?

A careful reading of the full *mantra*, particularly in the context of
the *sûkta* of which it is a part, leaves no doubt that the three-fourth
which is ignored is not at all a repetition or paraphrase of the
one-fourth which is presented. On the contrary, that three-fourth is as
significant, if not more, as the one-fourth when we take into account
the spirit of the Veda from which the citation has been selected. In
fact, the one-fourth which is flourished so forcefully remains
meaningless unless it is read with the rest of the *mantra*.

Why do modern Hindus maim in this manner a *mantra* from what they hold
as their most sacred shastra?  What do they want to prove by this wanton
misrepresentation of an entire and ancient ethos in spirituality,
philosophy and culture?

The answer becomes obvious as soon as we look into the psychology behind
the citation.  
 

**HINDU PSYCHOLOGY OF SURRENDER**

Firstly, modern Hindus want to stake a claim for admission to the
exclusive club of Monotheism maintained by Christianity and Islam.
Hindus here are out to convince the monopolises of monotheism that the
earliest Hindu shastra, the Rigveda, also supports and sanctions what is
supposed to be the *summum bonum* of religion according to Christian and
Muslim theology, or its apotheosis according to the modern Western
“Science” of Comparative Religion. At the same time, there is an almost
pathetic appeal to the monopolises of Monotheism that they should not be
appalled by the multiplicity of gods and goddesses in the post-Vedic
Hindu pantheon, and that they should judge Hinduism in terms of the
“original aspiration” rather than in terms of the latter-day
“aberration”.

Secondly, modern Hindus are pleading before the custodians of the “only
true” creeds that Hinduism is only a different way of stating the same
truths which were revealed to the founders of the former. In effect,
Hindus are praying with folded hands, “Please do not denounce Hinduism
as polytheism, pantheism, idolatry, paganism, and *kufr*. Please ignore
the differences of language and metaphor, and attend to the fundamental
spirit which informs your faiths as well as ours.”

The Hindu psychology throughout this exercise is one of apology, of
shamefacedness, of defence against what is initially conceded as a valid
criticism of the idioms and forms in which Hindu spirituality has been
spelled out in its shastras. This is a disastrous psychology. It leads
to a supine surrender on the one hand, and to a slavish invitation on
the other.

The psychology of surrender is best symbolised by the well-intentioned
Hindu slogan of *sarva-dharma-samabhãva* when it is extended
indiscriminately to Christianity and Islam. Hindus are shouting
themselves hoarse in stressing the identity of Brahma with Abraham, of
Manu with Noah, of Rama with Rahim, of Krishna with Karim, of Kashi with
Ka‘ba, and so on. But the monopolises of Monotheism remain far from
mollified. The orthodox among the monotheists dismiss with contempt the
Hindu claim of sharing the same faith with them fundamentally. The
kinder (or craftier) among the monotheists take pity on this plight of
poor Hindus, and invite them to renounce their nebulous, if not
counterfeit, Monotheism in favour of the fully developed doctrine.  
 

**HINDU PSYCHOLOGY OF IMITAION**

The psychology of imitation is manifest in modern Sikh scholars who
have, over the years, forced the message of the great Gurus into
monotheistic moulds. They have almost succeeded in eclipsing, more or
less completely, the Upanishadic spirituality of the *nirguNa* saints
among whom Guru Nanak occupies the front rank. They take immense pride
in equating the *Ek OMkãr* with *Allah*, the *Ãdigrantha* with
*Al-Kitãb*, the succession of Sikh gurus with the succession of prophets
in which Guru Gobind Singh is the last like Muhammad, and the
injunctions of the last Guru regarding outer symbols with similar
injunctions of the Sunnah.

A manifestation of the Islamic spirit could not lag far behind, once
Sikhism started Islamicizing itself. It has progressed on the path of a
similar exclusiveness, a similar self-righteousness, a similar
self-aggrandizement, a similar use of terror in the service of religion,
and a similar mob mentality vis-a-vis internal dissent, as have
characterised Islam throughout its blood-soaked career. Sikhism is fast
moving out of its spiritual moorings, and becoming a politics of power
which Islam has always been.  
 

**THE WAY OUT**

Hindu society will never be able to combat or come to terms with the
“only true” creeds like Christianity and Islam, so long as its spokesmen
continue to clothe Hindu spirituality in concepts borrowed from
Monotheism. The slogan of *sarva-dharma samabhãva* will fail to make any
dent in the armour of Christian and Muslim animosity, so long as Hindus
fail to recapture the spirit and the context in which this slogan had
been evolved.

What, then, is the way out?

Firstly, Hindus have to reawaken to the sublime spirituality of their
own Sanãtana Dharma, and base their evaluation of other religions and
cultures on its pristine premises. That will give them the requisite
self-confidence to counter all misinformed or malicious criticism.

Secondly, Hindus have to study and scrutinise the sources from which the
“only true” creeds derive their inspiration. That will invest Hindus
with an insight into why the monopolises of Monotheism have always been
so impervious to appeals for goodwill and understanding among different
sections of the human family.

The fundamental difference between the Sanãtana Dharma family of faiths
on the one hand, and the “only true” creeds like Christianity and Islam
on the other, can be drawn out in the form of a dialogue between a
Soviet citizen and a citizen from a free society. The story may not be
literally true.  But it is illustrative of what can happen to human mind
when it is deprived of freedom, and is regimented by blind beliefs
imposed from outside.  
 

**A FREE SOCIETY VERSUS A CLOSED FRATERNITY**

A Soviet diplomat arrived in the capital of a democratic country on a
commercial mission on behalf of his government. The mission was to
continue for several months, and the hotel in which the diplomat had to
stay immediately on his arrival was rather expensive by Soviet
standards. Next day, the diplomat approached the enquiry counter of the
hotel and asked the lady in attendance, “Where can I find your Housing
Committee?”

The lady could not understand his question and asked him to elaborate.
The diplomat explained, “You see, I cannot stay for long in this
expensive place. I want to apply to the appropriate authority for
allotment of adequate but cheaper accommodation.”

The lady picked up the telephone directory, opened it at a particular
page, and told the diplomat, “Sorry, we have no such committee in this
city or anywhere else in this country. You have to go to an estate agent
who will show you all kinds of accommodation and negotiate for the one
you approve of finally. The leading estate agents are listed on this
page. You may phone to any one of them for an appointment.”

The diplomat was visibly annoyed. He shoved aside the telephone
directory and shot his next question, “And where can I find your Food
Committee?”

The lady informed him that there was no such committee either. The
diplomat was now furious. He shouted, “How and where, then, do I buy the
food which I will need everyday? I must have the necessary permit.”

The lady assured him patiently that he needed no permit, and that he
could go into any of the hundreds of stores to buy whatever he wanted,
whenever he wanted.

By now the diplomat was in tantrums. He taunted, “I suppose you have no
Transport Committee either?”

The lady kept her cool and said with a smile, “Why, there are all those
taxies standing and cruising all over this city. You can hire any one of
them at any time of the day or night and go wherever you
please.”^([1](#1))

The diplomat gave up in utter disgust. There was sadness writ large on
his face. He shook his head several times and said to himself, “Very
bad! Very bad indeed! There is no system in this country. It is a chaos
all around. I feel lost.”  
 

**SPIRITUAL FREFDOM VERSUS RELIGIOUS REGIMENTATION**

A follower of closed creeds like Christianity and Islam finds himself in
a similar situation when faced with the spiritual freedom that is
Sanãtana Dharma. He discovers very soon that Sanãtana Dharma does not
fit into any of the mental moulds to which he is wedded, and which he
seeks in other systems of thought. He is most likely to shake his head
in utter disgust and feel lost like our diplomat from a closed social
system stationed in the metropolis of a free society. An encounter
between a monotheist and an informed follower of Sanãtana Dharma is,
therefore, sure to develop along similar lines.

The first point in which the followers of closed creeds take great pride
is the historicity of the only saviour or the last prophet who was sent
by or who received the “full and final revelation” from the “one and
only true god.” The first question which such a faithful will put to a
student of Sanãtana Dharma, therefore, is bound to be as follows: “Who
is your only saviour or your last prophet? Where was he born and brought
up? Where and when and before which apostles or companions did he teach,
preach, and reveal?”

A student of Sanãtana Dharma cannot but reply as follows: “The very
concept of a historical saviour or prophet is foreign to Sanãtana
Dharma. We do not concede the monopoly of spiritual truth or moral
virtue to any historical person, howsoever great or highly honoured.
Every one has to be one’s own saviour, one’s own prophet. One has to
discover the spiritual truths for one’s own self, if that truth has to
have any meaning for one or any validity in one’s life. A truth
discovered by someone else cannot become my truth unless I rediscover it
for myself. Scriptures and spiritual teachers can be my aids and guides,
and may help me in my search for truth. But the truth of which the
scriptures speak or which the teachers expound cannot become a truth for
me unless it comes alive in my own consciousness, and starts
transforming my own life. Moreover, the very historicity in which you
take pride is for us the hallmark of the ephemeral and the false. We
reject a historical religion as *pauruSeya prasthãna*, idiosyncrasies of
a particular person, no matter how you hail him. That which was born in
history has also died in history. You are showing devotion to what is
dead and gone.”

Next, the followers of closed creeds are mighty proud of being as
*Ahl-i-Kitãb* or the People of the Book. They are sure that the “only
true revelation” from the “one and only true god” is contained in the
book (*al-kitãb*) which was compiled by the apostles of the only saviour
or the companions of the last prophet, after the saviour or the prophet
had passed away and could speak no more. They believe that nothing can
be taken out from or added to this “book” which is supposed to contain
the final truth for all time to come. Therefore, the second question
which such a faithful will put to a follower of Sanãtana Dharma is as
follows: “Which is *the* book in which you believe, or your *al-kitãb*?”

A student of Sanãtana Dharma is sure to reply as follows: “What for do
we need a book?  The whole spiritual truth, every shastra, is secret in
the human heart. Any one, anywhere, at any time can have access to the
spiritual realm provided one seeks for it sincerely, and prepares
oneself for entering it. Many seers and saints have seen it in as many
ways, spoken of it and in as many languages and by means of as many
metaphors. The Vedas provide one version of it, the Jainãgama another,
the TripiTaka yet another, and so on down to the latest Hindu saint such
as Sri Ramakrishna, or the latest Hindu sage such as Raman Maharshi.
Different sects of Sanãtana Dharma have collected the sayings and songs
of different sages and saints in as many books which these sects cherish
as their shastras. But these shastras are not at all what you describe
as *the* book or *al-kitãb*, even by distant definition. Your creed will
get lost for good if your the book or *al-kitãb* gets lost. The book or
*al-kitãb* cannot be recovered because the person who preached it or to
whom it was revealed is dead and gone. But Sanãtana Dharma will lose
nothing if all its shastras are lost. All old shastras and many more can
be recovered from inside the human heart, where all of them are
ultimately enshrined.”

By now the follower of a closed creed is most likely to feel
flabbergasted by what he has been brainwashed to regard as blasphemy.
The third question which such a faithful will put to a student of
Sanãtana Dharma is as follows: “You have no only saviour, no last
prophet. You have no *al-kitãb*. How, then, do you know who is your one
and only true god?  How do you distinguish this one and only true god
from the many false gods which abound all around you?”

At this stage the student of Sanãtana Dharma will have to smile and say,
“According to our spiritual tradition, testified by a long line of
spiritual seekers, the way to God-discovery is through Self-discovery.
As one proceeds on that inner voyage one sees spiritual truths in many
forms. None of these forms is false. It is only one’s seeking which can
falter and lead to one’s fall from the path of spiritual progress by
insisting that this or that form alone is true. Sanãtana Dharma stands
squarely for a human becoming God in the process of
Self-discovery-*Ãtman* becoming *Parmãtman, PuruSa* becoming
*PuruSottama*. This is the path of world-discovery as well. The deeper
one dives into oneself, the faster one’s world gets divinised. One
starts seeing God in every human being, in every animal, in every plant,
in every stone. One feels free to worship God in any from or in all
forms at the same time. One also feel’s free not to worship God at all,
and to dwell within oneself in spiritual self-delight.  Sanãtana Dharma,
therefore, has no use for a God who makes himself known to mankind
through the medium of a saviour or a prophet, or through the pages of
*al-kitãb* or *the* book. Such a God must always remain external to us,
and external to the world in which we live. Such a God does not permit
humanhood to grow into Godhood, nor allows this world to get divinised.
He has reserved all divinity for himself, and has nothing to spare for
his creatures except an abject servitude to his arbitrary commandments
conveyed through a saviour or a prophet chosen equally arbitrarily.”

The follower of a closed creed now shoots the last arrow in his armoury
with what he believes to be deadly effect. He is sure to shout, “You
have failed to win the favour of the only saviour or the last prophet by
not living a life according to the final commandments of the one and
only true God as revealed to his only son or his last prophet in
*al-kitab* or the book. How will the only saviour or the last prophet
intercede for you on the Day of Judgement, and save you from God’s wrath
and eternal hell-fire? You cannot say in all seriousness that you are
not interested in going to an eternal heaven full of fair maidens,
flowing with milk and honey, and fanned by ever-fragrant breezes.”

A student of Sanãtana Dharma will keep his cool and reply as follows:
“Sanãtana Dharma is not so mean and miserly in deciding human destiny.
It gives many lives to every creature.  One can start anew from the
point where one stopped in one’s previous life. And the process does not
cease till a creature has attained perfection and achieved Godhood.
Every one is a *bodhisattva* destined to become the Buddha in the course
of spiritual seeking. The journey is from darkness and bondage to light
and freedom, and not from the sensual pleasures of this world to the
sensual orgies of a high heaven. On the other hand, the only hell we
know is neither situated outside ourselves, nor at the end of time. The
hell is within us - in our greed and gluttony, in our hatreds and
infatuations, in our self-righteousness and self-seeking, in our dark
drives for power and domination, in our self-love and pursuit of
pleasure. The only way out of this hell is through an awakening to the
divinity within us, and through dispelling the darkness of ignorance in
which we live our mundane lives. The favour or disfavour of a saviour or
a prophet can neither catapult us into heaven nor drag us down into
hell. A saviour or prophet is absolutely irrelevant to the realm of
spiritual progress or retrogression.”

At this point the follower of a closed creed is bound to give up in
utter disgust. He is bound to exclaim, “Very bad!  Very bad indeed! 
There is no system in your bewildered beliefs. It is a free for all.
What is worse, it is blasphemy against the one and only true God,
against the only saviour or the last prophet sent by Him, and against
the only true revelation conveyed by Him through a mighty messenger.”  
 

**PSYCHOLOGY OF CLOSED CREEDS**

A student of Sanãtana Dharma can ignore these pronouncements and proceed
to examine the “only true” creeds. To start with, he will not judge
these creeds for their inner logic or want of it, but instead weigh them
on the scales of yogic spirituality systematized by reflective reason.
And he will very soon find out that these creeds are not born of a
spiritual consciousness at all. On the contrary, they are constructs of
the outer mind drawing strength from dark drives of the unregenerate
unconscious which Freud and other psychoanalysts have studied and
surveyed with some insight.

The one and only true god of these creeds is the embodiment of fear and
awe of the dark and the unknown.  Their only saviour or last prophet is
a father figure in an infantile search for security in a world full of
doubts and uncertainties. Their *al-kitãb* is a collection of
rationalisations mounted upon human passions like self-love, jealousy,
vindictiveness, cunning, covetousness, and aggression. Their heaven
represents an explosion of the animal hunger for endless sense-pleasures
unmixed with or followed by pain. Their hell symbolizes a deep-seated
hatred for follow human beings who refuse to bow down before
self-appointed messengers of an imaginary almighty.

Hindu society will acquire self-confidence vis-a-vis the “only true”
creeds when it recognizes that Sanãtana Dharma stands for
self-exploration, self-purification, and self-transcendence, while these
creeds stand for self-stupefaction, self-righteousness, and
self-aggrandizement. The horrible histories of these creeds are running
commentaries on the character of their doctrines. Those histories are
full of crusades and *jihãds*, massacres and genocides, inquisitions and
witch-huntings, extinction of the freedom of thought and spiritual
aspiration, and imperialist aggression against “infidels” in which the
latter’s religion and culture are destroyed, their properties pillaged,
their lands misappropriated, and their men and women and children
slaughtered or enslaved. It is a sin to regard them as religion in any
sense of the term, and to extend *samabhãva* towards their exclusive and
intolerant dogmas. One of the tasks of a resurgent Hindu society will be
to rescue those people who have been forced or lured into the folds of
these crude and cruel creeds.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) This dialogue was written when the Soviet Union was
functioning. Now the Soviet Union is no more. But the point made is
still valid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


