+++
title = "07 7 Starting Point of Universal Spirituality"

+++
**7**  
**Starting Point of Universal Spirituality**

Hindu seers and sages could tap the sources of universal spirituality
because they did not start with an *a priori* assumption of an Almighty
God whom man had to fear and obey in awe and objection. Nor did they
fortify this *a priori* assumption with a framework of deductive
inferences drawn from an observed order in the workings of the outer
world. They never asserted that an Almighty God had to be accepted as a
matter of faith as the creator and controller of the cosmos. Nor did
they dogmatise that faith in an Almighty God could not and should not be
subjected to the test of human experience and reflective reason.

The starting point of Hindu sages and seers was not God but man. Their
testing ground for what they divined was not fanatical faith but direct
perception (*pratyakSa pramãNa*). Whether it is the Mahabharata of a
very distant date, or the songs of Chandidas who came quite late, the
refrain has always been, *sabãr ûpar mãnuSa satya*, that is, the highest
truth is man, the ultimate mystery (*paramam guhyam*) above all other
mysteries.

Man is neither an a *priori* assumption nor an abstract concept like
God. On the contrary, man is a concrete reality accessible to direct
(*pratyakSa*) perception which is the only valid evidence (*pramãNa*)
recognised by Hindu spirituality. The first question which a Hindu
seeker puts to himself, therefore, is: “Who am I (*ko’ham*)?” This is
the question asked again and again in the Upanishads. This is the
question which Raman Maharshi asked himself in the twentieth century,
only to reaffirm the ancient answer: “I am That (*aham brahmo’smi*).”

Lest this starting point of Hindu spirituality be mistaken for modern
humanism, it may be made clear that the former does not stop short at
the first few faculties of knowledge possessed by man. It searches for
and finds some other and more powerful human faculties of higher and
wider knowledge. Modern humanism views man mostly as a rational, or a
social, or a tool-making (*homo fabricus*) animal, or, at best, as a
scientist, or an artist, or a seeker of ethical and aesthetic values.
Hindu spirituality does not deny or discount these definitions of man.
Man can indeed be placed in all these categories. What Hindu
spirituality has discovered specifically is that man is very much more
than his body, his mind, and his intellect. His reach is far beyond his
inventive, his imaginative, and his intuitive genius. Hindu spirituality
proclaims that man in his innermost being is God-*Shivo’ham*, as the Adi
Shankaracharya sang.

The concept of an Almighty God *can* yield an experience of the Divine
if it is employed as a subject of meditation in order to purify and
raise a person’s concentrated (*ekãgra*) consciousness, as Patañjali has
prescribed (*îšvara-praNidhãnãt vã*), or as an object of selfless
devotion described in the Gita and other compendiums on Bhakti. But in
the mind of the unmeditative, the self-centred, and the self-righteous,
it can become a source of serious mischief. A passionate (*rãjasika*)
preoccupation with God can lead to delusions of sonship and prophethood.
The best that can be said about such self-appointed sons and prophets is
that the road to hell is paved with good intentions. In the case of the
prophet of Islam, even the intentions are highly doubtful. The cunning,
the covetousness, the carnal craving, and the calculated cruelty come
through quite clearly even though covered with a liberal coat of Allah
and his ninety-nine names. The Almighty Allah of Islam is no more than a
tape-recorder which relays back obediently what has been fed into it.  
 

**THEOLOGY VERSUS SPIRITUALITY**

As one reads the scriptures of Christianity and Islam with a morally
alert mind, one starts getting sick of the very sound of word ‘god’
which word is littered all over this literature like dead leaves in
autumn. The deeds which are ascribed to or approved of by this God are
quite often so cruel and obnoxious as to leave one wondering that if
these are the doings of the Divine, what else is there which is left for
the Devil to do.

On the other hand, the literature of Hindu spirituality employs a
vocabulary which breathes an altogether different atmosphere. It deals
with the soaring up of a purified human consciousness, and comes up with
words and phrases and figures of speech which embody intimations from
the infinite (*ananta*) and the immortal (*amrita*). It speaks of
*ãtman, brahma, rita, sat, cit*, and *ãnanda*; of *rûpa, vedanã, saMjñã,
saMskãra*, and *vijñãna*; of *šîla, samãdhi, prajñã*, and *nirvãNa*; of
*yama, niyama, ãsana, prãNãyãma, pratyãhãra, dhyãna, dhãrNã*, and
*mokSa*; of *cittabhûmi, manas, buddhi, bodhi, sattvašuddhi, kSetra* and
*kSetrajna*. The list can be extended and many more terms of a similar
import can be cited.

These psychological and psychic terms inspire no self-righteousness
which Hindu spirituality stigmatizes as the fundamental frailty of
unregenerate human nature. There is no malice in these words, nor spite,
nor proclivity to put the other person in the wrong. They only invite
one to improve oneself, and to start on a journey towards a fuller and
larger life - from the unreal to the Real (*asato mã sadgamaya*), from
darkness to Light (*tamaso mã jyotirgamaya*), from death to Immortality
(*mrityormã amritam gamaya*).

It is an altogether different matter that Hindu seeking for the deepest
and the vastest and the highest and the holiest in man has led to
visions of Gods and Goddesses, and that the *Ãtman* has ascended into
the *Paramãtman* and the *PuruSa* has been perceived as *PuruSottama*.
The significant point is that at no stage of its search, Hindu
spirituality has got separated from its starting point, namely, that man
and not God is the only proper subject of exploration.

There are strains of Hindu spirituality which have no use for God.
Jainism and Buddhism have plenty of Gods but no God as the creator and
controller of the cosmos. Buddhism discards even the concept of a Soul
or Self (*ãtman*). In fact, the entire range of technical terms used by
the Buddha are of psychological and psychic intent; none of them
suggests philosophical speculations. The several schools of the Shaktas
have a Goddess instead of a God to denote the supreme power they
worship. The six systems of Hindu philosophy - Nyãya, VaišeSika,
SãMkhya, Yoga, and the two schools of MîmãMsã - also have no notion of
God. It is only in Shaivism, Vaishnavism, and the other sects of Bhakti
that we come across God besides Gods. But this God again is nothing like
the God of Christianity or the Allah of Islam. Shiva and VishNu grow
directly out of the Vedic and the Upanishadic pantheon; they are Gods
invested with the attributes of all other Gods; they represent and are
represented by all other Gods.

This is a very significant feature of Hindu spirituality. A spirituality
which does not have its base in humanism can soon become a sham and a
self-deception. It can emerge as a closed creed leading to a closed
culture, a closed society, and a closed polity. Similarly, no true
universalism can be built or sustained except on the basis of humanism -
the validity of human experience and the objectivity of human reason
raised to its highest power.

It is not an accident that the modern West made a worthwhile progress in
science, technology, and a culture of general human welfare *only* when
it rejected the dogmas of Christianity derived from an *a priori*
concept of God, and returned to the humanism of ancient Greece and Rome.
It is not an accident that the Western humanists alone appreciated the
Hindu heritage at a time when it was under an unprecedented attack from
the crusading Christian missionaries and the bearers of the white man’s
burden. And it is not an accident that Communism ended by becoming a
closed ideology, a closed culture, a closed society, and a closed polity
when the Bolsheviks led by Lenin abandoned the humanism of Marx and
Engels, adopted the Almighty God of the Bible as Almighty History, and
came up with the doctrine of a permanent war between two sections of
mankind *a la* Christianity and Islam. The brutalities committed in the
name of Almighty History are now known. On the other hand, the Western
democracies retained the humanism of Max and Engels, and revised only
such of their formulations as had gone off the rails of rationalism or
were proved to be defective by subsequent social developments. How they
created welfare societies, how they came to have a bad conscience about
their empires, and how they retired from the colonies, is recorded
history.  
 

**HINDU CONCEPT OF MAN**

Humanism by its very definition must be rooted in some concept of man.
What is man? - that must remain the quintessential quest for humanism.
Different cultures have given different definitions of man. Here we are
concerned with the definition evolved by Hindu spirituality from an
endless exploration of the human personality, uncontrolled by any
preconceived ideology and led only by an unbounded curiosity to get to
the bottom of it all. The results of this exploration are the core of
Hindu culture, and the spiritual centre of Hindu society.

The earliest definition of man that we come across in Hindu tradition is
to be found in the Upanishads. The rishis who started their search with
the eminently empirical formula of ‘know thyself’ (*ãtmãnam viddhi*),
and employed yogic methods to reach the farthest frontiers of the inner
in man, arrived at the conclusion that man was constituted of five
faculties or sheaths (*košas*), one within the other. These they
enumerated as follows: (1) human body or the physical sheath (*annamaya
koša*), (2) human desires and drives, or the vital sheath (*prãNamaya
koša*), (3) human sense perceptions or the mental sheath (*manomaya
koša*), (4) human intellection and intuition at their highest and most
universal or the spiritual sheath (*vijñãnamaya koša*), and, (5) human
self-delight or the blissful sheath (*ãnandamaya koša*).

The spiritual science of SãMkhya spelled out the same structure of human
personality in a different language. So did the various Yogas and
Tantras. But the purpose of all these statements always remained
practical - the human personality was to be explored, purified,
uplifted, and made to reach and rest on its highest perch. Many mystic
methods were devised, experimented with, and perfected in order to
achieve this ultimate aim. But the central theme always revolved round
human consciousness and what can be done with it as it rose from one
level to another. The metaphysicians engaged themselves in their round
of abstract discussions. But the yogin and the bhakta and the mystic
pursued their path towards perfection without bothering about mere
metaphysics and without anchoring their boat at this scholastic shore or
that.

That explains why it is the seer and not the scholar who has all along
dominated the scene in Sanãtana Dharma. That explains why it is the
saint and not the pandit who has always sat at the centre of Hindu
society. That explains why it is the mystic and not the man of letters
who has ruled the roost in Hindu culture. The most honoured names in
Hindu history, above even those of the heroes, are the names of seers,
sages, saints, and mystics - Vyasa, Valmiki, Yajnavalkya, the Buddha,
Bhagvan Mahavira, Shankara, Ramanuja, Gorakhnath, Kabir, Nanak,
Tulsidas, Mira, Ramakrishna, Raman - to mention only the most notable in
a galaxy of great names. It is said that there is not a village in India
which has not known an authentic saint within a radius of three miles
around it. The *vãNî* and the *vacanãmrita* of these great souls has
sustained Hindu masses in their allegiance to Sanãtana Dharma even when
subjected to the most harrowing hooliganism as during the medieval
Muslim rule, or under the Portuguese pirates in Malabar, Tamil Nadu, and
Kerala.  
 

**THE MYSTIC QUEST IS UNIVERSAL**

Mysticism is not a monopoly of Hindus who have never claimed to be the
Chosen People, or organized themselves into the Church or the Ummah. It
is the universal religion of the human race whenever and wherever it has
not been forced or harangued into shutting itself against the higher
message by pontifical prophets and ridiculous revelations. The record
has not survived but the sculptures and hymns of ancient Egypt leave no
doubt that this was a land of lofty mysticism to which the Greeks
acknowledged a great debt. The mysticism in the ancient cultures of
Mesopotamia can be gleaned from the points of odium attached to their
religions in the Old Testament. The pre-Islamic Iranians had their full
quota of mystics, the same as in the medieval period under Islam before
the sufis were made subservient to the Shariat. So also the pagan Arabs.
The Jews have had giant mystics. The Greeks had their Thales,
Heraclitus, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, and Plotinus. The annals of
Rome reveal the same mystic spirit. China scaled the same spiritual
heights in Lao-tse and Confucius.

It is only when we come to countries and ages dominated by Christianity
and Islam that we find systematic theological tirades against mysticism.
The ancient traditions of mysticism derived from Egypt, Iran, India, and
Greece had survived for some time in many Christian and Muslim
countries. They were particularly prominent in Iran and Iraq which gave
us such great sufis as Rabia, al-Hallaj, Junaid, Abu Yazid, Attar, and
Rumi. Europe under Christianity also gave us great mystics such as
Eckhart, St. Teresa, and St. John of the Cross. But the theologians of
Christianity and Islam were vigilant. So were the tyrants propped up by
the Church and the Ummah. They could not tolerate for long such erosions
of their exclusiveness by what they denounced as an unsanctioned
universalism.  
 

**SUBJUGATION OF MYSTICISM TO THEOLOGY**

The theocratic hand that came down on the Christian mystics and Muslim
sufis was quite heavy to start with. The mystic and the sufi spirit was
irrepressible like all other sterling expressions of the human spirit.
But theology and theocracy were equally uncompromising. After a lot of
terror inspired by theologians and theocrats, a compromise was made
between the two. The Christian mystics could continue their ‘mumblings’
provided they swore by the primacy of the Catholic Church, and paid
homage to the Pope. The sufis could sing and dance and indulge in other
‘frivolities’ provided they swore by the Muhammad, conformed to the
Sunnah in their outer conduct, and served the sultans in the extension
of Islamic imperialism.

This victory of theology over theosophy is very much manifest in the
functioning of sufis and their *silsilãs* in India. One never meets a
sufi in the large number of this tribe in India who even whispered a
word of protest against what the mullahs were saying about Hindu
religion and culture, and what the sultans were doing to Hindu temples,
places of pilgrimage, and holy men. But one meets many sufis who were
furious with the sultans for stopping short of converting or killing all
Hindu *kãfirs*, and destroying all Hindu places of worship. Some of them
never got reconciled to the recognition of Hindus as *zimmîs* and the
imposition of *jizyah* on them because in their theology it was
tantamount to bartering away the mission of Islam for mammon. The only
choice which Hindus had, according to them, was between Islam and death.

A typical example of such sufism was Shykh Nuruddin Mubarak Ghaznavi
(died 1234-35 AD), a disciple of Shykh Shihabuddin Suhrawardi (1144-1234
AD), and one of the founders of the Suhrawardia sufi *silsilã* in India.
He propounded the doctrine of *Dîn Panãhî*, and presented it to Sultan
Iltutmish (1210-36 AD). This doctrine declared its very first principle
as follows: “The kings should protect the religion of Islam with sincere
faith. And kings will not be able to perform the duty of protecting the
Faith unless for the sake of Allah and the Prophet’s creed, they
overthrow and uproot *kufr* and *kafirî, shirk* and the worship of
idols. But if the total uprooting of idolatry is not possible owing to
the firm roots of *kufr* and the large number of *kãfirs* and
*mushriks*, the kings should at least strive to insult, disgrace,
dishonour and defame the *mushrik* and idol-worshipping Hindus, who are
the worst enemies of Allah and the Prophet. The symptom of the kings
being the protectors of religion is this: When they see a Hindu, their
eyes grow red and they wish to bury him alive; they also desire to
completely uproot the Brahmans, who are the leaders of *kufr* and
*shirk* and owing to whom *kufr* and *shirk* are spread and the
commandments of *kufr* are enforced. Owing to the fear and terror of the
kings of Islam, not a single enemy of Allah and the Prophet can drink
water that is sweet or stretch his legs on his bed and go to sleep in
peace.” Such statements from sufis can be multiplied. Amir Khusru, the
dearest disciple of Nizamuddin Awliya (Chishtiyya luminary of Delhi),
mourned loudly that if the Hanafi law (which accommodated Hindus as
*zimmîs*) had not come in the way, the very name Hindu would not have
survived.

Similar examples can be cited from the annals of Christian mysticism as
well. In the process, Christian mystics and Muslim sufis not only
drifted away from their spiritual search, but also prolonged the life of
such falsehoods as Christianity and Islam by making the dogmas of these
creeds sound deeper than they were intended to do. Their personal
tragedy turned, in due course, into a tragedy for universal spirituality
which had initially inspired them to deepen and widen the dogmas
propounded by the Founding Fathers of the Church and prophet Muhammad.
This double tragedy was inevitable because Christian mystics and Muslim
sufis failed from the beginning to see that what they were being made to
serve was not religion but a politics of power and imperialist
aggression.  
 

**MISINFORMATION ABOUT MONOTHEISTIC CREEDS**

Hindu society has never had an organised hierarchy like the Christian
Church. Nor has Hindu society ever been a fanatical fraternity like the
Muslim Ummah. Hindu spirituality, therefore, never became an instrument
of predatory imperialism. Hindu princes in pre-Islamic India fought many
wars. But none of them was a religious war. The scene changed to a
certain extent when Hindu society was attacked by an imperialist
ideology named Islam which pretended to be a superior religion, and
which swore that Allah and his last prophet had mandated the whole earth
to the Muslim Ummah. Hindu sword had to be drawn in defence of Hindu
society and culture, and some Hindu saints blessed the enterprise. Even
so, Hindu saints of the stature of Kabir and Nanak kept on pleading with
the mullahs and the sufis to give up their exclusiveness, and accept the
Hindu spiritual insight that all paths lead to the same goal. Hinduism
thus retained its spiritual character and universality all along.

Kabir and Nanak and numerous other *nirguNa* saints failed to carry any
conviction with the mullahs and the sufis and the sultans. The latter
were either too self-righteous or too enamoured of the power and pelf
which the exclusiveness of Islam had earned for them. Kabir had to
suffer persecution from Sikandar Lodi for questioning this
exclusiveness. Guru Arjun Deva and Guru Tegh Bahadur had to lay down
their lives in defence of Sanãtana Dharma.

In the final round, however, the *nirguNa* saints succeeded only in
confusing Hindu society into believing that Islam was just another
religion and not an ideology of imperialism. Fortunately, the impact of
*nirguNa* saints on Hindu society was marginal. The *saguNa* saints and
the *ãchãryas* did not even so much as mention Islam even in the heyday
of its power and sway. They found it beneath contempt.

The *nirguNa* saints have been revived in more recent times, and
presented as social reformers who stood for a casteless and classless
society and as the precursors of what passes for Secularism in
present-day India. This monstrous misrepresentation has been mostly the
work of Hindi scholars working for doctoral degrees. They have succeeded
to a large extent in misleading the Hindu intelligentsia. Now it is the
turn of the Buddha and Bhagvan Mahavira who are also being dressed up in
the same secular plumes.

The confusion has by now become very widespread, and is symbolized by
the sanctimonious slogan of *sarva-dharma-samabhãva*. This slogan was
coined by Mahatma Gandhi and included in his *MaNgala Prabhãta* as one
of the sixteen *mahãvratas*. The result was an unprecedented appeasement
of Islam starting with the Mahatma’s support of the Khilafat movement.
The Mahatma had believed sincerely that he could touch the heart of
Islam and win over the Muslims to nationalism by paying handsome
tributes to the Quran and the Prophet. But he also ended as a colossal
failure like Kabir and Nanak. In the final upshot, he had to pay the
price with his own life, and the nation had to suffer partition of the
motherland.

For, Islam has no heart which can be touched. The heart has been drained
of all human feelings and hardened into a calculating machine which
manufactures only imperialist ambitions. Hindu society will never be
able to soften that heart, or make that machine produce anything except
contrived grievances and repeated rounds of violence . Let Hindu society
make no mistake. The same is true of Christianity, though it has been
forced to soften it face and language due to its collapse in the modern
West. The heart of Christianity, too, has been hardened into a
calculating machine.  
 

**A RESCUE OPERATION NEEDED**

The only hope lies in the mystical elements which still survive in
Christian as well as Muslim communities in India due to the Hindu
converts carrying with them a lot of Hindu culture and also due to the
intrinsic urges of universal human nature. These urges have nothing to
do with theological Christianity or prophetic Islam. It is not an
accident that Aldous Huxley could not find a single mystical passage in
Christian theology or the Quran which he could cite in his *Perennial
Philosophy*. He quotes only from Christian and Muslim mystics.

One of the enterprises which a reawakened Hindu society will have to
undertake is to rescue Christian mysticism from the clutches of
Christian theology, and salvage sufism from the stranglehold of
prophetic Islam. This can be the only basis on which Hindu society can
come to terms with Christian and Muslim communities in India. One can be
sure that there are many Christians for whom the message of Christian
mysticism is more important than Christian theology, as there are many
Muslims in whom Attar and Rumi touch a deeper chord than is touched by
the pronouncements of prophetic Islam and its stultified sufi
accomplices.

Hindu society has to make it clear, once and for all, that there can be
no compromise with a Christian theology which preaches that Jesus Christ
is the only saviour and that it is the mission of Christianity to save
all mankind. At the same time, Hindu society has to tell the Muslims, in
an unmistakable voice, that it will not permit the permeation of
prophetic Islam according to which Muhammad is the last prophet and the
Ummah has inherited the lands of the *kãfirs* as a mandate from Allah.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


