+++
title = "11 Book Two, Part II—The Conversion\nof the Parivrajakas"

+++


|     |
|-----|
|    |

> Book Two, Part II—The Conversion of the Parivrajakas
>
> 1\. \*[Arrival at Sarnath](02_2.html#01)\* -- 2. \*[The Buddha's First
> Sermon](02_2.html#02)\* -- 3. \*[The Buddha's First Sermon
> (cont'd)](02_2.html#03)\* -- 4. \*[The Buddha's First Sermon
> (cont'd)](02_2.html#04)\* -- 5. \*[The Buddha's First Sermon
> (cont'd)](02_2.html#05)\* -- 6. \*[The Buddha's First Sermon
> (concluded)](02_2.html#06)\* -- 7. \*[The Response of the
> Parivrajakas](02_2.html#07)\*  
> 
>
>   
> § 1. Arrival at Sarnath
>
>  1. Having decided to preach his doctrine, the Buddha asked himself
> "To whom shall I first teach the doctrine?" The thought \[came to
> him\] of Alara Kalam, whom the Buddha adored as the learned, wise,
> intelligent, and of little impurity; "What if I first teach him the
> doctrine?" But he was told that Alara Kalam was dead.  
>  2. Then thought he of preaching it to Uddaka Ramputta. But he too
> was dead.  
>  3. Then he thought of the five old companions of his who were with
> him at Niranjana when he was practising austerities, and who had left
> him in anger on his abandonment of austerities.  
>  4. "They did much for me, attended me and looked after me; what if
> I first teach the doctrine to them?" said he to himself.  
>  5. He asked for their whereabouts. Having learnt that they were
> dwelling at Sarnath, in the deer park of Isipatana, he left in search
> of them.  
>  6. The five, seeing him coming, decided among themselves not to
> welcome him. Said one of them, "This, friends, is the ascetic Gautama
> coming, who has abandoned austerities and has turned to \[a\] life of
> abundance and luxury. He has committed a sin. We must not therefore
> greet him, nor rise in respect, nor take his bowl and robe. We will
> only set apart a seat for him. If he wishes, he may sit down." And
> they all agreed.  
>  7. But when the Buddha approached, the five Parivrajakas were not
> able to abide by their decision; so greatly impressed were they by his
> personality that they all rose in their seats. One took his bowl, one
> took his robe, and one prepared a seat, and one brought water to wash
> his feet.  
>  8. It was really a great welcome to an unwelcome guest.  
>  9. Thus those who intended to scoff remained to pray.
>
>   
> § 2. The Buddha's First Sermon
>
>  1. After \[the\] exchange of greetings, the five Parivrajakas
> asked the Buddha whether he still believed in asceticism. The Buddha
> replied in the negative.  
>  2. He said there were two extremes, a life of pleasure and a life
> of self-mortification.  
>  3. One says let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die. The other
> says, kill all *vasanas* (desires) because they bring rebirth. He
> rejected both as unbecoming to man.  
>  4. He was a believer in the Madhyama Marga (Majjhima Patipada),
> the middle path, which is neither the path of pleasure nor the path of
> self-mortification.  
>  5. "Answer me this," he said to the Parivrajakas. "So long as your
> self remains active and continues to lust after either worldly or
> heavenly pleasures, is not all mortification vain?" And they answered,
> "It is as thou sayest."  
>  6. "How can ye be free from self by leading a wretched life of
> self-mortification, if ye do not thereby succeed in quenching the
> fires of lust?" And they replied, "It is as thou sayest."  
>  7. "Only when the self in ye has been conquered \[so\] that ye
> are free from lust; ye will then not desire worldly pleasures, and the
> satisfaction of your natural wants will not defile ye. Let ye eat and
> drink according to the needs of your body.  
>  8. "Sensuality of all kinds is enervating. The sensual man is a
> slave of his passion. All pleasure-seeking is degrading and vulgar.
> But I say unto you that to satisfy the needs of life is not an evil:
> to keep the body in good health is a duty, or otherwise you shall not
> be able to keep your mind strong and clear and have the lamp of wisdom
> burning.  
>  9. "Know ye, O Parivrajakas, that there are these two extremes
> which man ought not to follow--the habitual indulgence on the one
> hand, of those things whose attraction depends upon the passions, and
> especially of sensuality--a low and pagan way of seeking satisfaction,
> unworthy, unprofitable, and the habitual practice thereof; and on the
> other hand, of asceticism or self-mortification, which is painful,
> unworthy, and unprofitable.  
>  10. "There is a middle path which avoids both these extremes. Know
> ye, that, this is the path which I preach."  
>  11. The five Parivrajakas listened to him with attention. Not
> knowing what to say in reply to the Buddha's middle path, they asked
> him what he was \[=had been\] doing after they had left him. Then the
> Buddha told them how he left for Gaya, how he sat in contemplation
> under the Banyan Tree, and how after four weeks of contemplation he
> obtained enlightenment, as a result of which he was able to discover a
> new path of life.  
>  12. On hearing this, the Parivrajakas became extremely impatient
> to know what the path was, and requested the Buddha to expound it to
> them.  
>  13. The Buddha agreed.  
>  14. He began by saying that his path which is his Dhamma
> (religion) had nothing to do with God and \[the\] Soul. His Dhamma had
> nothing to do with life after death. Nor has his Dhamma any concern
> with rituals and ceremonies.  
>  15. The centre of his Dhamma is man, and the relation of man to
> man in his life on earth.  
>  16. This, he said, was his first postulate.  
>  17. His second postulate was that men are living in sorrow, in
> misery and poverty. The world is full of suffering and that
> \[discovering\] how to remove this suffering from the world is the
> only purpose of Dhamma. Nothing else is Dhamma.  
>  18. The recognition of the existence of suffering, and to show the
> way to remove suffering, is the foundation and basis of his Dhamma.  
>  19. This can be the only foundation and justification for Dhamma.
> A religion which fails to recognise this is no religion at all.  
>  20. "Verily, Parivrajakas! whatsoever recluses or Brahmins (i.e.,
> preachers of religion) understand not, as it really is, that the
> misery in the world and the escape therefrom, is the main problem of
> Dhamma--such recluses and Brahmins in my opinion are not to be
> regarded as recluses and Brahmin ; nor have those worthies come to
> know fully of themselves what in this very life is the real
> meaning of Dhamma."  
>  21. The Parivrajakas then asked him, "If the foundation of your
> Dhamma is the recognition of the existence of suffering and the
> removal of suffering, tell us, how does your Dhamma remove
> suffering!"  
>  22. The Buddha then told them that according to his Dhamma if
> every person followed (1) the Path of Purity; (2) the Path of
> Righteousness; and (3) the Path of Virtue, it would bring about the
> end of all suffering.  
>  23. And he added that he had discovered such a Dhamma.
>
>   
> § 3. The Buddha's First Sermon—(contd.) The Path of Purity
>
>  1. The Parivrajakas then asked the Buddha to explain to them his
> Dhamma.  
>  2. And the Buddha was pleased to do so.  
>  3. He addressed them first on the Path of Purity.  
>  4. "The Path of Purity," he told the Parivrajakas, "teaches that a
> person who wishes to be good must recognise some principles as
> principles of life.  
>  5. "According to my Path of Purity, the principles of life
> recognised by it are: Not to injure or kill; Not to steal or
> appropriate to oneself anything which belongs to another; Not to speak
> untruth; Not to indulge in lust; Not to indulge in intoxicating
> drinks.  
>  6. "The recognition of these principles, I say, is most essential
> for every man. For every man must have a standard by which to judge
> whatever he does. And these principles, according to my teachings,
> constitute the standard.  
>  7. "There are everywhere people who are *patit* (fallen). But
> there are two classes of the *patit*: the *patit* who has a standard,
> and a *patit* who has no standard.  
>  8. "The *patit* who has no standard does not know that he has
> fallen. Consequently he always remains fallen. On the other hand, a
> *patit* who has a standard tries to rise from his fallen state. Why?
> The answer is, because he knows that he has fallen.  
>  9. "This is the difference between having a standard, and having
> no standard, for regulating a man's life. What matters is not so much
> the fall of the man, but the absence of any standard.  
>  10. "You may ask, ye Parivrajakas! Why are these principles worthy
> of recognition as a standard of life?  
>  11. "The answer to this question you will find for yourselves, if
> you ask: "Are these principles good for the individual?" also if you
> ask: "Do they promote social good?"  
>  12. "If your answers to these questions are in the affirmative,
> then it follows that the principles of my Path of Purity are worthy of
> recognition as forming a true standard of life."
>
>   
> § 4. The Buddha's First Sermon (cont'd)—Ashtanga Marga or the Path of
> Righteousness
>
>  1. The Buddha next addressed the Parivrajakas on the
> Ashtangamarga. He said that there are eight constituents in the
> Ashtangamarga.  
>  2. He began his discourse with the exposition of Samma Ditti
> (Right Views), the first and foremost element in the Ashtangmarga,  
>  3. "To realise the importance of Samma Ditti," the Buddha said to
> the Parivrajakas:  
>  4. "O, ye Parivrajakas, you must realise that the world is a
> dungeon, and man is a prisoner in the dungeon.  
>  5. "This dungeon is full of darkness. So dark is it that scarce
> anything at all can rightly be seen by the prisoner. The prisoner
> cannot see that he is a prisoner.  
>  6. "Indeed, man has not only become blind by living too long in
> the darkness, but he very much doubts if any such strange thing as
> light is said to be, can ever exist at all.  
>  7. "Mind is the only instrument through which light can come to
> man.  
>  8. "But the mind of these dungeon-dwellers is by no means a
> perfect instrument for the purpose.  
>  9. "It lets through only a little light, just enough to show to
> those with sight that there is such a thing as darkness.  
>  10. Thus defective in its nature, such understanding as this
> is.  
>  11. "But know ye, Parivrajakas! the case of the prisoner is not as
> hopeless as it appears.  
>  12. "For there is in man a thing called will. When the appropriate
> motives arise, the will can be awakened and set in motion.  
>  13. "With the coming of just enough light to see in what
> directions to guide the motions of the will, man may so guide them
> that they shall lead to liberty.  
>  14. "Thus though man is bound, yet he may be free; he may at any
> moment begin to take the first steps that will ultimately bring him to
> freedom.  
>  15. "This is because it is possible to train the mind in whatever
> directions one chooses. It is mind that makes us to be prisoners in
> the house of life, and it is mind that keeps us so.  
>  16. "But what mind has done, that mind can undo. If it has brought
> man to thraldom, it can also, when rightly directed, bring him to
> liberty.  
>  17. "This is what *Samma Ditti* can do."  
>  18. "What is the end of *Samma Ditti*?" asked the Parivrajakas.
> "The end of *Samma Ditti*," replied the Buddha, "is the destruction of
> Avijja (Nescience). It is opposed to Miccha Ditti.  
>  19. "And Avijja means the failure to understand the noble truths,
> of the existence of suffering and the removal of suffering.  
>  20. "*Samma Ditti* requires \[the\] giving up of belief in the
> efficacy of rites and ceremonies, to have disbelief in the sanctity of
> the **Shastra**s.  
>  21. "*Samma Ditti* requires the abandonment of superstition and
> supernaturalism.  
>  22. "*Samma Ditti* requires the abandonment of all doctrines which
> are mere speculations without any basis in fact or experience.  
>  23. "Samma Ditti requires \[a\] free mind and free thought.  
>  24. "Every man has aims, aspirations, and ambitions. *Samma
> Sankappo* teaches that such aims, aspirations, and ambitions shall be
> noble and praiseworthy and not ignoble and unworthy.  
>  25. "*Samma Vacca* (Right Speech) teaches:
>
> > \(1\) that one should speak only that which is true;  
> > (2) that one should not speak what is false;  
> > (3) that one should not speak evil of others;  
> > (4) that one should refrain from slander;  
> > (5) that one should not use angry and abusive language towards any
> > fellow man;  
> > (6) that one should speak kindly and courteously to all;  
> > (7) that one should not indulge in pointless, foolish talk, but let
> > his speech be sensible and to the purpose.
>
>  26. "The observance of Right Speech, as I have explained, is not
> to be the result of fear or favour. It is not to have the slightest
> reference to what any superior being may think of his action, or to
> any loss which Right Speech may involve.  
>  27. "The norm for Right Speech is not the order of the superior or
> the personal benefit to the individual.  
>  28. "*Samma Kamanto* teaches right behaviour. It teaches that
> every action should be founded on respect for the feelings and rights
> of others.  
>  29. "What is the norm for *Samma Kamanto*? The norm is that course
> of conduct which is most in harmony with the fundamental laws of
> existence.  
>  30. "When his \[=one's\] actions are in harmony with these laws,
> they may be taken to be in accord with *Samma Kamanto*.  
>  31. "Every individual has to earn his livelihood. But there are
> ways and ways of earning one's livelihood. Some are bad; some are
> good. Bad ways are those which cause injury or injustice to others.
> Good ways are those by which the individual earns his livelihood
> without causing injury or injustice to others. This is *Samma
> Ajivo*.  
>  32. "*Samma Vyayamo* (Right Endeavour) is primary endeavour to
> remove Avijja; to reach the door that leads out of this painful prison
> house, to swing it open.  
>  33. "Right endeavour has four purposes.  
>  34. "One is to prevent states of mind which are in conflict with
> the Ashtangamarga.  
>  35. "Second is to suppress such states of mind which may already
> have arisen.  
>  36. "Third is to bring into existence states of mind which will
> help a man to fulfil the requirements of the Ashtangamarga.  
>  37. "Fourth is to promote the further growth and increase of such
> states of mind as already may have arisen.  
>  38. "*Samma Satti* calls for mindfulness and thoughtfulness. It
> means constant wakefulness of the mind. Watch and ward by the mind
> over the evil passions is another name for *Samma Satti*.  
>  39. "There are, ye Parivrajakas, five fetters or hindrances which
> come in the way of a person trying to achieve *Samma Ditti*, *Samma
> Sankappo*, *Samma Vacca*, *Samma Kamanto*, *Samma Ajeevo*, *Samma
> Vyayamo* and *Samma Satti*.  
>  40. "These five hindrances are covetousness, ill-will, sloth and
> torpor, doubt, and indecision. It is, therefore, necessary to overcome
> these hindrances, which are really fetters, and the means to overcome
> them is through *Samadhi*. But know ye, Parivrajakas, *Samma Samadhi*
> is not the same as *Samadhi*. It is quite different.  
>  41. "*Samadhi* is mere concentration. No doubt it leads to Dhyanic
> states which are self-induced, holding the five hindrances in
> suspense.  
>  42. "But these Dhyana states are temporary. Consequently the
> suspension of the hindrances is also temporary. What is necessary is a
> permanent turn to the mind. Such a permanent turn can be achieved only
> by *Samma Samadhi*.  
>  43. "Mere *Samadhi* is negative, inasmuch as it leads to temporary
> suspension of the hindrances. In it there is no training to the mind.
> *Samma Samadhi* is positive. It trains the mind to concentrate and to
> think of some *Kusala Kamma* (Good Deeds and Thoughts) during
> concentration, and thereby eliminate the tendency of the mind to be
> drawn towards *Akusala Kamma* (Bad Deeds and Bad Thoughts) arising
> from the hindrances.  
>  44. "*Samma Samadhi* gives a habit to the mind to think of good,
> and always to think of good. *Samma Samadhi* gives the mind the
> necessary motive power to do good."
>
>   
> § 5. The Buddha's First Sermon (cont'd)—The Path of Virtue
>
>  1. The Buddha then explained to the Parivrajakas the Path of
> Virtue.  
>  2. He told them that the path of virtue meant the observance of
> the virtues called: (1) *Sila*; (2) *Dana*; (3) *Uppekha*; (4)
> *Nekkhama*; (5) *Virya*; (6) *Khanti*; (7) *Succa*; (8) *Adhithana*;
> (9) *Karuna*; and (10) *Maitri*.  
>  3. The Parivrajakas asked the Buddha to tell them what these
> virtues meant.  
>  4. The Buddha then proceeded to satisfy their desire.  
>  5. "*Sila* is moral temperament, the disposition not to do evil
> and the disposition to do good; to be ashamed of doing wrong. To avoid
> to do \[=doing\] evil for fear of punishment is *Sila*. *Sila* means
> fear of doing wrong.  
>  6. "*Nekkhama* is renunciation of the pleasures of the world.  
>  7. "*Dana* means the giving of one's possessions, blood and limbs,
> and even one's life, for the good of others, without expecting
> anything in return.  
>  8. "Virya is right endeavour. It is doing with all your might
> whatever you have undertaken to do, with never a thought of turning
> back, whatever you have undertaken to do.  
>  9. "*Khanti* is forbearance. Not to meet hatred by hatred is the
> essence of it. For hatred is not appeased by hatred. It is appeased
> only by forbearance.  
>  10. "*Succa* is truth. A person must never tell a lie. His speech
> must be truth and nothing but truth.  
>  11. "*Adhithana* is resolute determination to reach the goal.  
>  12. "*Karuna* is loving kindness to human beings.  
>  13. "*Maitri* is extending fellow feeling to all beings, not only
> to one who is a friend, but also to one who is a foe; not only to man,
> but to all living beings.  
>  14. "*Upekka* is detachment as distinguished from indifference. It
> is a state of mind where there is neither like nor dislike. Remaining
> unmoved by the result, and yet engaged in the pursuit of it.  
>  15. "These virtues one must practice to his utmost capacity. That
> is why they are called Paramitas (States of Perfection).
>
>   
> § 6. The Buddha's First Sermon (concluded)
>
>  1. Having explained His Dhamma and what it involved, the Buddha
> then asked the Parivrajakas:  
>  2. "Is not personal purity the foundation of good in the world?"
> And they answered, "It is as thou sayest."  
>  3. And he continued, "Is not personal purity undermined by
> covetousness, passion, ignorance, the destruction of life, theft,
> adultery, and lying? Is it not necessary for personal purity to build
> up sufficient strength of character so that these evils should be kept
> under control? How can a man be the instrument of good if he has no
> personal purity in him?" And they replied, "It is as thou sayest."  
>  4. "Again, why do men not mind enslaving or dominating others? Why
> do men not mind making the lives of others unhappy? Is it not because
> men are not righteous in their conduct towards one another?" And they
> answered in the affirmative.  
>  5. "Will not the practice of the Ashtanga Marga, the path of right
> views, right aims, right speech, right livelihood, right means, right
> mindfulness, right perseverance, and right contemplation, in short,
> the Path of Righteousness, if followed by every one, remove all
> injustice and inhumanity that man does to man?" And they said,
> "Yes."  
>  6. Turning to the path of virtue, he asked, "Is not Dana necessary
> to remove the suffering of the needy and the poor, and to promote
> general good? Is not Karuna necessary, to be drawn to the relief of
> poverty and suffering wherever it exists? Is not Nekkamma necessary to
> selfless work? Is not Uppekka necessary, for sustained endeavour even
> though there is no personal gain?  
>  7. "Is not love for man necessary?" And they said "Yes."  
>  8. "I go further and say, "Love is not enough; what is required is
> Maitri. It is wider than love. It means fellowship not merely with
> human beings but with all living beings. It is not confined to human
> beings. Is not such Maitri necessary? What else can give to all living
> beings the same happiness which one seeks for one's own self, to keep
> the mind impartial, open to all, with affection for every one and
> hatred for none?"  
>  9. They all said "Yes."  
>  10. "The practice of these virtues must, however, be accompanied
> by Prajna, i.e., intelligence.  
>  11. "Is not Prajna necessary?" The Parivrajakas gave no answer. To
> force them to answer his question, the Buddha went on to say that the
> qualities of a good man are: "do no evil, think nothing that is evil,
> get his livelihood in no evil way, and say nothing. that is evil or is
> likely to hurt anyone." And they said, "Yes, so it is."  
>  12. "But is doing good deeds blindly to be welcomed?" asked the
> Buddha "I say, 'no'. This is not enough," said the Buddha to the
> Parivrajakas. "If it was enough," said the Buddha to the Parivrajakas,
> "then a tiny babe could be proclaimed to be always doing good. For as
> yet the babe does not know what a body means, much less will it do
> evil with its body beyond kicking about; it does not know what speech
> is, much less will it say anything evil beyond crying; it does not
> know what thought is, beyond crying with delight; it does not know
> what livelihood is, much less will it get its living in an evil way,
> beyond sucking its mother.  
>  13. "The Path of Virtue must, therefore, be subject to \[the\]
> test of Prajna, which is another name for understanding and
> intelligence.  
>  14. "There is also another reason why Prajna-paramita is so
> important and so necessary. There must be Dana. But without Prajna,
> Dana may have a demoralizing effect. There must be Karuna. But without
> Prajna, Karuna may end in supporting evil. Every act of Paramita must
> be tested by Prajna Paramita, which is another name for wisdom.  
>  15. "I premise that there must be knowledge and consciousness of
> what wrong conduct is, how it arises; similarly, there must also be
> knowledge and consciousness of what is right conduct and wrong
> conduct. Without such knowledge there cannot be real goodness, though
> the act may be good. That is why I say Prajna is a necessary
> virtue."  
>  16. The Buddha then concluded his sermon by addressing the
> following admonition to the Parivrajakas.  
>  17. "You are likely to call my Dhamma pessimistic, because it
> calls the attention of mankind to the existence of suffering. I tell
> you such a view of my Dhamma would be wrong.  
>  18. "No doubt my Dhamma recognises the existence of suffering, but
> forget not that it also lays equal stress on the removal of
> suffering.  
>  19. "My Dhamma has in it both hope and purpose.  
>  20. "Its purpose is to remove Avijja, by which I mean ignorance of
> the existence of suffering.  
>  21. "There is hope in it because it shows the way to put an end to
> human suffering.  
>  22. "Do you agree with this or not?" And the Parivrajakas said ,
> "Yes, we do."
>
>   
> § 7. The Response of the Parivrajakas
>
>  1. The five Parivrajakas at once realised that this was really a
> new Dhamma. They were so struck by this new approach to the problems
> of life that they were unanimous in saying, "Never in the history of
> the world has any founder of religion taught that the recognition of
> human suffering was the real basis of religion.  
>  2. "Never in the history of the world has any founder of religion
> taught that the removal of this misery is the real purpose of it!  
>  3. "Never in the history of the world had a scheme of salvation
> been put forth, so simple in its nature; so free from supernatural and
> superhuman agency; so independent of, even so antagonistic to, the
> belief in a soul, to the belief in God and to the belief in life after
> death!  
>  4. "Never in the history of the world had a scheme of religion
> been put forth which had nothing to do with revelation, and whose
> commands are born of the examination of the social needs of man and
> which are not the orders of a God !  
>  5. "Never in the history of the world has salvation been conceived
> as the blessing of happiness to be attained by man in this life and on
> this earth, by righteousness born out of his own efforts!"  
>  6. These were the sentiments which the Parivrajakas uttered after
> they had heard the Buddha's Sermon on his new Dhamma.  
>  7. They felt that in him they had found a reformer, full of the
> most earnest moral purpose and trained in all the intellectual culture
> of his time, who had the originality and the courage to put forth
> deliberately and with a knowledge of opposing views, the doctrine of a
> salvation to be found here, in this life, in inward change of heart to
> be brought about by the practice of self-culture and self-control.  
>  8. Their reverence for him became so unbounded that they at once
> surrendered to him and requested him to accept them as his
> disciples.  
>  9. The Buddha admitted them into his order by uttering the formula
> "Ehi Bhikkave" (come in Bhikkus). They were known as the Panchavargiya
> Bhikkus.  
> 

|     |
|-----|
|    |

-- [main book index page](index.html#index) -- [detailed book
section-map](sectionmap.html) -- [book sources](sources/index.html) --  
-- [Dr. Ambedkar's work](../../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#ambedkar) --
[fwp's main page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
