+++
title = "03 3. What is Wrong with \"Hindu\"?"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**3. What is Wrong with "Hindu"?**

 

         To an extent, the avoidance of the term "Hindu" has
characterized many earlier avatars of Hindu nationalism.  Sri Aurobindo
titled his newspaper "Arya", and declared that India would rise with
"Sanatana Dharma", a more profound term than the colloquial "Hinduism". 
The Arya Samaj preferred the term "Vedic", or the Vedic term "Arya"
(denoting adherence to Vedic civilizational standards), to the
originally purely geographical Persian term "Hindu".  Moreover, "Hindu"
was a catch-all term which included traditions considered deviant or
non-Vedic by the Arya Samaj (esp. Puranic, Tantric); in the 1881 census,
the Arya Samaj even advised its members to register as non-Hindus.  This
policy was reversed for the 1901 census, but in the 1980s, some Arya
Samaj factions again made attempts to be recognized as a non-Hindu
minority.  By then, the term "Hindu" had not only become a distinctly
dirty word, but also carried constitutional disadvantages with it (cfr.
infra).  In the same period, and for the same conformist and opportunist
reasons, the Ramakrishna Mission unsuccessfully tried to get registered
as a new non-Hindu religion called Ramakrishnaism.

  

         Even those who espouse doctrines and practices which are
described in handbooks on "Hinduism", avoid the term "Hindu".  In recent
years, yoga teachers whether Indian or Western have tended to avoid
mentioning the purely "Hindu" character of what they offer as the
universal "science of yoga" (it is Christian fundamentalists who warn
people of the Satanic Hindu character of these seemingly innocuous
breathing and mental exercises).  The Maharishi Mahesh Yogi calls his
*sadhana* "science of creative intelligence", the political party which
his followers in the West founded is called "Natural Law Party", and its
viewpoints are typically prefixed with "Vedic": Vedic economics, Vedic
health programme, etc.  One of the reasons certainly is that outside
India, the term "Hindu" is exotic and therefore connotes irrelevance to
local situations.  Another, more ominous one is that ever since the
arrival of Hare Krishna singers in our streets, "Hindu" at best connotes
mildly laughable eccentricity if not charlatanism.[\[1\]](#_edn1)  For
people who get their news and views through Christian missionary
information channels, "Hindu" connotes savage superstition,
otherworldliness, indolence, oppression and cruelty.  But these reasons
cannot count as valid excuses for activists with pro-Hindu convictions
working within Hindu society.

 

         The most decent reason for avoiding the term "Hindu" might be
that the corpus of Hindu literature itself does not mention it
anywhere.  It is, after all, a Persian term brought to India by the
Muslim invaders.  Moreover, it has a negative definition: any Indian who
does not subscribe to a prophetic-monotheist creed.  It is merely the
"Other" of the Muslim invaders in India.  But then, it had the advantage
of uniting all Indians of different traditions and levels of culture in
a single category clearly demarcated from the predator religions
Christianity and Islam.  This gave the term also a positive content,
viz. their common civilizational virtues which set them apart from
Christianity and Islam: their pluralism, their freedom of thought, their
reliance on genuine experience rather than dogmatic belief.  "Hindu" has
therefore become a meaningful, more than merely geographical term. 
Though in certain contexts a puristic preference for more ancient and
native terms may be legitimate, the term "Hindu" should be good enough
for household use in the present era.

 

         Therefore, when Hindu freedom fighters created a common
platform to counter the anti-national designs of the Muslim League, they
did not hesitate to call it Hindu Mahasabha (HMS).  The first session of
the All Indian Hindu Mahasabha was held at Haridwar in 1915 and was
attended, among others, by Gandhi who had not yet taken command of the
Indian National Congress or become known as Mahatma. This, then, is the
main exception to the rule that modern Hindu ideologues and
organizations shun the name "Hindu".  Later on HMS ideologue V.D.
Savarkar gave currency to the neologism "Hindutva" (a somewhat uneasy
combination of a Persian loan-word with a high-brow Sanskritic suffix)
through his so‑titled book in 1923.  He too tried to give a positive
meaning to the term "Hindu", and sought it in people's degree of
rootedness in the Indian territory: a Hindu is one for whom India is
both "fatherland" and "holyland".

 

         But barely two years later, Dr. Hedgewar, though acknowledging
Savarkar's influence, called his newly created organization
*"Rashtriya"* (national, not "Hindu") *Swayamsevak Sangh*.  By that
time, Gandhi had made the word “Hindu” to mean sokething less than
“national”, and the nation had become something more than Hindu.. The
revolutionary movement in Bengal with which Hedgewar had come in contact
was also turning away from its Hindu inspiration and fighting shy of the
word “Hindu” in order to lull Muslim suspicions. The name *Hindu
Swayamsevak Sangh* has recently been adopted by the Non-Resident Indian
branches of the RSS (in whose case "national" would mean "Trinidadian",
"Canadian" etc.), but for the rest, the Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP,
founded in 1964) is the only explicitly "Hindu" RSS affiliate, all
others being "Rashtriya" or "Bharatiya".  These terms, in contrast to
"Arya" or "Vedic" or "Sanatana Dharma" (which are not used in the quoted
BJS and BJP programmes either), are not synonyms of "Hinduism", but
purely geographical terms. 

 

         The explanation given by RSS men is that in Hedgewar's view,
the nation of India was essentially Hindu, and that the self‑designation
"Hindu" would merely corroborate the prevalent British (and later,
Nehruvian) demotion of the Hindus as merely one "community" among
others, rather than as the nation of India.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  The version
of the RSS's critics in the Hindu Mahasabha was and is that the RSS was
just not brave enough to affirm its natural Hindu identity against the
anti‑Hindu dictates of the opinion‑making establishment.  It should be
admitted that the tendency to identify "Hindu" with "national" was
already present in Savarkar's own definition, but the component "India
as holyland" does at least discriminate between traditions originating
in India and the predatory religions Christianity and Islam.

 

         Among the Sangh Parivar's components, the BJP is the most
emphatic in avoiding any association with Hinduism.  While other
organizations somehow affiliated with the RSS may sometimes describe
their political ideal as "Hindu Rashtra", the BJP studiously avoids such
terms and prefers to swear by "genuine secularism".  When A.B. Vajpayee
is asked about the notion of "Hindu Rashtra", he declares he prefers
"Bharatiya Rashtra", which, if words still have any meaning, can only
denote the already‑existing "Indian state", not an ideal requiring the
efforts of a "Bharatiya" political party.  American NRIs told me that
when Vajpayee was invited to preside over the opening of a new Hindu
temple in the USA, he said that they should have called it a "Bharatiya
temple" instead.

 

         L.K. Advani has correctly pointed out that "the term *Hindu
Rashtra* was never used during the Jana Sangh days, neither had it ever
been mentioned in any manifesto of the BJP".  At the same time, he
reiterated the RSS theory that any Indian who "identifies with India" is
thereby a Hindu: a Muslim who satisfies this condition (what Gandhians
called a "nationalist Muslim") should call himself a "Mohammedi Hindu",
a Christian should likewise be described as a "Christi Hindu".  In
Advani's view, "those residing in the country are Hindus even if many of
them believe in different religions.(...) those following Islam are
'Mohammedi Hindus'.  Likewise, Christians living in the country are
'Christian Hindus', while Sikhs are termed 'Sikh Hindus'.  The
respective identities are not undermined by such a formulation. 
Similarly, someone is a 'Sanatani Hindu', while the other is an 'Arya
Samaji Hindu'.  It would be better if such a formulation comes to be
accepted.  As part of the same concept, I consider this country to be a
Hindu *'rashtra'*.  There is no need to convert it into a Hindu
*'rashtra'*; this needs to be understood.  But I certainly do not
believe in forcing people to believe in this."[\[3\]](#_edn3)

 

         In theory, and at first sight, this construction could be
intellectually defensible if we start from the Hindu doctrine of the
*ishta devata*, the "chosen deity": every Hindu has a right to worship
the deity or divine incarnation or guru whom he chooses, and this may
include exotic characters like Allah or Jesus Christ.  In practice,
however, anyone can feel that something isn't right with this semantic
manipulation: Muslims and Christians abhor and mock the idea of being
defined as sects within Hinduism, and apart from a handful of
multiculturalist Christians who call themselves "both Hindu and
Christian", this cooptation of Muslims and Christians into the Hindu
fold has no takers.  It is actually resented, rejected and ridiculed. 
After all, taken to its logical extreme, it would imply that the state
of Pakistan, founded by and for Indian Muslims, i.e. "Mohammedi Hindus",
is also a Hindu Rashtra.

 

         More than the nationalist definition of Hindu-ness developed by
Savarkar (who admitted that including Muslim in his definition of
"Hindu" would stretch it too far), the clumsy notion of "Mohammedi
Hindus" brandished by the RSS-BJP is an element of an attempt to delink
the term Hinduism from its natural religious contents.[\[4\]](#_edn4) 
This broad concept of Hinduism implies the assumption that Indian
Muslims can still, in a way, be Hindus, as expressed by token BJP
Muslims who say things like: "When my ancestors accepted Islam, that
didn't mean we changed our culture."  That remains to be seen: a
practicing Muslim is expected to condemn Hindu idolatry and polytheism,
to have an Arabic name, to observe an Arab-originated dress code,
distinct marriage customs, food habits, and rituals of which to Hindus
some are absurd (circumcision) and others repugnant (animal sacrifice,
abolished in Vedic ritual millennia ago).  Adding separate traditions of
Muslim architecture, Persian-Arabic vocabulary, poetry, script and
music, it is clear that in practice, Muslim culture in India, though
differing in certain externals from Muslim culture elsewhere, is most
certainly a different culture from that of the Hindus; in making that
very observation during his pro-Partition speeches, Jinnah was simply
right.  In spite of this, Hindutva people insist that an "indianized"
Islam can be integrated into a Hindu nationhood. 

 

         Some go even further and accept Indian Muslims within the ambit
of Hindutva without any questions asked.  Thus, veteran journalist M.V.
Kamath writes in the *Organiser*: "Hindutva, then, is what is common to
all of us, Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists...
whoever has Indian heritage.  Hindutva is the engine that pulls the
nation and takes us into the future.  It is cultural nationalism that
has the power to unite.(...) Hindutva is not Hinduism, it does not ask
anyone to follow a particular creed or ritual.  Indeed, it does not
speak for Hinduism, it is not a religious doctrine."[\[5\]](#_edn5) 
This way, the opposition between "Indian secular nationalism" and "Hindu
communalism" is declared non-existent, essentially by replacing the
latter position with the former: Kamath's conception of Hindutva is
fully coterminous with Nehru's purely territorial patriotism.  But in
that case, what is all the fuss about?  If the Hindutva activists are
merely Indian nationalists, why don't they applaud Nehru and join the
secularists?  This is one more of those occasions where Hindutva
spokesmen assert something (i.e. the equivalence of Hindutva and secular
nationalism) to their own satisfaction, but fail to notice that they are
convincing no one, that on the contrary everybody derides the exercise
as a cheap semantic trick, a transparent attempt to sweep profound
antagonisms between religions, or between Nehruvian secularism and
Hindutva, under the carpet.

 

         While we could live with redefinitions of the term *Hindutva*,
which is still a neologism, there is just no excuse when Hindutva
ideologues go as far as to "secularize" the meaning of the established
term *Hindu*.  Consider the following dialogues, one true and one
imaginary, cited by an RSS stalwart as evidence that "Hindu" simply
means "Indian":

 

         1. "When the Shahi Imam of Jama Masjid of Delhi went to Mecca
on a pilgrimage, a local resident asked him, 'Are you a Hindu?'  The
Imam was startled by this question and replied, 'No, I am a Muslim.' 
When Imam Saheb asked him the reason for calling him a Hindu, he replied
that all 'Hindustanis' were called Hindu there."[\[6\]](#_edn6) 

         2. "A Frenchman asked an Indian, 'What is your religion?'  The
reply was, 'Hindu.'  The Frenchman countered: 'That is your nationality;
but what is your religion?'"[\[7\]](#_edn7)

 

         This exercise of sanitizing the term "Hindu" from its
religio-cultural contents is extremely silly.  What is the use of
learning that some ignorant foreigners call the Shahi Imam a Hindu, when
you yourself know for fact that the man is an enemy of Hinduism?  And
what word shall we invent to designate the phenomenon which all
encyclopedias commonly call "Hinduism", once we have imposed on the word
"Hindu" the geographical-political meaning which is already
satisfactorily expressed by the words "Indian" and "Hindustani"?  What
is gained if the expression "Hindu-Muslim riot" becomes replaceable with
"Indian-Muslim riot"?  Or if the phrase "Hindus dominate Nepal" turns
out to mean "Indians dominate Nepal"?  The people of Nepal, the only
*Hindu Rashtra* so far, might not like it.  Short, this semantic
manipulation is as hopelessly transparent as a child's very first lie. 
Moreover, it would imply that "Hindu Rashtra", the professed goal of
this Sangh leader, simply means "Indian state"; and this in turn would
imply that the Hindutva movement is a bunch of buffoons working for the
creation of a state which has already been created long
ago.[\[8\]](#_edn8)  If the word "Hindu" can only be used after
distorting its meaning, it is perhaps just as well that the BJP avoids
using it.

 

         Most RSS affiliates pledge allegiance to secularism, but they
at least do so by emphasizing the "secular" (meaning pluralistic)
character of Hinduism, as in the VHP ad campaign: "Hindu India, secular
India".  So, if Hinduism is secular, why not openly acknowledge the
Hindu inspiration of the BJP's "positive secularism"?  Well, a new
argument against an explicitation of the BJP's Hindu orientation was
created by a 1992 court decision under the Representation of the People
Act, prohibiting the Hindu Mahasabha from contesting elections.  The
reasons given by the judges were that the HMS openly aims at founding a
Hindu state and that being a Hindu (though defined very inclusively) is
a requirement for membership, as per Art.3 and Art.5.A of the HMS
constitution.  In several cases, moreover, elected candidates for the
BJP or the Shiv Sena have been taken to court for "corrupt electoral
practices", meaning the "use" of religion in their campaigns; some of
them won their cases, some of them lost, but the danger inherent in
openly identifying with the Hindu cause was certainly driven home.

 

         After the Ayodhya demolition, the Congress government
threatened to outlaw the BJP on similar grounds, but several socialist
and casteist parties, the BJP's erstwhile allies in the struggle against
the Emergency, refused to support the necessary legislative reform
because they remembered all too well how small the distance is between
such rhetoric of "protecting democracy against the communal forces" and
the imposition of dictatorship.  The BJP calculates that it was lucky
this time around (and the next time, viz. the Supreme Court verdict that
an appeal to "Hindutva" is not a corrupt electoral practice), but that
on a future occasion, any sign of espousal of a "Hindu" agenda may be
fatal.  Instead of questioning the tendency to outlaw religion as a
legitimate factor in political choices of Indian citizens, the BJP bends
over backwards to adapt to it.

 

         In Europe, with its centuries of struggle against Christian
hegemony, nobody minds that the ruling party in Germany is called
*Christlich-Demokratische Union*, "Christian‑Democratic
Union".[\[9\]](#_edn9)  Democracy allows the citizens to decide for
themselves on what basis to form political parties, so they exercise the
right to found a party committed to "Christian values", and to vote it
to power.  Most Christian-Democratic parties nowadays hasten to add that
these "Christian values" have become a "common European heritage shared
by non-Christians as well".  But in India, any hint of a "Hindu" party
upholding "Hindu values" (even if explained as a "common Indian heritage
shared by the minorities as well") is declared intolerable by judges and
journalists,-- and by the leaders of the very party concerned.

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(           \[1\])  "Charlatanism" is the common
allegation against traveling babas who promise instant enlightenment by
means of a simple technique; it certainly applies when they offer
another magic trick, viz. instant harmony between Hindus and Muslims by
means of the "equality of religions" (or *Ram Rahim ek hai*, or *Ishwar
Allah tere naam*, etc.) mantra.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(           \[2\])  Thus, M.S. Golwalkar: *Bunch of
Thoughts* (Jagaran Prakashan, Bangalore 1980 (1966)), p.177-178.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(           \[3\])  "Advani wants Muslims to identify with
'Hindutva'", *Times of India*, 30/1/1995.

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref4)^(           \[4\])  To support this non-doctrinal,
non-communal usage of the term Hindu, K.S. Sudarshan relates some
anecdotes where Arabs and Frenchmen refer to any Indian (including the
Imama of Delhi's Jama Masjid when he visited Arabia) as a "Hindu".  A
linguist would say that in that case, the word *Hindu* is a "false
friend": though sounding the same, it has a different meaning in Arabic
on the one and English or Hindi on the other hand.  This is obviously no
sound basis for denying the operative (and historical, and legal)
meaning of *Hindu* as "any Indian *except* Muslims, Christians and
Parsis".

</div>

<div id="edn5" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref5)^(           \[5\])  M.V. Kamath: "The Essence of
Hindutva", *Organiser*, 28 April 1996.  If "Indian heritage" is the
unifying element, the point is precisely that Muslims and Christians
reject this heritage.

</div>

<div id="edn6" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref6)^(           \[6\])  Adapted from *Saptahik Hindustan*, 1
May 1977, in K.S. Sudarshan et al.: *Why Hindu Rashtra?* (Suruchi
Prakashan, Delhi 1990), p.5.

</div>

<div id="edn7" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref7)           \[7\]  *Ibid.*; the story is an anachronism, for
by now the French distinguish clearly between *indien* (pertaining to
the Indian territory or state) and *hindou* (pertaining to Hindu
religion).

</div>

<div id="edn8" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref8)^(           \[8\])  We forego the occasion to enter the
discussion on the exact meaning of the word *Rashtra*, simply because it
is so obvious: the word can be analyzed as "instrument (*-tra*) of
rulership (*raj*)", hence "the institution through which government is
exercised", hence "state"; and not "nation" (as some RSS stalwarts
insist on asserting), the subject for whose benefit this political
instrument is created.  Even if the latter meaning is accepted, the
"Hindu Rashtra" is an entity which (especially according to Sangh
ideologues) has been in existence for ages, viz. the Hindu nation.

</div>

<div id="edn9" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref9)^(           \[9\])  A Gandhian secularist remarked about
this comparison that "Christian-Democratic" refers to a well-defined
"Christian" identity, and that there is no Indian equivalent to this,
since "Hinduism" is but an undefined conglomerate.  In fact, when the
German Christian-Democratic Union was founded, fifty years ago,
Protestants and Catholics were still mutually hostile religions, and it
was something of a revolution to create a joint political platform
representing the values they held in common.  A fortiori, the different
"Hindu" traditions (which do not have a history of religious wars
against one another, as Catholicism and Protestantism do) can quite
legitimately be united for political purposes on a common platform.

 

     **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section4.html)**

**     [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section2.html)**

</div>

</div>
