+++
title = "00"

+++
## BOOKS BY GEORGE F. KENNAN





*American Diplomacy, 1900–1950* \(1951\)

*Realities of American Foreign Policy* \(1954\)

*Soviet-American Relations, 1917–1920* \(2 vols., 1956–58\)

*Russia, the Atom, and the West* \(1958\)

*Russia and the West under Lenin and Stalin* \(1961\)

*Memoirs, 1925–1950* \(1967\)

*From Prague after Munich: Diplomatic Papers, 1938–1940* \(1968\)

*The Marquis de Custine and His “Russia in 1839”* \(1971\)

*Memoirs, 1950–1963* \(1972\)

*The Decline of Bismarck’s European Order: Franco-Russian Relations, 1875–1890* \(1979\)

*The Nuclear Delusion: Soviet-American Relations in the Atomic Age* \(1982\)

*The Fateful Alliance: France, Russia, and the Coming of the First World War* \(1984\)

*Sketches from a Life* \(1989\)




AROUND *the* CRAGGED HILL  
*A Personal and Political Philosophy*

GEORGE F. KENNAN





On a huge hill,

Cragged, and steep, Truth stands, and hee that will

Reach her, about must, and about must goe;

And what the hills suddennes resists, winne so;

Yet strive so, that before age, deaths twilight,

Thy Soule rest, for none can worke in that night.

—John Donne





## Contents





*Foreword*



PART ONE

*Chapter One:* MAN, THE CRACKED VESSEL

*Chapter Two:* FAITH

*Chapter Three:* ON GOVERNMENT AND GOVERNMENTS

*Chapter Four:* THE NATION

*Chapter Five:* IDEOLOGY



PART TWO

*Foreword for Part Two*

*Chapter Six:* EGALITARIANISM AND DIVERSITY

*Chapter Seven:* DIMENSIONS

*Chapter Eight:* THE ADDICTIONS

*Chapter Nine:* FOREIGN POLICY, NONMILITARY

*Chapter Ten:* FOREIGN POLICY, MILITARY

*Chapter Eleven:* WHAT IS TO BE DONE?



*Epilogue*

*Index*





## *Foreword*





. . . sad cure, for who would loose,

Though full of pain, this intellectual being,

Those thoughts that wander through Eternity,

To perish rather, swallowed up and lost

In the wide womb of uncreated night,

Devoid of sense and motion?

—John Milton, *Paradise Lost*




*I* approached the writing of this book with much hesitation. I could not have any certainty as to what would come out of it. The undertaking appeared to require—to some extent, at least—abstraction, which has never been my dish. It threatened also to lead me to theory, which to me, as to Goethe, has always been gray, in contrast to the green quality of what he called “the golden tree of life.” It had always seemed to me safer, less pretentious, and, perhaps, more useful to illustrate general beliefs through the medium of specific examples, leaving it to the reader to draw his own picture of their implications.

I was far from being alone, I suspect, in entertaining such reservations. I seemed to recall that Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes once said something to the effect that he had never been able to state his own philosophy of the law in any pure form—only through the corpus of his dissenting opinions. And I was reminded of Anton Chekhov, the playwright, who, when asked to explain at a rehearsal in the Moscow Art Theater his interpretation of the way one of his characters should be played, could only say, “Don’t you see? He wears checkered trousers.”

But I was pressed to recognize that this, in my case, was not enough. A number of recent writers had given themselves the trouble of trying to extract from the welter of my past writings—from lectures on international affairs, from books on diplomatic history, or from cryptic sentences in commencement speeches or other oratorical efforts—something resembling a coherent personal and political philosophy. They professed to have come away frustrated, or at least bewildered. The pickings, they said, were slim, and sometimes even added to their confusion.

What weight there was behind these complaints I could not judge. But I was moved by their effort. It implied a belief, or at least a suspicion on their part, that behind all these suggestive specific examples there must have been something to be said by way of generalization that I had not said but that would be worth my saying.

This foreword, like most forewords, is being written after the completion of the book. \(How else could one know to what a foreword should be applicable?\) I see, on looking it over, that this work, like all the others I have written, ended up, whatever the original intent, as essentially a collection of critical observations. The difference is only that in this instance I have attempted to take the high ground, avoiding all detailed preoccupation with current problems and trying to stick to the broader dimensions of things—the ones that might still be expected to be visible and significant in future decades as well as years.

Whether the result, bearing this character, represents a betrayal of the original intent to put forward something resembling a personal and political philosophy, I cannot say. But I find myself, at this point, wondering whether any work of personal philosophy, however impressively abstract and theoretical, has not in essence been, or could be, anything other than just such a product of observation and of critical appraisal.

I find sustenance for this questioning in two passages, widely separated in time, among things I have recently read. The first, a passage from Edmund Burke’s *Reflections on the Revolution in France,* reads as follows:

. . . I cannot stand forward and give praise or blame to anything which relates to human actions and human concerns on a simple view of the object, as it stands stripped of every relation, in all the nakedness and solitude of metaphysical abstraction. Circumstances . . . give in reality to every political principle its distinguishing color and discriminating effect.

The second of the passages, this one from a recent book review by my good and esteemed friend Stuart Hampshire \(a *real* philosopher, as I am not\):

We know what we are doing when we actively devise experiments, actively verify and test our beliefs, actively direct our interests and inquiries toward useful and concrete questions. . . . A sequence of abstract thought, and also the stream of our passive impressions together form a sea of ignorance, in which we shall drown, if thought and feeling are cut off from our active interest. . . . Unless we purposefully turn our eyes to look at something that interests us as individuals, we shall literally see nothing in the world, and we shall understand nothing in the real world unless we remember that we freely choose the direction in which to look.1

This book represents just such a turning of the eyes to a number of things that interest me as an individual. If the reflections this arouses lack any apparent universal applicability, whether in time or in space, this is because the writer sees little unity in the phenomena observed. But this does not preclude the possibility that there will become apparent to the attentive reader a unity the author himself has been unable to discover. Should this be the case, the effort embodied in what follows will be doubly rewarded.



1. Review by Stuart Hampshire of *The Jameses: A Family Narrative,* by R. W. B. Lewis, in *New York Review of Books,* October 10, 1991, p. 4.


## *Foreword for Part Two*





Gentlemen, why in heaven’s name this haste? You have time enough. No enemy threatens you. No volcano will rise from beneath you. Ages and ages lie before you. Why sacrifice the present to the future, fancying that you will be happier when your fields teem with wealth and your cities with people? In Europe we have cities wealthier and more populous than yours, and we are not happy. You dream of your posterity; but your posterity will look back to yours as the golden age. . . . Why, in your hurry to subdue and utilize Nature, squander her splendid gifts? Why hasten the advent of that threatening day when the vacant spaces on the continent shall all have been filled, and the poverty or discontent of the older states shall find no outlet?

—Lord Bryce, *The American Commonwealth* \(1888\)




*I*n the first part of this treatise, I came as near as I could to reflections and reactions that might have relevance to the situation of mankind everywhere. I must now turn to those that pertain specifically, if not exclusively, to the problems of my own country. And there are a few words that might well be said by way of preface to these following chapters, lest their content might lead to other, and unjustified, conclusions.

I am well aware that the United States of this day is very much a polyglot country, and that within this country people of my particular native milieu, commonly described by the modern acronym “Wasps,” are now a minority, and a dwindling minority at that. With the fading from the national memory of many of the aspects of that milieu has gone the currency of many of its values. I, too, have retained only a portion of those values; for no generation retains in toto the values of its predecessors, and least of all do they remain unchanged when the subject has lived extensively in contact with other cultures and outlooks. But some of those values—the bulk of them, probably—have been retained; and these, as they find reflection in this book, will no doubt be widely questioned or challenged.

For all of this, the United States is for me, if only because I was born and reared in it at the outset of this century and served it as faithfully as I could for some twenty-seven years in the American Foreign Service, a country like no other country. One may hope, of course, to have some usefulness even beyond one’s country’s borders; and that hope I, too, from time to time, have indulged. But there can, for the likes of me, be only one final center of loyalty and concern. Such a center, however strange it now is to me, and I to it, could be only the country into which I was born. The world at large, as a possible center of this sort, would be too broad for these frail shoulders.

Nor do the strangeness of much of the place and the narrow limits of my direct contact with it constitute any total barriers to understanding. There are many aspects of American life that are spread fairly evenly across the country and are not only observable for anyone living anywhere within it but actually press themselves upon his or her consciousness, whether he or she likes it or not. The television screen pours out a never-ending stream of images reflective in one way or another of life across the nation, as do the other great advertising media—images seldom thoughtfully reflective, to be sure, sometimes even designed to mislead, and yet instructive even in their very conceptual shallowness and their obviously ulterior motivations. To live anywhere in this country, in short, is to live in a great deal of it.

Still, the question will arise, at least in some minds, What makes him think that his views on this country would be worth our reading? He is not an expert on it. He has never given special study to its problems. Why should his views have value beyond those of hundreds of other elderly people who, precisely because they recognize similar limitations in themselves, don’t write books?

The question is well placed. And my answer to it is only that in writing on this subject, as I am about to do, I am simply trying to respond to the demands of some critics that I try to identify, somewhat more specifically than I have ever done in the past, those of my views and reactions—of my prejudices, if you like—that might be said to be of a philosophical nature. And if, then, there are those who think that this purpose might be served by a sketch of the way this country and its problems look to one who has led such and such a life and has been exposed to such and such influences, then here it is; and this, without apologies for its limitations.

It will be necessary to move swiftly over many of these problems. It will not be possible to do more than to touch very briefly on certain of the questions at issue, and then only from the standpoint of their wider significance. This is not another book about American society in general as it nears the end of the century.

But here these views shall be exposed, as well as I can state them. Some relate to existing physical conditions of American society. Some relate to its habits—habits so deeply ingrained as to approach the status of addictions. Others relate to prevalent attitudes that find their expression in the media and in the utterances of political and other leaders. That some of them will be attractive targets for outraged disagreement, I have no doubt.

I approach the stating of these views with many hesitations. Tocqueville, in undertaking the writing of the second volume of his work on America, said, in a letter to a friend, “It seems to me at this point that I am walking on air, and that I must inevitably fall, headlong and helplessly, into the vulgar, the absurd, or the tedious.”1 At the risk of taking the divine as an example for the ordinary, I must confess to similar anxieties as I confront the writing of the second part of this book. But I see, as Tocqueville plainly saw, no alternative to the effort.



Precisely because these views will be out of accord with so much of what passes as the conventional American wisdom of the day, they may seem to convey a negative and pessimistic view of American society, even one that challenges its very worth. This being the case, I should probably preface them with a word or two of explanation.

American politicians never miss a chance to refer to the United States as “this great country.” So insistently do they do this that if their motives in doing so were less obvious, one might suspect that they were trying to overcome a certain uncomfortable doubt about this in their own minds. We could do, it seems to me, with less frequent reassurance on this point. But they are, of course, right. The United States *is* a great country—if only in size and populousness and in the significance it has attained over these past two centuries as a factor in the world community. And the fact that the ways in which it is great are not, to some of us at least, the ways in which a great many Americans, including politicians, see its true greatness as lying does not controvert the general assertion.

For me to try to identify the various elements of the country’s greatness would be, inevitably, to sound pompous and condescending. We are dealing, here, with something far larger than any one of us—something of which each of us is only a tiny part, and of which our judgment can never be more than imperfect. And it would come with ill grace for any of us, claiming as we do to be a part of the whole, to list the virtues in which we ourselves, by implication, profess to share.

But beyond that, the country has plenty of faults to balance off against whatever virtues it could be said collectively to possess; and if it is indeed great, a signal aspect of its greatness lies surely in its quality as a vast human battleground on which there is fought out a titanic contest between not just the virtues and deficiencies of its own life but many that are shared in high degree by most of the advanced countries of the world. The outcome of this battle is indeterminate; only one thing is certain: it will lead to no total victory for one side or the other. For that, human nature and human affairs are too complicated.

In this very indeterminateness—in the limitations of our vision and our power—there lies the same tragic quality that has always marked the great moments of human history. And in this sense America, if a great country, is also a tragic one. But tragedy is a dialectical concept, implying the confrontation between positive and negative phenomena. If the positive aspects of American civilization, as I see them, were not present in a measure at least comparable to the negative ones, even the element of tragedy would be absent, and America would be a very pitiable spectacle indeed. And all I can add, to what I have already said about its greatness, is that this—as a pitiable spectacle—is not at all the way I see it.



1. The French original: “Ici, il me semble que je suis en l’air, et que je vais dégringoler infailliblement, sans pouvoir m’arrêter, dans le commun, l’absurde, ou l’ennuyeux.” Letter of May 26, 1836, to one Bouschitt, as cited in the introduction, by Françoise Mélonio, to the Robert Laffont edition of Tocqueville’s major works \(Paris, 1986\).

## *Index*





Page numbers listed correspond to the print edition of this book. You can use your device’s search function to locate particular terms in the text.

abortion conflict, 67, 123, 145

accidents, chance and, 36

Adams, Henry, 44, 56

on effect of power, 56

Adams, John, 43n

ad hoc committees, 235–36

advertising, 159, 167–73

communications industry and, 167

influence of, 168–69

junk mail and, 171–73

in *New York Times,* 170

television and, 167, 169

truth and, 169–71

Africa, 201–2

afterlife, 39

*Age of Jackson, The* \(Schlesinger\), 71

aid programs, 199–202

Air Force, U.S., 225

airplane, 161, 164, 166

Alaska, 150

alliances, 185, 194–98, 222–24

“American Century,” 182

*American Commonwealth, The* \(Bryce\), 111

American Indian, 143

American Philosophical Society, 246

Aristotle, 54*n*

Army, U.S., 226

art, sexual urge and, 18

Ascetics, 48*n*

atheism, 44

Augustine, Saint, 54*n*

authoritarianism, 62*n*

authority, 25–27

and arrogance of power, 27

rivalry and, 25–26

self and, 25–26

subordination to, 25

automation, 101

automobile, 160, 161–65, 173, 178

community and, 161

crime and, 163

environment and, 162–63

power of, 165

unsociability of, 161–62

wastefulness of, 162

autonomy, 29, 44

bereavement, 36

Bible, 40–41, 47, 50

Big Bang, 42

body count, warfare and, 220

Bohlen, Charles, 98

Boisdeffre, Le Mouton de, 217

bourgeoisie, 97

brainwashing, self-respect and, 22

Brazil, 143, 253

brotherhood, 31

Bryce, james, 111

Brzezinski, Zbigniew, 189*n*

Buckminster, Reverend, 57*n*

budget deficit, 158, 200

Bullitt, William C., 30, 142

Bundy, McGeorge, 214

bureaucracy, 118, 122, 139, 146–49, 239, 254, 256

Congress and, 149, 233

democracy and, 146, 148–49

foreign policy and, 187–88

government and, 118, 187–88, 233

individual and, 148

parochialism and, 187–88, 210

U.S. and, 146–49

Burke, Edmund, 12, 133*n*, 134–35

Bush, George, 123–24, 143*n*, 189*n*, 215

business, 185–86

busing, 129

California, 136, 150

Calvinism, 43*n*

Canada, 86, 204

Western European Union and, 223–24

canals, 159–60

*Canterbury Tales, The* \(Chaucer\), 162

Carter, Jimmy, 188*n*

Casablanca Conference \(1943\), 218

Central Intelligence Agency \(CIA\), 187

Chamber of Commerce, U.S., 225

chance, mortality and, 35–36

Chaucer, Geoffrey, 162

chauvinism, national, 78, 79

Chekhov, Anton, 11, 22

China, Imperial, 71

China, People’s Republic of, 143, 223, 253

China lobby, 193

Christianity, 40–42

Judaism and, 50

church, 48–51

leadership of, 49

Churchill, Winston, 218

Church of England, 50

citizenship, 144, 254

civilization:

American, 32–33

European, 117

individual and, 27, 28

population growth and, 100

pretenses of, 29

Civil War, U.S., 213

class structures, 99

Clausewitz, Carl von, 212, 213*n*, 221

Cold War:

end of, 180, 184, 195, 214

residual habits of, 195, 198, 200, 202, 210

collective, political, 81–84

Commerce Department, U.S., 187

communication, 105, 150, 159, 256

advertising and, 167

communism:

demise of, 119, 120

mortality and, 98

community, automobile and, 161

computers, 105

unemployment and, 107

Congress, U.S., 137, 172, 206

bureaucracy and, 149, 233

Council of State and, 237, 239, 240, 244–45, 247

foreign policy and, 189–90

shortcomings of, 137–38

*see also* House of Representatives, U.S.; Senate, U.S.

*Congressional Record,* 236

conservatism, 98

Constitution, U.S., 157, 198, 245

Eighteenth Amendment to, 66–67

consumerism, 99, 168

Council of State \(proposed\), 235–49, 256

advisory status of, 237

basic requirements of, 236–38

classified information and, 240–41

Congress and, 237, 239, 240, 244–45, 247

finances and, 237

geographical distribution and, 244–46

membership in, 237, 241–43

nature and function of, 238–40

need for, 235–36

panel for, 243–48

president and, 237, 240, 247

quarters of, 239

services available to, 240

staff of, 239

subjects to be addressed by, 239

task of, 240

courage, 51–52

creativity, sexual urge and, 18

crime, 158

automobile and, 163

Croatia, 91

Czechoslovakia, 86

death, 36, 39

Marxism and, 98

decentralization, 149–51

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, The* \(Gibbon\), 116

Defense Department, U.S., 187

deficit, 158, 200

democracy, 59, 60, 116, 158, 159

in Africa, 202

American vs. parliamentary, 65–66

bureaucracy and, 146, 148–49

direct, 135

egalitarianism and, 117

government and, 63–65, 68, 71, 72–73, 117–18, 133–34

nation-state and, 76

parliamentary, 65–66

plebiscite and, 135–38

representation and, 133–34

Tocqueville’s apprehensions about, 67–68, 117–19, 140–41

*Democracy in America* \(Tocqueville\), 117

desegregation, 126–27

destruction, warfare and, 220–22

dictatorial authoritarianism, 62*n*

dictatorship, 59, 60, 64

totalitarian, 61–62

diplomacy, 191

government and, 192

multilateral, 185, 203–5

privacy and, 209

shuttle, 191

*dirigisme,* 103, 252

*Discourses* \(Machiavelli\), 54*n*

Divine Injunction, 46–48

division of powers, 64, 65

domestic service, 125–26

Donne, John, 7, 37

Dostoyevski, Fyodor, 41

drug abuse, 158

economy:

growth of, 100–101

wealth and, 121–22

education, 32, 158, 159

environment and, 33–34

military and, 230–31

segregation and, 128–30

status and, 124

television and, 176–77

egalitarianism, 116–41, 254

democracy and, 117

domestic service and, 125–26

elitism and, 130–33

government and, 133–40

individual and, 140–41

law and, 123

Marxism and, 119–20

plebiscite and, 133–40

representative government and, 133–40

segregation and, 126–30

socialism and, 119–22

in Soviet Union, 119–20, 124*n*

species and, 140–41

Tocqueville and, 117–19

in U.S., 122–25

ego, 23, 25, 28

power and, 55, 57

Egypt, 198

election, *see* vote, voting

elitism, 130–33

defined, 130

elections and, 131–32

responsibility and, 131–32

U.S. and, 130

voting and, 131–32

employment:

farming and, 102–3

immigration and, 154

and urban vs. rural life, 102–3

energy, 159, 162

entertainment, 159, 168

environment, natural, 88, 142, 155–56, 158, 202

automobile pollution and, 162–63

foreign policy and, 186

free enterprise system and, 103–4

junk mail and, 172

overpopulation and, 104, 142–43

environment, social, 32–35

education and, 33–34

technology and, 106–7

espionage, 209

ethics, 51

religion and, 52

Europe:

military policy and, 223–24

as regional association, 204–5

U.S. forces in, 224

U.S. relationship with, 196–97, 223–24

European Community, 204

UN and, 90–91

Evans, Daniel, 143*n*

faith, 36, 37–52, 251

Christianity and, 40–42

church and, 48–51

Divine Injunction and, 46–48

ethics and, 51–52

human nature and, 37, 44–45

merciful deity and, 44–46

natural law and, 69

original sin and, 37–38

Primary Cause and, 42–44

false modesty, 22

farming, 102–3

*Faust* \(Goethe\), 18

federal government, 118, 123, 144, 148

power of, 67–68

*Fellowship of the Ring, The* \(Tolkien\), 251

Florida, 150

*Foreign Affairs,* 208

foreign policy, military, 212–31

alliances and, 222–24

destruction and, 220–22

Europe and, 223–24

Japan and, 223

military establishment and, 225–26

military planning and, 226–28

national service corps and, 226

NATO and, 223, 224

nuclear warfare and, 214–16

political situation and, 217–18, 221

Third World and, 224–26

total war concept and, 216–18

training and, 229–30

UN and, 222–23

unconditional surrender policy and, 218–20

foreign policy, nonmilitary, 180–211, 255

aid programs and, 199–202

bureaucracy and, 187–88

business and, 185–86

Congress and, 189–90

environment and, 186

espionage and, 209

formal alliances and, 185, 194–98

global interests and, 184–86

governmental machinery and, 186–92

human rights and, 71–72, 206–8

implied alliances and, 198–99

Japanese Security Treaty and, 194–95

lobbies and, 190, 193–94

morality and, 208–10

multilateral diplomacy and, 185, 203–5

NATO and, 194–98

parochial interests and, 181–84

president and, 187

privacy of negotiations in, 209

State Department and, 189–92

Third World and, 199–203

UN and, 184–85, 203–4

Foreign Service, U.S., 112, 146

neglect of, 191–92

forgiveness, 31

France, 76, 80, 197, 212, 218, 223

freedom, 70, 71

free enterprise, 120, 159, 252, 255

environment and, 103–4

government and, 103–4

transportation and, 159, 166

uniformity and, 151

French Revolution, 76, 133*n*, 212

Freud, Sigmund, 20

Fulbright, J. William, 157

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade \(GATT\), 186

Germany, Federal Republic of, 196, 197

Germany, Imperial, 80

Germany, Nazi, 219

Germany, unified, 220, 223

Germany, Weimar, 170*n*

Gibbon, Edward, 48*n*, 116

global interests, 184–86

global warming, 143*n*

God:

Divine Injunction and, 46–48

holy spirit and, 45–46

human rights and, 70

image of, 45

individual and, 45–46

Jesus Christ as Son of, 40–41

man and, 42–44

as merciful deity, 44–46

Nicene Creed and, 45

as Primary Cause, 42–44, 47–48

rights and, 70

Scripture and, 45

worship of, 48–51

Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 11, 18

Gorbachev, Mikhail S., 72, 214, 215

government, 53–73, 157–58, 251–52, 254

American vs. parliamentary, 65–66

bureaucracy and, 118, 187–88, 233

centralization of, 123

constituencies and, 233

constitution and, 66–67

daily life and, 178–79

decentralization of, 149–51

democracy and, 63–65, 68, 71, 72–73, 117–18, 133–34

diplomacy and, 192

division of powers in, 64, 65

egalitarianism and, 133–40

federal, 67–68, 118, 123, 144, 148

forms of, 61–68

free enterprise and, 103–4

functions of, 54

human rights and, 68–73

ideals and, 54

individual and, 55–56, 144–45

initiative and referendum and, 135–36

junk mail and, 172

law and, 122–23, 133–34

machinery of, 186–92

morality and, 53, 54, 58

natural law and, 69

necessity of, 53–54

nondemocratic vs. democratic, 63–65, 68, 71, 72–73

political clique and, 58–61

power and, 55–58

regimes and, 59

representative, 133–40

self-interest and, 60

size and, 143–46

societal problems of, 157–58

tasks of, 54–55

totalitarian, 61–62

transportation policy and, 159–60, 162, 165–67

two voices of, 60–61, 211

uniformity and, 59

*see also* Council of State

Grazia, Sebastian de, 53*n*–54*n*

Great Britain, 195, 196, 205, 218, 223

Imperial Russia and, 227

greatness, foibles and, 31

Greece, 198

growth, 253

ideology and, 100–101

Hampshire, Stuart, 13

Hawaii, 150

*Henry VIII* \(Shakespeare\), 53

heredity, 32–35

personality and, 32–33

and stratification of society, 33

Herod I \(The Great\), King of Judea, 41

Hitler, Adolf, 219

Holmes, Oliver Wendell, Jr., 11

Holy Spirit, 45

Divine Injunction and, 46–48

Hopkins, Harry L., 189*n*

House, Edward M., 189*n*

House of Commons, 134, 180

House of Representatives, U.S., 245

human rights, 68–73

extension of, 71–73

God and, 70

government and, 68–73

leadership in, 207–8

morality and, 207

natural law and, 69

obligation and, 70

U.S. foreign policy and, 71–72, 206–8

Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Bureau, U.S., 206

humility, 49, 52, 57

ideals, government and, 54

ideology, 96–107, 252

automation and, 101

defined, 96–97

free enterprise and, 103–4

growth and, 100–101

Marxist, 97–98

middle class and, 99

science and, 105–7

urban vs. rural, 101–3

illness, 36

immigration, 151–56

employment and, 154

environment and, 155–56

illegal, 154

limits to, 154–55

overpopulation and, 152, 153

poverty and, 153–54

imperialism, 146

Imperial Russian Military Academy, 213*n*

India, 143, 253

individual:

bureaucracy and, 148

civilization and, 27, 28

egalitarianism and, 140–41

God and, 45–46

government and, 55–56, 144–45

leadership and, 258

Marxism and, 36

power and, 55–56

industrial revolution, 122

initiative and referendum, 135–37, 140

injustice, social, 122

Institute for Advanced Study, 105–6

intelligence, foreign policy and, 209

international aid programs, 199–202

International Development and Humanitarian Assistance, 199

International Monetary Fund, 186

Iran, 224

Iraq, 65, 88, 154, 224

isolationism, 183–84, 186

Israel, 198

Israel lobby, 193

Italy, 153, 223

Japan, 220

U.S. military policy and, 223

U.S. Security Treaty with, 194–95

Jesus Christ, 40–41, 45

Jews, Judaism, 40

Christianity and, 50

Job, 47

John the Evangelist, Saint, 40

Jomini, Antoine de, 213

junk mail, 171–73

environment and, 172

juvenile delinquency, 163

Kedourie, E., 74

Khayyam, Omar, 17

Kissinger, Henry, 189*n*

Korea, Democratic People’s Republic of \(North\), 84*n*, 195, 223

Korea, Republic of \(South\), 84*n*, 198, 223

Korean War, 194

Kremlin, 97

Kuwait, 154

language, 175–76

Latin America, 196

law:

egalitarianism and, 123

government and, 122–23, 133–34, 144–45

plebiscite and, 135

referendum and, 137

law and order, 54, 157

leadership, 26, 178

of church, 49

in human rights, 207–8

individual and, 258

polls and, 139

League of Nations, 85

Lenin, V. I., 97

*Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol* \(Burke\), 134–35

liberalism, 98

status and, 124–25

liberty, equality vs., 118

Library of Congress, 240

Libya, 224

lobbies, 256

foreign policy and, 190, 193–94

love, self-denial and, 39

loyalty, 51–52

luxuries, 121

Macaulay, Thomas, 180

McFarlane, Robert, 189*n*

Machiavelli, Niccolò, 60

*Machiavelli in Hell* \(Grazia\), 53*n*-54*n*

Mahan, Alfred T., 213

man, 17–36, 251

authority and, 25–27

chance and, 35–36

conflicting impulses of, 17–18, 27, 45

demonic dimension of, 28–32

Divine Injunction of, 46–48

environment and, 32–35

equality of, 131

ethics and, 51–52

faith and, 37, 44–45

God and, 42–44

greatness and, 31

heredity and, 32–35

judgment and, 24

modern, 38

mortality and, 35–36

natural law and, 69

nature and, 38–39, 142–43

overestimation of, 22–28

self-regard and, 20–21

sexual urge and, 18–20

social nature of, 23

soul of, 38–40, 44–45

underestimation of, 21–22

Manifest Destiny, 182

Marine Corps, U.S., 225–26

Marshall, George C., 45*n*, 247

Marx, Karl, 99, 122

Marxism, 77, 252

death and, 98

egalitarianism and, 119–20

human individuality and, 36

as ideology, 97–98

uniformity and, 121

Mary, Virgin, 45

mass hysteria, 82

mass psychology, 62*n*

means, ends and, 258

media, 60, 124, 177, 192, 199, 235, 236

polls and, 138–39

thought and, 176

melting pot, 127–28, 150

*Metempsychosis* \(Donne\), 37

Mexico, 204

middle class, 99

Middle East, 198, 200

migration, 32–33

Military Education and Training, 201

military policy, *see* foreign policy, military

Millay, Edna St. Vincent, 29

Milton, John, 11, 177

morality:

behavior and, 38

foreign policy and, 208–10

government and, 53, 54, 58

human rights and, 207

warfare and, 221–22

mortality:

communism and, 98

man and, 35–36

regimes and, 59

movies, 169, 175, 176

multilateral diplomacy, 185, 205

UN and, 203–4

nation, 74–95

chauvinism and, 78, 79

democracy and, 76

emergence of, 75–76

emotional fragility of, 84

international community and, 84–91

minority elements and, 91, 94, 95

nationalism and, 76–81

patriotism and, 77–81

plebiscite and, 83

political collective and, 81–84

regional association and, 92–95

UN membership and, 84–86

National Academy of Sciences, 143*n*, 246

National Defense Committee, 225

National Defense University, 230

national deficit, 158

nationalism, 76–82, 252

emotional intensity of, 77

as mass hysteria, 82

nation-state and, 76–81

pathological patriotism and, 78–81

patriotism and, 77–78

personal vs. collective, 81–82

romanticism and, 78–79

self and, 76–77

*Nationalism* \(Kedourie\), 74

National Security Council, 187

original concept of, 189

State Department and, 189

national service corps, 226

natural law, 69

nature:

man and, 38–39, 142–43

population and, 142–43

Primary Cause and, 42–44

scientific manipulation of, 34–35

unpredictability of, 33

Navy, U.S., 148*n*, 225, 230

negotiations, privacy of, 209

*New Encyclopedia Britannica,* 96

New Jersey, 136

*New York Times,* 143*n*

advertising in, 170

Nicene Creed, 45

Niebuhr, Reinhold, 18, 82*n*, 183

Nixon, Richard M., 188*n*

noninterference, 207

North Atlantic Treaty Organization \(NATO\), 205, 215

U.S. foreign policy and, 194–98

U.S. military policy and, 223, 224

nuclear weapons:

first use of, 215–16

fixation on, 214–15

North Korea and, 195

proliferation of, 215

objectivity, 23

old age, chance and, 36

Open Door principle, 71

original sin, 37–38

overpopulation, 102, 201

environment and, 104

immigration and, 152, 153

Third World and, 102

*Oxford English Dictionary,* 130

Pakistan, 198

Panama, 210

Pan American Airlines, 148*n*

*Paradise Lost* \(Milton\), 11

parliamentary democracy, 65–66

parochialism, 187–88, 210

patriotism, 77–81

periodicals, 169

Persian Gulf War, 210

personality, 31

environment and, 33–34

heredity and, 32–33

Philippines, 198

plebiscite, 83

democracy and, 135–38

egalitarianism and, 133–40

law and, 135

Poindexter, John, 189*n*

Policy Planning Staff, State Department, 190, 247

political collective, 81–84

politics, 26, 55

cliques and, 58–61

military policy and, 217–18, 221

philosophy of, 27–28

World War II and, 217–18

polls, 135, 210

effects of, 138–39

leadership and, 139

media and, 138–39

wording of, 137

Pope, Alexander, 106

population:

civilization and, 100

nature’s tolerance and, 142–43

U.S. and, 142–43

pornography, 19, 29

Portugal, 223

Postal Service, U.S., 171–72

poverty, 120, 124

farming and, 102–3

immigration and, 153–54

power, 26

Adams on effect of, 56

arrogance of, 27

centralization of, 67

competition for, 58–59

ego and, 55, 57

elected representatives and, 138

equality and, 118

of federal government, 67–68

government and, 55–58

guilt and, 183

individual and, 55–56

intoxication of, 56

mass hysteria and, 82

national context of, 76

proximity to, 56–57

self-regard and, 57

prayer, 43

Primary Cause:

faith and, 42–44

merciful deity and, 47–48

Prohibition, 66–67

proletariat, 97

contemporary poor vs., 99

Protestantism, 50

psychology, 82

public interest, private enterprise vs., 104

public transportation, 162, 164, 166–67

publishing, 168–69

radio, 167, 175

railroads, 159–62

reading, 175–76

Reagan, Ronald, 188*n*–189*n*

referendum, 135

law and, 137

*see also* initiative and referendum

*Reflections on the Revolution in France* \(Burke\), 12–13

regime, 60

mortality and, 59

total, 61–62

regional association:

Europe as, 204–5

nation-state and, 92–95

UN and, 92, 93, 94

U.S. and, 204

religion, 45–51

ethics and, 52

representative government, 133–40

responsibility, 44

elitism and, 131–32

Riga, 128

ritual, 49

rivalry, 27

authority and, 25–26

robots, 101

Roman Catholic church, 49–50

romanticism, 78–79

Roosevelt, Franklin D., 188*n*, 217, 218

*Rubáiyát* \(Khayyám\), 17

rural, urban vs., 101–3

Russia, Imperial, 85, 87*n*

Great Britain and, 227

Russia, Republic of, 86

Russian Orthodox church, 39, 49

saints, 30–31

savings and loan disaster, 103

Scandinavia, 120, 125, 139

Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr., 71

science:

ideology and, 105–7

manipulation of nature and, 34–35

Scowcroft, Brent, 189*n*

Scripture, 45

secrecy, foreign policy and, 209

segregation:

busing and, 129

education and, 128–30

egalitarianism and, 126–30

forced, 127

uniformity and, 127–28

self, 20–28

authority and, 25–26

nationalism and, 76–77

overestimation of, 22–28

totalitarianism and, 21–22

underestimation of, 21–22

self-judgment, 24

self-love, 18

self-regard, 20–21, 26, 27

man and, 20–21

power and, 57

Senate, U.S., 157, 198, 199, 245

sexual urge, 18–20

Shakespeare, William, 53, 132, 153

shuttle diplomacy, 191

single-issue voting, 136

size, government and, 143–46

Smith, Page, 43*n*

social behavior, 21

social injustice, 122

socialism, 77, 98

egalitarianism and, 119–22

soul, 38–40

man’s inner conflict and, 44–45

sovereignty, 87–88

Soviet Union, 84, 97–98, 103, 121, 123, 143, 196, 197, 223, 252, 253

breakup of, 184–85

egalitarianism in, 119–20, 124*n*

nuclear arsenal of, 214–15

Soviet Union, postcommunist, 85, 86

Spain, 86, 223

Spanish-American War, 146

special interests, 190, 256

foreign policy and, 193–94

species, individual and, 140–41

Stalin, Joseph, 97, 98, 252

State Department, U.S., 146, 147, 187, 193, 200, 206, 248

foreign policy and, 189–92

NSC and, 189

Policy Planning Staff of, 190, 247

secretary of, 188, 190–91

Supreme Court, U.S., 145, 239, 241, 246, 247

Switzerland, 84*n*

technology, 105–7

television, 112, 173–77, 178

advertising and, 167, 169

antisocial nature of, 173–75

children and, 174–75

education and, 176–77

in legislative chamber, 138

national uniformity and, 150–51

passivity induced by, 173–74

reading and, 175–76

thought and, 176–77

in U.S., 138

Texas, 150

Third World:

emigration and, 153–54

overpopulation and, 102

UN representation of, 199

U.S. aid to, 199–203

U.S. foreign policy and, 199–203

U.S. military policy and, 224–26

Tocqueville, Alexis de, 33, 113–14, 123, 126

apprehensions of, 67–68, 117–19, 140–41

egalitarianism and, 117–19

on inequality, 120*n*

Tolkien, J.R.R., 251

totalitarianism:

anonymity and, 144

cruelties of, 61–62

self and, 21–22

total war, 216–18

transportation, 159–67

automobile and, 160–65

canals and, 159–60

crime and, 163

free enterprise and, 159, 166

government and, 159–60, 162, 165–67

health and, 163

pollution and, 162–63

public, 162, 164, 166–167

railroads and, 159–62

urban community and, 160–61

Treasury Department, U.S., 187

Turkey, 198

unconditional surrender, 216, 218–20

unemployment:

automation and, 101

computer and, 107

uniformity:

government and, 59

Marxism and, 121

segregation and, 127–28

television and, 150–51

United Nations, 70, 72

Environmental Program of, 186

equality in, 88–91

European Community and, 90–91

General Assembly of, 68–69, 89

intermediate status in, 85

membership in, 84–86

multilateral diplomacy and, 203–4

negotiations and, 209

nondemocratic states and, 64

prestige and, 90

proliferation of nations in, 85–86

protocol and, 86–87

regional associations and, 92, 93, 94

Security Council of, 185

sovereignty and, 87–90

Third World nations in, 199

*Universal Declaration of Human Rights* issued by, 68–69, 70

U.S. foreign policy and, 184–85, 203–4

U.S. military policy and, 222–23

world community and, 85–86

United States:

burden of presidency of, 66

decentralization and, 149–51, 155

economic growth and, 100–101, 103

equality in, 117, 122–25

governmental machinery of, 187–92

greatness of, 114–15

nuclear arsenal of, 214–15

plebiscitary tendency in, 133–34, 139–41

presidential power in, 68

self-image of, 145–46

sweeping solutions favored by, 144–45

as unique example, 182

“Wasp” values in, 111–12

*Universal Declaration of Human Rights, The,* 68–69, 70

universe, 42

urban, rural vs., 101–3

vanity, 25

*Victorian England: Portrait of an Age* \(Young\), 232

Victorians, 29

Vienna, Congress of, 86

Vietnam War, 210

vote, voting:

elitism and, 131–32

failure to, 118

initiative and referendum and, 135–37

legislative process and, 133–34

on single issue, 136

War College, U.S., 227

warfare, *see* foreign policy, military

war of annihilation, 216–18, 220

wealth:

character and, 123–24

economy and, 121–22

perquisites of, 124

Western European Union, 223

Wilson, Woodrow, 71, 188*n*, 209

military planning and, 227–28

World Bank, 186

world trade, 186

World War I, 71, 80, 209, 217, 218, 219, 220, 226

World War II, 80, 98, 148*n*, 184, 214, 220

civilian deaths in, 222

politics and, 217–18

unconditional surrender and, 218–19

worship, 48–51

Yeltsin, Boris, 83*n*–84*n*

Young, G. M., 232

Yugoslavia, 84, 184–85





Copyright © 1993 by George F. Kennan



All rights reserved

First published as a Norton paperback 1994



The text of this book is composed in 11.5 Bembo with the display set in Bernhard Modern Roman and Bernhard Tango. Composition and Manufacturing by the Haddon Craftsmen, Inc. Book design by Jo Anne Metsch



The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:

Kennan, George Frost, 1904–

Around the cragged hill: a personal and political philosophy / by George F. Kennan.

p.cm.

Includes index.

1. State, The.2. Political science—Philosophy.

3. International relations.I. Title.

JC251.K461993

320’.01—dc2092–9936



ISBN 978-1-324-02094-3



W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110

W. W. Norton & Company Ltd., 10 Coptic Street, London WC1A 1PU

234567890










