+++
title = "01 FROM GANDHISM TO COMMUNISM"

+++
# FROM GANDHISM TO COMMUNISM

I had a brief encounter with the Sthanakavasi Svetambara sect of Jainism
also, at about the same time. The school in which I was a student was a
Svetambara Jam school. The relative with whom I stayed was also a Jain.
There was a daily period in our school for teaching the elements of Jain
dharma. But the Jam community which I saw from close quarters was too
decadent, self centred, and morose for my taste. The lectures of some
Jain sadhus which I attended in the local sthanaka (Jain hermitage) were
narrow and sectarian, and never made any sense to me. What scandalised
me most was the Jain version of Sri Krishna. He was portrayed as a
crook. I was told that Sri Krishna had descended into the fifth hell for
the killings in which he had indulged and that he was still there. I had
to wait for years before I came to understand Bhagvan Mahavira and
Jainism via my understanding of the Buddha and Buddhism. Both of them, I
found, had scaled the same Himalayan heights of the soul.

A friend and classmate one day gave me biographies of Sri Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa and Swami Vivekananda written by Romain Rolland. I was
enthralled and felt strongly drawn towards Vedanta. The library in Delhi
which I frequented had complete works of Swami Vivekananda and Swami Ram
Tirtha, in eight volumes each. I read all of them. But my gain was very
little indeed. The mistake I made was to imagine that mystic
consciousness, which alone could witness the truths of Vedanta, was a
matter of mental, at best intellectual, attitudinizing. Both Ramakrishna
and Vivekananda were to come back to me in later years as embodiments
of' our great spiritual and cultural traditions.

Five paise of the old currency was not exactly a small sum for me in
those days. But I gladly parted with it for a small sized copy of the
New Testament which a pavement bookseller had in his collection of old
books. I did not know at that time that I could have acquired a much
better edition and that for the asking if I had approached some
Christian church or mission. I did not know any at that time. I read the
gospel part of the New Testament immediately. The rest of it did not
interest me. But the personality of Christ on the cross fascinated me so
much that I bought a picture of Christ and put it on the wall of my
small cell along with pictures of Mahatma Gandhi, Sri Ramakrishna, Swami
Vivekananda and Swami Ram Tirtha. The Sermon on the Mount intermingled
and became one with the message of Mahatma Gandhi.

It was at about this time that I came in contact with the Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) also. Some of my classmates were members of this
organisation of which I had never heard so far. They invited me to a
function held in Gandhi Grounds on the occasion of Vijayadashmi. I was
very much impressed by the mass drill and I.he torchlight procession
that I saw. But the speech by Shri Vasantarao left me aghast Amongst
other things he said: *"It is a sin and a crime to be weak. The Vedas
had prescribed that a lion should be slaughtered in one of the
sacrifices. But who could catch a lion? So the poor goat was substituted
for it. Why? Simply because the goat was weak."* I had often joined in
singing Surdas' famous song, nirbala ke bala Rama (the strength of the
weak is Rama). Jesus had also told me that the meek shall inherit the
earth. This denigration of the weak and glorification of the strong,
therefore, scandalised me at that time. I had to learn a lot from
history, past and present, before I realised that Shri Vasantarao was
stating a great truth. It is indeed a sin and a crime to be weak . It is
only the strong who can fight for dharma and practise kshama
(forgiveness).

But as my moral and intellectual life was preparing to settle down in a
universe of firm faith provided by Mahatma Gandhi, my emotional life was
heading towards an upheaval which I had not anticipated. Let me hasten
to clarify that this upheaval had nothing to do with love or romance.
The dimensions of this disturbance were quite different. I started
doubting, first of all slowly and then rather strongly, if there was a
moral order in die universe at large and in the human society in which I
lived. The sages, saints and thinkers whom I had honoured so far were
sure that the world was made and governed by a God who was satyam
(Truth), sivam (Goodness), sundaram (Beauty). But all around me I saw
much that was untrue, unwholesome, and ugly. God and his creation could
not be reconciled.

This problem of evil arose and gripped my mind partly because of my
personal situation in life. In spite of my pose of humility learnt from
Mahatma Gandhi, I was harbouring a sense of great self esteem. I was a
good student who had won distinctions and scholarships at every stage. I
had read a lot of books which inside me feel learned and wise. I was
trying to lead a life of moral endeavour which I thought made me better
than most of my fellowman. Standing at the confluence of these several
streams of self esteem, I came to believe that I was somebody in
particular and that the society in which I lived owed me some special
and privileged treatment. All this may sound ridiculous. But people who
take themselves too seriously are seldom known for a sense of humour.

My objective situation, however, presented a stark contrast to the
subjective world in which I loved to live. I was very poor and had to
lead a hard life. My learning, whatever it was worth, did not seem to
impress anyone except my teachers and a few classmates. Most people
around me thought that I was a bookworm and a crank. My interest in Arya
Samaj, the freedom movement and Harijan uplift had alienated the family
elders in the village. I had even suffered physical assault from one of
them. But the unkindest cut of all was that whenever I visited the home
of some city classmate who liked me, his family people made it a point
to ignore me as a village bumpkin outside the ken of their class. I was
always so poorly dressed as to be mistaken for one of their servants. it
took me a long time to forget and forgive the father of a close friend
who chided his son in my presence for having fallen into bad company. I
did not know at that time that our upper classes are normally very
uppish and that their culture and good manners are generally reserved
for their social superiors.

Over a period of time, I found that I was getting overwhelmed by a great
sense of loneliness and self pity. This black mood got intensified by my
voluminous readings of the great tragedies from Western literature.
Thomas Hardy was one of my most favourite novelists. I read almost all
his works. The comedies of Shakespeare I always gave up midway. But I
lapped up his tragedies. I knew by heart all the soliloquies of Hamlet.
And I thought that my situation was summed up by the following stanza in
Gray's Elegy:

Full many a gem of purest ray serene,  
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;  
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,  
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.

I was sure that I was one of those gems and flowers which would never
get the appreciation they deserved by virtue of their brilliance and
fragrance. I translated the whole poem into Hindi verse.

But, by and large, the problem of evil was occasioned by the cruelty,
oppression, high handedness and injustice which I witnessed in the world
around me. I will describe only one of the many instances which revolted
me. Our village had a large population of Harijans who, besides other
occupations, worked as agricultural labourers also. Several other
villages in our neighbourhood ran short of agricultural labour at
harvest time. These villages, therefore, promised better wages than
those paid in our village. Harijans from our village naturally started
going to the neighbouring villages, which was not to the liking of
peasant proprietors in our village. A band of these strong men descended
on the Harijan basis (locality) one day, demolished several Harijan
houses and threatened to molest Harijan women if their menfolk did not
agree to work exclusively in our village for wages determined by the
village panchayat in which the Harijans had no representation. I
happened to be in the village that day and went on a visit to the basti
along with boys from the Harijan Ashram. I could not suppress my own
tears when I saw a newly married Harijan bride stunned into tearless
silence by the terror of it all.

At this critical juncture in my life, I made great friends with a
classmate who was a student of philosophy which was not my subject. He
was very well read. But what was more, he had the gift of the gab. His
company came as a godsend at a time when I was in great need of it. It
became our daily routine to go for long walks along the Jamuna or on
unfrequented roads outside Delhi, which was a rather small city at that
time. During these walks, he gave me lessons in inductive and deductive
logic, ethics, psychology and the various systems of Western philosophy.
It was all very fascinating and a new world of thought and perception
opened before me. I still regard him as one of my two great gurus.

In between, however, he would express his own views and judgments on
subjects about which I thought I had already arrived at final
conclusions. We had a violent argument one day when he denounced the
marriage institution and opined that a man and a woman should be free to
live together as long as they liked one another. But I fell murderous in
spite of my devotion to non violence when one fine morning he declared
that Gandhi was the embodiment of all reaction. This was a new term for
me. He asked me to read Yashpal's Gandhivada ka Savaparikshana
(postmortem of Gandhism) and find out for myself. I had never heard of
Yashpal nor did I care. I did not read the book till I became a
Communist several years later. My friend was not a Communist at that
time and never became even a Marxist in his life. But he was an admirer
of the revolutionaries whom, he said, some people wrongly described as
terrorists. I knew nothing about any revolutionaries or terrorists
except Bhagat Singh whom Mahatma Gandhi had described as a misguided
patriot.

My mental defences in support of Gandhism were giving way one by one
under assault after assault mounted by this philosopher friend whom I
loved as a remarkable human being and to whom I conceded a superiority
of intellect and knowledge. But I refused to share his conviction that
this world was created and controlled by the Devil who off and on spread
some grains of happiness over his net in order better to trap the
helpless human beings. I was not prepared to give up all hope so fully
and finally. But the evolutionistic explanation of the world, inanimate
and animate, which I had read in H.G. Wells' Outline of History an year
or two before, now suddenly started coming alive in my consciousness. So
far I had remembered only some unconventional observations made in this
big book, namely, that Ashoka was the greatest king in the annals of
human history, that Alexander and Napoleon were criminals, and that
Muhammad was some sort of a loafer. Now I started wondering whether this
world was really a chance concourse of atoms with no purposive
consciousness leading it towards a godly goal, and no moral order
governing at the heart of its matrix.

Another nail in the coffin which Gandhism had now started becoming for
me, was driven by the book Gandhism Versus Socialism which attracted my
attention at the Sasta Sahitya Mandal bookshop. Till this time, I knew
nothing about Socialism. The controversy between Gandhiji and Subhash
Chandra Bose had brought this term to my notice for the first time two
years ago. I had referred the matter to my friend in the Harijan Ashram.
He had told me that the Socialists belonged to the Bomb Party and
believed in violence. That had settled the matter for me. But as I read
this book, Socialism underwent a tremendous transformation in my eyes.
In the debate between a number of leading Gandhians and Socialists, the
Gandhians had lost the contest. I was struck by the fact that while the
Gandhians were on the, defensive all along the line and were trying to
prove that Gandhism was also Socialism, the Socialists were on the
offensive and saying in so many words that Gandhism was not Socialism
but something reactionary and revivalist instead.

Now I was in a desperate hurry to get a good knowledge of the doctrine
of Socialism. It was a prescribed reading also for my next year's course
in the history of Western political thought. But I did not want to wait
till the next year. The syllabus for B.A. Hons. had Harold Laski's
Communism on top of the books recommended for advanced reading on
Socialism. I borrowed a copy of this book from the university library
and sat down on the lawn outside to read it. Never before in my life had
a book fascinated me as this one did. I was still reading it when it
grew dark and I could read no more. I brought it home and it was late in
the night when I finished it. it was comparatively a small book. But
when I woke up next morning, Gandhism was lying in shambles all around
me.

Laski led me straight to two more books in quick succession. Both of
them were proscribed by the British government at that time. But our
professor of political science had both of them and gladly agreed to
lend them to me, on the condition that I carried them wrapped in a
newspaper and opened them only in the privacy of my room. One of these
books was Theory And Practice of Socialism by John Stratchey. The other
was Red Star Over China by Edgar Snow. I found them as absorbing as
Laski's Communism. Stratchey was to leave Communism later on and join
the British Labour Party. Edgar Snow was to be denounced by the Chinese
Communists as a C.I.A. agent. But these two books, while they lasted
with the reputation of their authors intact, made more Communists in
India than any other literature.

A desire to read Karl Marx now became irresistible. First, I read the
Communist Manifesto. It was simply breathtaking in the breadth and depth
of its sweep over vast vistas of human history. It was also a great call
to action for changing the world and ending exploitation and social
injustice for all time to come. What was I most reassuring was that
revolutionary action was only an aid to the evolutionary spiral of
social forces towards an ultimate resolution of all class
contradictions, inevitably and in spite of all opposition. I need not
have read any more of Marx to become a Marxist. But I did read two
volumes of the Das Capital, page by page. The meticulous and painstaking
scholarship of Marx in the age old and true German tradition taxed my
mental capacities to the limit. But I was left in no doubt that he had
built his case against Capitalism and for the Labour Theory of Value on
a solid foundation of recorded facts and figures, and by an exercise of
razor sharp logic which left no loop holes and no loose ends.

I do not remember if I read any more Communist classics or any other
Communist literature at this time. I certainly did not read any Lenin or
Stalin. Mao had not yet emerged as a Communist theoretician. Nor did I
know anything about the existence of a Communist or Socialist movement
in India. Day to day and practical politics had no interest for me. I
hardly ever read the daily newspaper in those days, leave alone any
party periodicals. Mahatma Gandhi's weekly, Harijan, was the only
periodical I had ever read regularly so far. But that was not because of
any political interest. The Mahatma's preoccupation with moral problems
was the prime source of my attraction towards his weekly. Marx had
provided me with what I thought was a deeper solution of moral problems.
An individual could not be moral in the midst of an immoral society.

Then came the great confusion which I think must have happened in many
other cases. From being a Marxist, I became a Communist, that is, an
admirer of the Soviet Union. I had not read a single book about
conditions of life in Soviet Russia. Yet I concluded deductively that
the millennium promised by Marx after the proletarian revolution must
have started sprouting in a country which was known to be Communist. As
I look back, I am amazed at the imbecility of my mind with regard to
concrete facts while it was so alert with regard to theoretical
questions. But the ideological swindle did take place very smoothly, and
without any resistance from any Part of my intellect. So, when the Quit
India movement was launched by Mahatma Gandhi, I found myself on the
other side of the fence. I had no sympathy for the freedom fighters who
were being killed by British bullets, or being herded into British
jails. My eyes were fixed on the great battles being fought across the
vast expanse of the Soviet Union. I had started reading the daily
newspapers.

At the Same time, I concluded that God as a creator of this world could
be conceived only in three ways either as a rogue who sanctioned and
shared in the roguery prevalent in his world, or as an imbecile who
could no more control what he had created, or as a samyasin (recluse)
who no more cared for what was happening to his creatures. if God was a
rogue, we had to rise in revolt against his rule. If he was an imbecile,
we could forget him and take charge of the world ourselves. And if he
was a samyasin, he could mind his business while we minded our own. The
scriptures, however, held out a different version of God and his role.
That version was supported neither by experience nor by reason. The
scriptures should, therefore, be burnt in a bonfire, preferably during
winter when it could provide some warmth.

There was a comic sequel to this declaration of my new credo. I was
taking to a small assembly of interested intellectuals in our village.
As I was unfolding my new vision, someone reported that the president of
the Arya Samaj hid left his borne with a strong stick in his hand. He
had also heard of what I was now preaching publicly. And he was
convinced that I was bound to see, God in a new light and change my
opinion about God's role in the world as soon as the top of my head had
a taste of his stick. I must confess that I was not prepared for this
test. I, therefore, turned tail and left the village dust very day. I
hoped that the president's temper would cool down in due course. It did.
And I was more careful in giving expression to my militant atheism
before village audiences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
