+++
title = "02 SEEDS THAT WERE TO SPROUT"

+++
# SEEDS THAT WERE TO SPROUT

Four years after leaving college I was ready to join the Communist Party
of India when it declared war on the newly born Republic of India in
February 1948. I conveyed my decision to my friend Ram Swarup, whom I
had met after leaving college and who was to exercise a decisive
influence on my intellectual evolution. He wrote back immediately: *"You
are too intelligent not to become a Communist. But you are also too
intelligent to remain one for long."*

This was a prophecy which came true. it was only an year and a few
months later that I renounced Marxism as an inadequate philosophy,
realised that the Communist Party of India was a fifth column for the
advancement of Russian imperialism in India, and denounced the Soviet
Union under Stalin as a vast slave empire. Before I tell the story of
that transformation, I have to look back and point towards planting of
some other seeds in mind. These seeds were to sprout into life as soon
as the spell of Marxism was broken, and grow into an abiding faith in
Sanatana Dharma.

The first college teacher to leave a lasting impression on my
intellectual growth was our professor of Sanskrit. This great language
and literature was not my main subject in B.A.Hons. I was only supposed
to qualify in it in a supplementary examination and then forget all
about it. lie prescribed course was the first four chapters of
Dasakumaracharit of Dandin and a few cantos of the Kiratarjuniyam of
Bharavi, with some grammar and translation work thrown in as an aid. In
the normal course, therefore, a casual student like me should not have
attracted any notice from our Sanskrit professor, nor he from me. But we
were fated, as it were, to fascinate one another. The outcome of this
meeting was not only my lasting love for Sanskrit language and
literature but several other decisive departures in my way of looking at
Hindu philosophy and history.

This professor had spent several years in Europe, to earn his Ph.D. He
had also taught at Santiniketan for some time. But these were only his
outer accomplishments which several other professors also had in their
own fields. What mattered most to me about him was his vast erudition in
the wide fields of traditional Indian philosophy, Indian history, and
Indian languages and literatures. Every single line of prose and poetry
in the prescribed texts was for him an occasion to launch on a learned
discourse in comparative linguistics, metaphysics, history, and what
not. His contempt for modern Indologists was always as obvious as his
admiration for everything which was traditionally Hindu.

He startled me one day when he poured undisguised contempt on Sir S.
Radhakrishnan who, in his opinion, had tried to fit Hindu philosophy
into the straitjacket of a conceptual framework borrowed from Western
philosophy. I had not studied any Hindu philosophy so far. Nor had I
read any writings of Radhakrishnan. But this was a famous name in which
every Indian was supposed to take legitimate pride. The professor
clinched the argument by stating that a man venturing to write on Hindu
philosophy without a knowledge of Sanskrit was like a man writing a
cheque without a bank balance. I was to discover later on that the
professor was more than right in his indictment.

Another day he came down very heavily on the theory of an Aryan invasion
of India in the second millennium BC. I had never suspected that this
theory was a deliberate plant by Western Indologists, to prove that
India was a caravanserai which no racial, religious or linguistic group
in India could claim as its original home. Our teachers of history in
school and college had always started their first lessons in Indian
history with the advent of the wild Aryans who destroyed the cities in
the Indus Valley, who drove the Dravidians towards the South, and whose
warlike ballads were preserved in the Rigveda. The professor dismissed
all this history as a cock andbull story for which there was no
evidence, literary or archaeological.

It was the strong influence of our Sanskrit professor which made me
stand up in protest when our history teacher traced the Bhakti Movement
in medieval India to the influence of Islam. It was revolting to hear
him quoting Dr. Tarachand approvingly while he taught that
Shankaracharya was drawn towards monotheism due to his association with
some Arab merchants who had settled down in Kerala towards the end of
seventh century AD. The history teacher challenged me to write a rival
thesis disproving what Tarachand had propounded. I wrote a rather long
paper on the Bhakti Movement which took me an hour to read before a full
class. The history teacher praised me for arguing my case very ably from
my own premises. But he was adamant that a wellknown authority like
Tarachand could not be wrong.

I came very close to our Sanskrit professor who also cherished me as his
pet student. He organised a Sanskrit Parishad of which he made me the
first secretary. He could speak Sanskrit extempore and very fluently. He
encouraged me also to write and read out my speeches in Sanskrit. It was
quite an effort in which he helped me. I succeeded and surprised many
people who had never known me as a Sanskritist. I also had the
opportunity to listen to some famous scholars who came to address two
succeeding annual sessions of our Sanskrit Parishad.

But he strongly disapproved of my association with Harijan work. In
fact, he was not prepared to believe that I could be engaged in such a
*disgraceful* activity when one of my classmates who wanted to praise me
before him lodged the first information report. He called me to his
presence and put the question straight to me. I told him the truth.
There was no reproach in his eyes or words. He tried gentle persuasion
with some instances of depravity which he thought was hereditarily
ingrained in a certain class of people. I had too much respect for him
to enter into an argument. But I did tell him that I did not agree.

This great scholar and teacher fell seriously ill before I started
moving towards Marxism. And he died before I left college. I wonder if I
would have wandered into Marxism and atheism had I continued under his
influence. I also wonder if we two would have ever agreed, one way or
the other, about the problem of untouchability. But as I look back I am
filled with gratitude for the seeds of pride in Hindu culture and
history which he was the first to plant in my mind.

It was perhaps due to the strong undercurrents of influence exercised by
what I learnt at the feet of this Sanskrit savant that I was never able
to part company, fully and finally, with the ideals and idols of my
earlier days. Marxism made me renounce my faith in God as the Creator
and Controller of our Cosmos. But my reverence for Sri Garibdas and the
saints and sufis to whom he had introduced me through his great Granth
Saheb remained intact. I gave up Gandhism but not my veneration for
Mahatma Gandhi. His spiritual strength and moral stature continued to
cast its spell on me as ever before. And both Sri Ramakrishna and Swami
Vivekananda made me bow my head in homage whenever their holy names were
mentioned.

This split between my intellectual perceptions and emotional
dispositions was also due to my incomplete acceptance of Marxism. I had
accepted Marx's Historical Materialism as an adequate explanation of the
processes of human history. I had accepted his Labour Theory of Value as
the source of all capital accumulated by human society. I could see
clearly that the State was an instrument of class oppression. I could
detect naked class interests hiding behind the cloak of social
institutions, law codes and conventional morals. And I also came to
believe in the inevitability as well as the desirability of the
proletarian revolution on an international scale. But I found it very
difficult, almost impossible, to accept Dialectical Materialism as a
valid view of the world process.

I had read quite a bit of modern Western philosophy to know that while
Materialism was deterministic, there was an obvious element of teleology
in Dialectics. Materialism and Dialectics could not, therefore, be
reconciled. I had referred the matter to my professor of political
science whom I thought a very good Marxist. But he confessed that
philosophy had never been his domain and that he had never studied
Dialectical Materialism. Next I had taken the problem to a professor of
philosophy in our college. He confirmed my suspicion that Materialism
and Dialectics were logically irreconcilable. I left it at that at that
time. But the ideological gap continued to rankle in my mind.

Meanwhile I had added two snore idols to the panorama of saints and
sages in my private pantheon Socrates and Sri Aurobindo. They made a
great difference to my intellectual turn out in the long run.

Plato who made me fall at the feet of Socrates, figuratively speaking,
was a prescribed reading for me as a student of Greek political thought.
But I did not stop at the Republic, the Laws and the Statesman, which
three Dialogues would have covered my course. I read practically the
whole of Plato in order to know more and more about the personality of
Socrates whom someone had so aptly described as the first satyagrahi
(adherent to truth) known to the Western world. He finally rose to his
full stature in the three Dialogues centred round the last days of his
life Apology, Crito, Phaedo. His wisdom as well as the nobility of his
character left me spellbound. This fascination for the personality of
Socrates led me later on to translate and publish these three Dialogues
in Hindi under the title Satyakama Socrates.

My encounter with Sri Aurobindo, on the other hand, came about almost
inadvertently. I had heard his name from my father who extolled him as a
great Yogi. My father literally believed that Sri Aurobindo could
levitate as much as five feet above ground. But I had never read
anything written by Sri Aurobindo nor was he on my list of masters whom
I aspired to read some day. The intellectual elite in the college talked
a lot about Spengler, Bergson, Marcel Proust, Bernard Shaw and Alduous
Huxley, but I had never heard the name of Sri Aurobindo in this
exclusive club.

Strange as it may sound, I was led to Sri Aurobindo by my interest in
Sigmund Freud, the founder of Psychoanalysis. Psychology was not my
subject in college. But my philosopher friend had aroused my interest in
Western psychology as he had done in Western philosophy. I studied all
the six schools of psychology which were known in those days. But I was
impressed only by the depth psychology of Freud. Our university library
had almost all his published works till that time, including his
voluminous case histories. And there were not many readers to take out
these tomes. I could, therefore, study them at leisure. I wonder if I
derived any intellectual benefit from them. What I remember is that I
started seeing all sorts of conflicts and complexes in my mental make
up. It was something like what happens to an immature student of
Homeopathy who starts suspecting in his own self the symptoms of all
sorts of diseases described in the Materia Medica.

My morbid fears made me approach one of our professors who was a well
known psychoanalyst. He gave me a few sessions of free association, the
therapeutic method prescribed by Freud. I do not remember that they did
me any good. The professor must have soon found out that I was a victim
of auto suggestion But I was surely surprised when one day he suddenly
asked me if I believed in God. When I replied in the negative, he
further asked me if I believed in a higher consciousness. This I could
not deny without repudiating Sri Garibdas and the saints and sufis who
always sang of a consciousness full of nur and zahur.

I did not know that the professor was a devotee of Sri Aurobindo. He was
not in a hurry to reveal himself to me all at the same time. What he
told me to start with was that though he had put all his good faith in
psychoanalysis for quite a number of years, he had now come to the
conclusion that yoga was a more effective method of dealing with mental
ailments.

I knew next to nothing about yoga. I was only vaguely aware of the name
of Patanjali as an exponent of the yoga system of Indian philosophy. But
that was all. I had not studied any Indian philosophy so far nor was I
inclined to do so. The professor recommended that I need not bother
about the philosophy of yoga. All I needed was to make a start with some
simple expositions of practical yoga by Sri Aurobindo. He also promised
to lend me some books if I could not find them on my own.

My search for the writings of Sri Aurobindo led me to my old favourite
library in Chandni Chowk. The college and university libraries had not
so far acquired any of his works, perhaps because they had been
published only recently. The library in Chandni Chowk, however, had
quite a few of Sri Aurobindo's works. One of these was The Life Divine.
I immediately went for it, forgetting for the time being what the
professor had recommended. And that was an intellectual experience which
I will never forget. I still remember how I tried to read this great
work by the moonlight on the roof when I found one night that my lantern
had run out of kerosene. What impressed me most at that time was Sri
Aurobindo's full and very fair exposition of the philosophy of
materialism in all its metaphysical and scientific ramifications as well
as life meanings. Here was a mind which was as razor sharp as that of
Marx but which at the same time covered a larger territory.

As I look back, I can see that the greater part of Sri Aurobindo's vast
vision as expounded in The Life Divine was beyond my grasp at that time.
The heights to which he rose as a witness of the world process and the
drama of human destiny left me literally gasping for breath. But this
much was clear at the very start that his concept of man had dimensions
which were radically different from those I had come across in any other
system of thought. He was not dealing with man as a producer and
consumer of material goods. He was not dealing with man as a member of a
social or political or economic organisation. He was not dealing with
man as a rational animal or a moral aspirant or an aesthete. Man was all
these according to him. But man was also much more at the same time. He
was a soul effulgent with an inherent divinity which alone could sustain
and give meaning to the outer manifestations of the human personality.

And the promise made by Sri Aurobindo regarding the ultimate destiny of
the human race was far more stupendous than that held out by Marx. The
international proletarian revolution anticipated and advocated by Marx
was to lead to a stage at which mankind could engage itself in rational,
moral and aesthetic endeavours free from the distortions brought about
by class interests. But the supramentalisation of the mental, vital and
physical nature of' man envisaged and recommended by Sri Aurobindo would
enable mankind to bridge the gulf between human life as a terrestrial
turmoil and human life as a spiritual self existence.

The conceptual language I am using now to draw the distinction between
Marx and Sri Aurobindo was not accessible to me in those days. Most of
this clarity is wisdom by hindsight. But howsoever vague and inchoate my
vision might have been at that time, I did feel that Sri Aurobindo was
talking about fundamentally different dimensions of the universe and
human life. The gulf between my mundane interests and the grand
aspirations dictated by Sri Aurobindo's vision was very wide and I could
hardly muster the care or the courage to cross over. But in the inner
recesses of my mind, I did become curious about the nature of the
universe, about man's place in it, and about a meaningful goal of human
life.

My problem now was to reconcile Sri Aurobindo with Marx, in that order.
Marx of course came first. He was the exponent par excellence of the
social scene with which I was primarily preoccupied as well as extremely
dissatisfied. Sri Aurobindo had to be accommodated somewhere, somehow,
in the system of Marx. The reconciliation was achieved by me several
years later to my own great satisfaction. I came to the conclusion that
while Marx stood for a harmonised social system, Sri Aurobindo held the
key to a harmonised human personality. The ridiculousness of this
reconciliation did not dawn on me even when a well known exponent of Sri
Aurobindo to whom I presented it as an intellectual feat dismissed it
with a benevolent smile. I dismissed the exponent as wise by half
because while he had studied Sri Aurobindo, he had most probably not
studied Marx, at least not as well as I had done!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
