+++
title = "05 RAM SWARUP TO THE RESCUE"

+++
# RAM SWARUP TO THE RESCUE

I was present in the Second Party Conference of the Communist Party of
India which was held in the Maidan at Calcutta in February, 1948. It was
some time before this Conference that B. T. Ranadive had taken over from
P.C. Joshi the General Secretaryship of the CPI. The Ranadive line, as
it came to be known in India, was an adoption of the international
Communist line laid down by Stalin through the mouth of his minion,
Zhdanov, in September 1947.

The Zhdanov line led to widespread purges in East European satellites of
the Soviet Union and the Communist takeover of Czechoslovakia. The
Communist Parties in India, Burma, Malaya, Indonesia and the Philippines
staged violent uprisings. The civil war in China was intensified and it
led to Mao's victory in 1949. The culmination of this line was the
invasion of South Korea by North Korea's Communist armies. Stalin was
out to fill the vacuum created by the withdrawal of British power and
the demobilisation of US forces from the Pacific.

The large sized stage in this Second Party Conference of the CPI was
decorated with portraits of Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin, Mao and Marshal
Tito. Delegates from several East European and South East Asian
countries were present. The Yugoslav delegate was particularly paraded
on the stage as a famous warrior who was still carrying a German bullet
in his shoulder blade. To me his name sounded like *Jagdish*. Later on I
learnt that he was Comrade Dedeir. Speaker after speaker thundered in a
very strong language and called upon the people *"to give hell to the
bourgeois bastards who had sold their souls to the Anglo American
imperialists"*.

I was really thrilled and made up my mind to join the Party immediately.
A few months earlier I had come quite close to another Bengali Communist
who was well placed in the Party hierarchy in Calcutta. He was a friend
of my boss and had become my friends also. He had an equally well
stocked library. I now approached him to take me to the Party
headquarters and get me enrolled as a party member. He fixed up a date
on which I was to accompany him for a rendezvous with revolution. And I
started looking forward to that date with an eagerness which I had
seldom experienced earlier.

But Providence had planned it otherwise. The Communist Party in Bengal
was banned exactly on that date. There was a telephone in the
groundfloor of the house in which I lived. I had given this number to my
Bengali friend in case he ever needed to call me in an emergency. He
called me that day. It was early in the morning. I did not know that the
Party had been banned. He gave me the great news in very grave tones.
His advice to me was not to go anywhere near the Party office or the
office of any front organisation and to stop professing Communism in
public. A few days later it was suggested to me by my Marwari friend
from the share market that as my place was not suspected by the police,
it could be used for lodging in a Communist leader from Rajasthan who
was expected in Calcutta after a fortnight. I immediately extended a
warm welcome to the veteran's visit.

But destiny was determined, as it were, to deny me that *"honour"* also.
My friend Ram Swarup suddenly appeared on the scene and expressed his
intention to stay with me for quite some time. It was his first visit to
Calcutta. I was very happy because he was my nearest and dearest in the
whole world. I did not know that Ram Swarup had by now come to regard
Communism as a very great evil threatening to engulf the future of
mankind. There had been nothing in his letters to indicate this decisive
turn. He had only warned me that I was too intelligent to remain a
Communist for long. But he had also conceded that I was too intelligent
not to become a Communist. I had overlooked his warning and taken his
concession seriously.

Ram Swarup's conclusions about Communism were revealed to me
dramatically a few days after his arrival when there were some fireworks
between him and my Marwari friend who had come specifically to meet a
person about whom I had always talked so warmly and so highly. I was
unhappy to find that there was very little prospect of my two good
friends striking a friendship between them. As I saw off my Marwari
friend downstairs, he informed me that he would not allow the Communist
leader from Rajasthan to stay under a roof which harboured a man of such
undesirable political credentials. I was taken aback. I could never
think of Ram Swarup as an undesirable person. But I did not know how to
counter the argument. Returning to my room upstairs I asked for Ram
Swarup's opinion about my Marwari friend. He smiled and said: *"Well, he
is quite thick headed. It seems that no argument can penetrate his
skull."* My friendship with this Marwari friend broke down soon after I
renounced Communism and we became total strangers.

Next I tried to find out if Ram Swarup would hit it off with my Bengali
friend. I had talked to him also about Ram Swarup and also given him to
read Ram Swarup's Let Us Have Riots: The Philosophy of Those Who Want to
Divide India by Street Riots. We were entertained in the true tradition
of Bengali hospitality at the home of this friend one day. But there was
hardly any dialogue between Ram Swarup and our host. Ram Swarup simply
listened to my friend expounding the new Party line at length. I was
intrigued by Ram Swarup's studied silence. And I asked for his opinion
about my friend as soon as we came out of the latter's house. Ram Swarup
said *"Well, his commitment to Communism is a pathological condition. It
needs to be unravelled."* This was my second disappointment within a few
days of Ram Swarup's arrival in Calcutta.

My Bengali friend was arrested and detained in a camp in North Bengal
some weeks later. By the time he came back in 1949 I had not only
renounced Communism but had also written against it in some Calcutta
newspapers. He came to meet me in our office and said that he had read
some funny statements by me. I told him that I was very serious in what
I had stated and that perhaps we could meet some day to thrash it out.
He showed no eagerness for an argument. That was also the end of another
very warm friendship. Our chance meetings in later days have always been
a cold and correct affair.

Finally, I arranged a meeting between Ram Swarup and my boss. Both of
them exchanged pleasantries and avoided the one subject which I wanted
them to discuss. The discussion took place a few days later as my boss
was passing by my seat and found Ram Swarup sitting in front of me. It
was about the next big world depression and disintegration of the world
capitalist system suspected by us Communists to be round the corner at
that time. There could be no agreement because Ram Swarup was convinced
that another depression would not be permitted by the capitalists who
had acquired a fairly good grasp of their economies. My boss gave
figures of firms that had gone bankrupt within that year. Ram Swarup
requested him to find out for himself and for us also figures of new
firms that must have come up during the same specific period. His
argument was that in a living economy some firms must be falling sick
and going out, and that it did not matter if the reverse trend was also
there. It restored a new perspective to the Whole argument. My boss
offered no more comments that day. I asked Ram Swarup's opinion about my
boss. He said: *"He is much better. He argues with a lot of facts and
figures and not with Party slogans."*

A few months passed. Ram Swarup converted me from Communism to anti
Communism during those months. I had to go out of Calcutta on a business
trip spread over several weeks. Ram Swarup stayed over in Calcutta but
was gone by the time I returned. As I met my boss, his first words were:
*"Your friend is a wonderful man. We spent a lot of time together. I can
now see the worth of what he has to say about Communism."* They have
been very good friends ever since.

After I had failed to pit my three best Communist friends against Ram
Swarup, I had to face him myself and all alone. The discussions spread
over several months. Most of the time I repeated Party slogans,
sometimes very vehemently. Ram Swarup dismissed them with a smile. One
day in my exasperation I struck a superior attitude and said: *"We find
it difficult to come to any conclusion because I have a philosophical
background while you proceed merely from economic, social and political
premises."* Ram Swarup enquired what I meant by philosophy and I rattled
out the list which I had ready in my mindLocke, Berkley, Hume,
Descartes, Spinoza, Leibnitz, Kant, Hegel, Schopenhauer and so on. Ram
Swarup told me that at one time or the other he had studied all of them
but had found them irrelevant and useless. I was surprised as well as
pained. Ram Swarup explained: *"Suppose one knows this philosophical
system or that. Does it make a better man out of one in any way? These
systems are mere cerebrations and have little to offer towards practical
purposes of life."* The word *"cerebration"* got stuck in my mind and
made it impossible for me to read any abstract philosophy any more. I
had been very fond of Western metaphysics and epistemology fill that
time.

One day Ram Swarup asked me to go to the US Information Library in
Esplanade and look up only the documentation in David Dallin's Slave
Labour in Soviet Russia. I had a great hesitation in going anywhere near
this library which I had so long regarded as a scat of blatant
imperialist propaganda. It was the same sort of inhibition as I had
experienced earlier in reading Srimad Bhagvata.

But my curiosity had been aroused. I went to this library like a thief
and looked up this book. The documentation, mainly photostats of
identity cards issued to inmates of forced labour camps located all over
the Soviet Union, was extensive as well as very informative. I was
shaken. I suddenly remembered that according to the Moscow weekly, New
Times, Molotov had admitted the existence of *"corrective labour camps"*
in the Soviet Union in a UN debate on the subject of forced labour.

I mentioned my suspicions to my boss. He smiled and asked me to read
Victor Kravchenko's I Chose Freedom which had appeared some time
earlier. I now remembered that my boss had offered to lend me a copy of
this book a few months ago and that I had turned it down with the
contemptuous remark that I did not want to waste my time on imperialist
propaganda literature. I borrowed the book from him now and read it non
stop. The earlier experience of reading Laski's Communism was repeated.
Communism now lay in shambles all around me. I could now understand why
my boss, an enthusiastic Party liner earlier, had shown no enthusiasm
for the new Party line adopted in February, 1948. His reading of
Kravchenko's book had considerably cooled his enthusiasm for the Soviet
Union. He admitted as much when I questioned him next day.

Kravchenko, an eminent metallurgical engineer in the Soviet Union, had
been sent to Washington during the Second World War to look after
military supplies under the Lend Lease Programme. He had defected to the
West after some time and written this book as his testament to truth
about the Soviet Union. The book became very successful because it was
very controversial and saw several editions in quick succession in
several languages of the world. I myself was to translate and publish it
in Hindi. The Communist press denounced the book as well as its author
in a very strong language. At the very time that I first read it,
Kravchenko was fighting a prolonged defamation case against a famous
French magazine published from Paris. The magazine had described him as
a drunkard, a liar, a traitor, and so on. The Manchester Guardian was
publishing the proceedings of the case in great detail, day after day.
An airmail edition of this English daily was regularly received in the
British Information Service library at Calcutta.

I followed the Kravchenko case in the Manchester Guardian with great
interest. Any lurking doubts that might have remained in my mind about
the truth of what Kravchenko had stated were removed by this case. The
Soviet Embassy in Paris was participating in the defence by the French
magazine on the plea that the reputation of their country was involved.
The Embassy made many witnesses from the Soviet Union take the stand in
the Paris court. Most of the famous Communists as well as fellow
travellers from all over Western Europe were also enlisted against
Kravchenko. I was amazed to witness a drama in which while Kravchenko
marshalled facts and figures derived mostly from official Soviet
publications, in defence of what he had written in his book, a whole
battery of Communist bigwigs had nothing better than standard Communist
swearology to hurl at him.

One episode was very revealing. It was the Communist contention that
Kravchenko was not at all an eminent metallurgical engineer which he had
made himself out to be in his book. Kravchenko produced a copy of Pravda
in which Molotov had described him by name as one of the most eminent
metallurgical engineers being put in charge of the new Soviet
metallurgical factory in Vladivostock. Next day Kravchenko's old
professor of engineering from Leningrad University appeared in the court
and testified that Kravchenko was indeed a brilliant metallurgical
engineer and one of his best students. The professor had left Leningrad
in the aftermath of the German invasion and was hiding somewhere in
Western Europe to avoid repatriation by the Western powers in keeping
with a post war agreement with the Soviet Government.

Another great book which I came across in quick succession was Stalin's
Russia by the famous French Socialist, Suzanne Labin. She had described
in great detail all facets of the Soviet Union and documented her
version very meticulously from Soviet sources. It was an hairraisilg
account. I was now ashamed of myself. Why had I not cared to study the
life in the Soviet Union before becoming a rabid Communist? Ram Swarup's
cryptic comment was: *"Facts about the Soviet Union have always been
known, mostly from Soviet sources. There is not much difference about
those facts between the Communists and those who are opposed to
Communism. What makes the difference is the way you interpret those
facts. And your interpretation again is a matter which very much depends
upon your sense of values and the culture from which those values are
derived."*

It was a call for an introspection into, as well as a retrospection of
my entire philosophical outlook as it had evolved uptil now. I had a
second look at Marx who had led me to Communism. I found that Lenin and
Stalin were not Marxists at all. They had only used Marxist language to
dress up their case, which was quite different. They had reversed
Clausewitz's statement that war was politics by other means to read that
politics was war by other means. Marx, on the other hand, was a serious
sociologist and economist. But, in the last analysis, his system of
thought was derived from the same premises as those of Western
capitalism. These premises were a materialist word view, an
evolutionistic sociology, a hedonistic psychology, a utilitarian ethics,
and a consumerist economy. After all, the Soviet Union aspired to be
tomorrow what the United States was today. The goal in both cases was
the same an economy of abundance. The Soviet Union had taken the road of
State Capitalism and systematic terror, while the United States had left
it to the remorseless operation of market forces. Was I prepared to
accept that goal as the highest human aspiration? If not, what was the
goal which could be held out as a better choice?

I had no answer to this question. I was now in the midst of a
philosophical void which was to last for several years. The quest which
I thought had ended with my acceptance of Communism was on once more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
