+++
title = "90 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


  
**== APPENDIX XX ==**

**The Poona Pact[/1/](#n01)**

  

**(1)** There shall be seats reserved for the Depressed Classes out of
the general electorate seats in the Provincial Legislatures as follows:รท

Madras 30: Bombay with Sind 15; Punjab 8; Bihar and Orissa 18; Central
Provinces 20; Assam 7; Bengal 30; United Provinces 20; Total 148.

These figures are based on the total strength of the Provincial
Councils, announced in the Prime Minister's decision.

**(2)** Election to these seats shall be by joint electorates subject,
however, to the following procedure:

All the members of the Depressed Classes registered in the general
electoral roll in a constituency will form an electoral college, which
will elect a panel of four candidates belonging to the Depressed Classes
for each of such reserved seats, by the method of the single vote; the
four persons getting the highest number of votes in such primary
election, shall be candidates for election by the general electorate.

**(3)** Representation of the Depressed Classes in the Central
Legislature shall likewise be on the principle of joint electorates and
reserved seats by the method of primary election in the manner provided
for in Clause two above, for their representation in the Provincial
Legislatures.

**(4)** In the Central Legislature, eighteen percent of the seats
allotted to the general electorate for British India in the said
Legislature shall be reserved for the Depressed Classes.

**(5)** The system of primary election to a panel of candidates for
election to the Central and Provincial Legislatures, as herein before
mentioned, shall come to an end after the first ten years, unless
terminated sooner by mutual agreement under the provision of Clause six
below.

**(6)** The system of representation of the Depressed Classes by
reserved seats in the Provincial and Central Legislatures as I provided
for in Clauses 1 and 4 shall continue until determined by mutual
agreement between the communities concerned in the settlement.

**(7)** Franchise for the Central and Provincial Legislature's for the
Depressed Classes shall be as indicated in the Lothian Committee Report.

**(8)** There shall be no disabilities attaching to anyone on the ground
of his being a member of the Depressed Classes in regard to any
elections to local bodies or appointment to the Public Services. Every
endeavour shall be made to secure fair representation of the Depressed
Classes in these respects, subject to such educational qualifications as
may be laid down for appointment to the Public Services.

**(9)** In every province, out of the educational grant an adequate sum
shall be earmarked for providing educational facilities to the members
of the Depressed Classes.  


======================

**[/1/](#m01)** Signed on 25th September 1932.  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [back to Table of Contents](../index.html#contents) --  

