+++
title = "13 SIND"

+++
**SIND**

In Sind the Sikh population was not large, though the Hindus formed
about 30% of-the population of the province.  Out of the total
non-Muslim population of 14 Lakhs, now^([1](#1)) only about 2 lakhs are
left in Sind, the rest having come to India as refugees.  The turning
out of non-Muslims from Sind is very amply illustrative of the naked
policy of turning out of Hindus and Sikhs from Pakistan, for no other
reason whatever except that they were not Muslims.  There was a policy
of systematic terrorization of Hindus.  Their business premises were
looted, their womenfolk molested, and the avenues of normal respectable
life entirely closed to them.  Thus, through terror and intimidation,
within the period of less than a year twelve lakhs out of the fourteen
lakhs of Hindus in Sind have been forced to migrate to India.  This has
happened in spite of the fact that in the words of Shri Mansukhani,
Secretary, Sind Congress Refugee Relief Committee, New Delhi, “not one
single Muslim lost his life at the hands of Hindus in any act of
retaliation or self-defence, not to talk of any act of aggression; but
where from the first day of the birth of Pakistan, Hindus have been
systematically done to death, by the knife, by the bullet. by the
throwing out of the windows and doors of running trains.  The object has
been one and the goal clear.  Pakistan has desired that it should be a
theocratic state in the sense that all its citizens should be Muslims. 
This battle has been remorselessly waged on one long front of Western
Pakistan.”

Hindus’ houses were forcibly occupied, in Karachi and everywhere else,
their property and land snatched from them, and no option left for them
but to, seek a safer life free from unbearable indignities, in India.

Other portions from Shri Mansukhani’s article, quoted above. are: -

“Soon after August 15, 1947, was organised the ousting of Hindus and
Sikhs from their residences and business premises, from their
agricultural lands and industrial concerns.

“No Hindu’s house was his castle, he had to retreat at the point of the
dagger and run away from the back-door.  The Police of the Province and
the War-time established Rent Control Department helped ‘legally’ to
throw out the members of the minority community.

*Traces of Hinduism Erased*

“It is not an uncommon phenomenon for prominent Hindus who are sticking
on to the soil of Sind to be accosted while going about even on the main
streets by Muslims and threateningly asked to either embrace Islam or go
out of Pakistan.

“Hindu passengers can travel by railway only for short journeys and
during day time and that too at great risk of their lives.

*Our Shrines*

“Our Gurmandir in Karachi became lately the residence of Sydney Cotton,
the smuggler of arms to Nizam’s Hyderabad of yesterday.  Most of our
religious places, shrines, temples and Gurdwaras have been occupied by
Muslims.  The scriptures have been destroyed and the valuables have been
pilfered and safely appropriated.  Some of these places have also been
turned into mosques where the Faithful congregate and read their Friday
prayers to Allah.  All educational institutions are similarly occupied
and converted into the Schools and Colleges for Muslims.”

(“*The Tribune*”-January 16, 1949)

As for the Sikhs, their elimination and extermination began at about the
same time as in West Punjab.  By August all Sikhs in large towns had
left Sind, and came over to the Punjab.  It was not infrequent for
trains carrying these Sikh refugees to be attacked on the way.  On the
2nd of August, Sikhs were attacked in several villages in Nawabshah
District.

On the 1st September, 1947 one train was stopped at Nawabshah, and the
Sikh passengers attacked.  Of these 15 were killed, and 17 injured.

The only Sikhs in Sind after August, were those in the interior-small
tradesmen, pedlars and craftsmen.  These began to be evacuated.  Their
condition was described in news agency reports as being extremely
miserable and pitiable, as they could not ply any trade, and were in the
last stage of destitution.

So much were the Muslims indoctrinated with the gospel of hate preached
over years by the Muslim League, that on the 6th January, 1948, long
after killing had stopped in East Punjab, a terrible massacre of evacuee
Sikhs, awaiting embarkation for India occurred at Karachi.  That this
was no isolated incident of its kind in Pakistan is witnessed by the
terrible Gujrat massacre of the 11th January, 1948, and the Parachinar
massacre of the 23rd January, 1948.  These three huge massacres of Sikhs
and Hindus occurred in such quick succession at a time when all attacks
on the Muslims in Indian territory had ceased three months before.

Certain details of this above mentioned Karachi massacre are of interest
as revealing the conspiracy, cynicism and heartlessness of the
Government of Pakistan, in the matter of getting Sikhs murdered.

As for the details of the massacre, the District Magistrate’s report
from Karachi is reproduced below:

“Communal trouble started in Karachi today when 184 Sikhs arrived from
Shikarpur by the morning train.  From the station they went to a
Gurdwara near Ratan Talao.  A mob of nearly 8,000 gathered on the
arrival of the Sikhs and surrounded the Gurdwara and set fire to it, and
started stabbing and killing and a number of persons^([2](#2)) were
killed,”  
  

In the town of Karachi ‘there was looting in several quarters and there
were four cases of arson.”^([3](#3))

There was looting on the next day as well, in the houses of Hindus.  The
situation was described in ‘an appeal’, issued by the Editors of several
Karachi newspapers as ‘appalling’ while admitting that some Muslims gave
shelter to ‘the Hindu victims of mob frenzy.’

In the Gurdwara, where the massacre took place, women and children were
also killed, as admitted by the Sind Premier in his statement.

The result of the disturbances of January 6 was described in ‘*The Civil
and Military Gazette*’ in these words:

“There was negligible loss of life suffered by the minority community
(Hindus) compared to the looting that took place throughout the city……
The lives of members of the minority community (Hindus) were saved at
the expense of their property.”

About 10,000 Hindus had to be kept in refugee camps, and Hindus had to
be evacuated early to India, to save them from being murdered by
Muslims.  Looting went on uninterruptedly.  So bold and open was this
loot, that police and employees of the Chief Court of Sind openly
participated in it.  The Chief Court building was used as a dump for
this loot.  The Chief justice, an Englishman, his patience exhausted,
had at last to intervene and stop the loot from being stacked at least
in the Chief Court Building.  This was the limit of the collapse of the
law and good government in Pakistan.

Further facts in the situation are:

\(1\) About 800 Sikhs were killed in Karachi and not 184, as stated in
the Pakistan *communique*.

\(2\) Not a word of regret was expressed by any responsible person in
Pakistan over this tremendous loss of Sikh life.  The Sind Premier made
only the insulting statement that the sight of these Sikhs ‘provoked’
the Muslims and only added the still more insulting directive that Sikhs
be not brought to Karachi ‘in open carriages.’ The Premier’s statement
also makes it clear that no police precautions were taken for the
protection of these Sikhs, whose lives were evidently so cheap that any
one was at liberty to take them without the Pakistan Government moving
its little finger.

The Governor-General of Pakistan, Mr. Jinnah, who sent a message of
sympathy for the sufferers, did not so much as mention the Sikhs, who
had been killed in overwhelming numbers.  All that he said was that *he
had sympathy for the Hindus in their losses*.

This was symptomatic of the attitude of the Pakistan Government, which
did not regard Sikh life as worthy of any kind of protection and as
meriting any sympathy.

The masses in Pakistan knew very well what their Government thought of
any attack made on the Sikhs.

Jinnah’s statement was, furthermore an attempt to create a rift between
Hindus and Sikhs, which the Muslims have been trying to, by posing to
dislike the Hindus less than the Sikhs.

All these happenings occurred at a time when in India, Mahatma Gandhi
undertook his last fast to get better treatment for the Indian Muslims. 
That was the response in Pakistan to the Mahatma’s gesture, and the
faithfully carrying out of the Mahatma’s instructions by Hindus and
Sikhs.  Exactly when Delhi was being made safe for Muslims, in Karachi
800 Sikhs were massacred, and all Hindus looted and despoiled, had to
move into refugee camps.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))January, 1949.

^([2](#2a))These were Sikhs exclusively.

^([3](#3a))This is the Pakistan report of widespread looting of Hindu
houses that went on unchecked in Karachi for a day or longer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
