+++
title = "01 PREFACE TO THIRD EDITION"

+++
**PREFACE TO THIRD EDITION**

The first two editions of this book were published in quick succession -
July 1986 and July 1987 - because it was received with great interest
and appreciation by the Hindu intelligentsia at large, in this country
and abroad.  But the present (third) edition has been delayed
inordinately in spite of persistent demand after the second edition went
out of print in 1988.  A reprint of the second edition was not brought
out because I wanted to include in a new edition the copious materials
which I had collected in the meanwhile from orthodox collections of
Hadis and which I thought worth presenting to the readers.  But that was
not to be.

I had finished reading the six authentic Hadis collections Bukhari,
Muslim, Tirmizi, Ibn Majah, Ibn Daud, Nasaii - which an orthodox Muslim
organization had published in several volumes each, with Arabic text and
Urdu translation. I had marked in the margins of several thousand pages
the relevant references pertaining to the five pillars of Islam, the
character of the Muslim *Ummah*, and the doctrine of *jihAd*. I had
noted many stories which provide the context in which particular
*sUrahs* and *Ayats* of the Quran were “revealed”; they made it more
than clear as to how Allah of the Quran had functioned as a mouthpiece
of the Prophet and even some of his companions.  But as I started
sorting out the references and putting them together under particular
themes, I suffered a prolonged spell of illness which persists even as I
write these lines.  So I wait and hope that I will be able to resume the
work at some future date.

Some of the material included in the present edition had gone into the
computer in the winter of 1990-91.  But a lot of new material has been
added during 1999.  As this edition stands now, I think the reader will
find it better arranged and more informative.

The book is still divided into two sections.  The second section stands
as it did in the earlier editions except that it has been renamed as
‘The Petition and the Judgment’ instead of ‘Court Documents’.  The first
section, however, has not only been renamed as ‘Introduction’ instead of
‘Preface’, but also carries new insertions, reflections and formulations
which have added as many as 50 more pages to it.  Many new footnotes
have been added, and several new publications cited as the Bibliography
at the end goes to show.

The Second Preface to the second edition has been retained intact except
that now it stands renamed as, ‘Preface to Second Edition’.  But
sections of the First Preface to the second edition have been rearranged
as chapters, most of which have been revised, enlarged and renamed. 
Chapter 4, ‘The Prophet sets the Pattern’, is entirely new.  It is a
summary of the first orthodox biography of the Prophet, and provides a
background to the chapters that follow.  Chapter 5, ‘The Orthodox
Exposition of *JihAd*’, has been enlarged with extensive passages from
*Tuhfat-ul-Mujahideen*, a sixteen century (CE) treatise on *jihAd*
composed at Bijapur and carrying many citations from orthodox
collections of Hadis.  In a way, this part of the chapter fulfils to a
certain extent my plan to present Hadis materials vis-à-vis *jihAd*. 
Chapter 6, ‘*JihAd* in India’s History’, now includes *jihAds* waged by
Sher Shah Sur, Akbar the Great Mughal, and Ahmad Shah Abdali.  Many
myths have been floated about the ‘secularism’ of Sher Shah and Akbar by
Muslim and Stalinist “historians” in recent times.  Pandit Jawaharlal
Nehru, the architect of India’s I secularism’, has gone to the extent of
hailing Akbar as “the father of Indian nationalism” who “deliberately
placed the ideal of a common Indian nationhood above the claims of
separatist religion”.^([1](#1)) I hope the readers will draw their own
conclusions.

**II**

This book is going to the press while the *jihAd* in Kargil is raging,
and the end is not yet in sight.  The Hindu intelligentsia in India in
general and the present-day Hindu leadership in particular, has yet to
show any sign that they have learnt any lesson from what is essentially
a renewed contest between Islamic imperialism and Indian nationalism. 
On the other hand, a realization seems to be dawning in the West,
particularly the USA, that Pakistan has become the foremost citadel of
what they (the West) prefer to describe as Islamic fundamentalism and
terrorism. I wish to point out that Pakistan has not invented the Islam
it is practising; it has always been there in India (which is now known
as Indo-Pak Subcontinent or South Asia, but which is the same as the
BhAratavarsa of hoary history) since the eighth century CE.  Let it be
realized by everybody concerned that India has always been and remains,
the citadel of the most bigoted and bloodthirsty zealotry of Islam.  The
historical reasons for why it is so, are many. I do not have the time to
detail them here.  The main reason may be told.  Islam in India has been
what it has been because India has continued to stare at Islam as its
greatest failure.  Islam in India has never been able to relax, as it
could do in countries which it converted completely.  And it will not
relax till Hindus learn to knock out its ideological fangs which are
rooted in the Quran.

New Delhi

<div align="right">

**Sita Ram Goel **

</div>

10 July 1999  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))*Glimpses of World History*, Fourth Impression, OUP, 1982, p.
306.  I have examined the ‘myth of Akbar’ in *The Story of Islamic
Imperialism in India*, Second Revised Edition, Voice of India, New
Delhi, 1994, pp. 99-103.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


