+++
title = "06 CHAPTER 4 THE PROPHET SETS THE PATTERN"

+++
**CHAPTER 4**

**THE PROPHET SETS THE PATTERN**

**Prophecy about the Prophet**

\[A Jew from Syria had migrated to Medina some years before Muhammad
proclaimed his prophethood in 610 CE.\]

Later when he knew that he was about to die he said, “O Jews, what do
you think made me leave a land of bread and wine to come to a land of
hardship and hunger?” When we \[the Jews\] said that we could not think
why, he said that he had come to this country expecting to see the
emergence of a prophet whose time was at hand.  This was the town where
he would migrate and he was hoping that he would be sent so that he
could follow him.  “His time has come,” he said, “and don’t let anyone
get to him before you, O Jews; *for he will be sent to shed blood and to
take captive the women and children of those who oppose him.  Let not
that keep you back from him*.”^([1](#1))

**First Blood shed in Islam (Between 610 and 613 CE)**

\[To start with Muhammad had organised a secret society in Mecca.  His
followers used to congregate for prayers in unfrequented spots outside
the city.\]

When the apostle’s companions prayed they went to the glens so that
their people could not see them praying, and while Sa‘d b. AbU  WaqqAS
was with a number of the prophet’s companions in one of the glens of
Mecca, a band of polytheists came upon them while they were praying and
rudely interrupted them. They blamed them for what they were doing until
they came to blows, and it was on that occasion that Sa‘d smote a
polytheist with the jawbone of a camel and wounded him.  *This was the
first blood to be shed in Islam*.^([2](#2))

**The Prophet promises Slaughter (Between 613 and 614 CE)**

\[Muhammad proclaimed his prophethood publicly only when he had acquired
a following large enough to make him feel confident that his voice would
carry weight.\]

People began to accept Islam, both men and women, in large numbers until
the fame of it was spread throughout Mecca, and it began to be talked
about.  Then Allah commanded His apostle to declare the truth of what he
had received and to make known His commands to men and to call them to
Him.  Three years elapsed from the time that the apostle concealed his
state until Allah commanded him to publish his religion, according to
information which has reached me. Then Allah said, ‘Proclaim what you
have been ordered and turn aside from the polytheists.’^([3](#3))

YahyA b. ‘Urwa b. al-Zubayr on the authority of his father from
‘Abdullah b. ‘Amr b. al-‘AS told me that the latter was asked what was
the worst way in which Quraysh showed their enmity to the apostle.  He
replied: ‘I was with them one day when the notables had gathered in the
Hijr and the apostle was mentioned.  They said that they had never known
anything like the trouble they had endured from this fellow; he had
declared their mode of life foolish, insulted their forefathers, reviled
their religion, *divided the community, and cursed their gods*.  What
they had borne was past all bearing, or words to that effect.’^([4](#4))

While they were thus discussing him the apostle came towards them and
kissed the black stone, then he passed them as he walked round the
temple.  As he passed they said some injurious things about him.  This I
could see from his expression.  He went on and as he passed them the
second time they attacked him similarly.  This I could see from his
expression.  Then he passed the third time, and they did the same.  He
stopped and said, ‘Will you listen to me O Quraysh?  *By him who holds
my life in His hand I bring you slaughter*.’ This word so struck the
people that not one of them but stood silent and still; even one who had
hitherto been most violent spoke to him in the kindest way possible,
saying, ‘Depart, O AbU’l-QAsim, for by God you are not violent.’ So the
apostle went away, and on the morrow they assembled in the Hijr, I being
there too, and they asked one another if they remembered what had taken
place between them and the apostle so that when he openly said something
unpleasant they let him alone.  While they were talking thus the apostle
appeared, and they leaped upon him as one man and encircled him, saying,
‘Are you the one who said so-and-so against our gods and our religion?’
The apostle said, ‘Yes, I am the one who said that.’ And I saw one of
them seize his robe. Then AbU Bakr interposed himself weeping and
saying.  ‘Would you kill a man for saying Allah is my Lord?’ Then they
left him.  *That is the worst that anyone ever saw Quraysh do to
him*.”^([5](#5))

**Muhammad’s Faction acquires Strength (Between 614 and 616 CE)**

\[Hamza, one of Muhammad’s uncles, was a well-known warrior of Mecca. 
He heard that AbU Jahl, a leading citizen, had spoken harshly to his
nephew.\]

Hamza was filled with rage, for Allah purposed to honour him so he went
out at a run and did not stop to greet anyone, meaning to punish AbU 
Jahl when he met him.  When he got to the mosque he saw him sitting
among the people, and went up to him until he stood over him, when *he
lifted up his bow and struck him a violent blow with it*, saying, ‘Will
you insult him when I follow his religion, and say what he says?  Hit me
back if you can!’ Some of B. MakhzUm got up to go to AbU  Jahl’s help,
but he said, ‘Let AbU UmAra alone for, by God, I insulted his nephew
deeply.’  *Hamza’s Islam was complete, and he followed the apostle’s
commands*. When he became a Muslim the Quraysh recognized that the
apostle had become strong, and had found a protector in Hamza, and so
they abandoned some of their ways of harassing him.^([6](#6))

When ‘Umar became a Muslim, he being a strong, stubborn man whose
protégés none dare attack, the prophet’s companions were so fortified by
him and Hamza that they got the upper hand of Quraysh.  ‘Abdullah b.
Mas‘Ud used to say, ‘We could not pray at the Ka‘ba until ‘Umar became a
Muslim, and then he fought the Quraysh until he could pray there and we
prayed with him.’ ‘Umar became a Muslim after the prophet’s companions
had migrated to Abyssinia.^([7](#7))

**Abyssinian invasion invited (615 CE)**

\[Meanwhile, Muhammad had sent some of his followers to Abyssinia where
Negus, the Christian emperor, was informed that what Muhammad was
preaching in Mecca was the same as Christianity.  The Negus was also
reminded of earlier Abyssinian invasions of Arabia, and invited to
intervene again in favour of Muhammad and his Muslims.\]

When the apostle saw the affliction of his companions and that though he
escaped it because of his standing with Allah and his uncle AbU TAlib,
he could not protect them, he said to them: ‘If you were to go to
Abyssinia (it would be better for you), for the king will not tolerate
injustice and it is a friendly country, until such time as Allah shall
relieve you from your distress.’ Thereupon his companions went to
Abyssinia, being afraid of apostasy and fleeing to Allah with their
religion.  This was the first hijra in Islam.^([8](#8))

\[But Abyssinian intervention failed to materialize because the Negus
got involved in domestic trouble\].

**The Satanic Verses (615 CE)**

When Quraysh perceived that the apostle’s companions had settled in a
land in peace and safety, and that the Negus has protected those who
sought refuge with him, and that ‘Umar had become a Muslim and that both
he and Hamza were on the side of the apostle and his companions, and
that Islam had begun to spread among the tribes, they came together and
decided among themselves to write a document in which they should put a
boycott on B. HAshim and B. Muttalib that they should not marry their
women nor give women to them to marry; and that they should neither buy
from them nor sell to them, and when they agreed on that they wrote it
in a deed. Then they solemnly agreed on the points and hung the deed up
in the middle of the Ka‘ba to remind them of their
obligations.^([9](#9))

When the apostle saw that his people turned their backs on him and he
was pained by their estrangement from what he brought them from Allah he
longed that there should come to him from Allah a message that would
reconcile his people to him.  Because of his love for his people and his
anxiety over them it would delight him if the obstacle that made his
task so difficult could be removed; so that he meditated on the project
and longed for it and it was dear to him.  Then Allah sent down ‘By the
star when it sets your comrade errs not and is not deceived, he speaks
not from his own desire,’ and when he reached His words ‘Have you
thought of al-LAt and al-‘UzzA and ManAt the third, the others’, Satan,
when he was meditating upon it, and desiring to bring it (*sc*.
reconciliation) to his people, put upon his tongue ‘these are the
exalted GhAnIq whose intercession is approved.’ When Quraysh heard that,
they were delighted and greatly pleased at the way in which he spoke of
their gods and they listened to him.^([10](#10))

\[Muhammad’s followers were annoyed with him for alienating them from
their own people and then seeking reconciliation to save himself and his
own clan from trouble.  So Muhammad had to beat a hasty retreat and
repudiate the latest revelation from Allah.  Salman Rushdie has
dramatised in his novel, *The Satanic Verses*, the tension which arose
between Muhammad and his Muslims.\]

Then Gabriel came to the apostle and said, ‘What have you done,
Muhammad?  You have read to these people something 1 did not bring you
from Allah and you have said what He did not say to you.  The apostle
was bitterly grieved and was greatly in fear of Allah.  So Allah sent
down (a revelation), for He was merciful to him, comforting him and
making light of the affair and telling him that every prophet and
apostle before him desired as he desired and wanted what he wanted and
Satan interjected something into his desires as he had on his tongue. 
*So Allah annulled what Satan had suggested and Allah established His
verses* i.e. you are just like the prophets and apostles.  Then Allah
sent down: ‘We have not sent a prophet or apostle before you but when he
longed Satan cast suggestions into his longing.  But Allah will annul
what Satan has suggested.  Then Allah will establish his verses, Allah
being knowing and wise.’ Thus Allah relieved his prophet’s grief, and
made him feel safe from his fears and annulled what Satan had suggested
in the words used above about their gods by his revelation.^([11](#11))

\[This episode revealed the quality of Allah’s revelations.  Muhammad
received one kind of revelations when he felt weak and wanted to
compromise with the Meccans, and another kind of revelations when his
followers raised a storm against the concession he had made in favour of
the Meccan Goddesses.\]

**Uncompromising Aggression (620 CE)**

\[The Meccans had made many attempts to persuade Muhammad against
insulting their religion and their forefathers.  They made another
attempt at compromise when AbU TAlib, Muhammad’s uncle and protector,
fell ill and was reported as dying.\]

AbU  SufyAn with sundry other notables went to AbU TAlib and said: ‘You
know your rank with us and now that you are at the point of death we are
deeply concerned on your account.  You know the trouble that exists
between us and your nephew, so call him and let us make an agreement
that he will leave us alone and we will leave him alone; let him have
his religion and we will have ours.’ When he came AbU TAlib said,
‘Nephew, these notables have come to you that they may give you
something and to take something from you.’ ‘Yes,’ he answered, ‘you may
grant me one word by which you can rule the Arabs and subject the
Persians to you.’ ‘Yea,’ said AbU Jahl, ‘and ten words.’ He said: ‘You
must say There is no God but Allah and you must repudiate what you
worship beside him.’ They clapped their hands and said, ‘Do you want to
make all the gods into one God, Muhammad?  That would be an
extraordinary thing.’ Then they said one to another, ‘This fellow is not
going to give you anything you want, so go and continue with the
religion of your fathers until God judge between us.’ So saying they
departed... Then AbU TAlib died.^([12](#12))

**Attempt to raise TA’if against Mecca (620 CE)**

In consequence of the growing hostility of Quraysh after AbU TAlib’s
death the apostle went to TA’if to seek help from ThaqIf and their
defence against his tribe. Also he hoped that they would receive the
message which Allah had given him.  He went alone.^([13](#13))

When the apostle arrived at al-TA’if he made for a number of ThaqIf who
were at that time leaders and chiefs, namely three brothers... One of
them had a Quraysh wife of the B. JumaH.  *The apostle sat with them and
invited them to accept Islam and asked them to help him against his
opponents at home*.  One of them swore that he would tear up the
covering of the Ka‘ba if God had sent him.  The other said, “Could not
God have found someone better than you to send?” The third said, “By
God, don’t let me ever speak to you.  If you are an apostle from God as
you say you are, you are far too important for me to reply to, and if
you are lying against God it is not right that I should speak to you!”
So the apostle got up and went, despairing of getting any good out of
ThaqIf.  He said to them, “*Seeing that you have acted as you have, keep
the matter secret*,” *for he was loath that his people should hear about
it, so that they would be still further emboldened against
him*.^([14](#14))

**Muhammad conspires with Medina (620 to 622 CE)**

The apostle offered himself to the tribes of Arabs at the fairs whenever
opportunity came, summoning them to Allah and telling them that he was a
prophet who had been sent. He used to ask them to believe in him and
protect him until Allah should make clear to them the message with which
he had charged his prophet.^([15](#15))

When Allah wished to display His religion openly and to glorify His
prophet and to fulfil His promise to him, the time came when he met a
number of the Helpers at one of the fairs; and while he was offering
himself to the Arab tribes as was his wont he met at al-‘Aqaba a number
of the Khazraj whom Allah intended to benefit.^([16](#16))

When the apostle met them he learned by inquiry that they were of the
Khazraj and allies of the Jews.  He invited them to sit with him and
expounded to them Islam and recited the QurAn to them.  Now Allah had
prepared the way for Islam in that they lived side by side with the Jews
who were people of the scriptures and knowledge, while they themselves
were polytheists and idolaters.  They had often raided them in their
district and whenever bad feeling arose the Jews used to say to them,
‘*A Prophet will be sent soon.  His day is at hand.  We shall follow him
and kill you by his aid*.’ So when they heard the apostle’s message they
said one to another: ‘This is the very prophet of whom the Jews warned
us.  Don’t let them get to him before us!’ Thereupon they accepted his
teaching and became Muslims, saying, ‘We have left our people, for no
tribe is so divided by hatred and rancour as they.  Perhaps Allah will
unite them through you. So let us go to them and invite them to this
religion of yours; and if Allah unites them in it, then no man will be
mightier than you.’ Thus saying they returned to Medina as
believers.^([17](#17))

In the following year twelve Helpers attended the fair and met at
al-’Aqaba - this was the first ‘Aqaba - where they gave the apostle the
‘pledge of women’.  This was before the duty of making war was laid upon
them.^([18](#18))

When Allah gave permission to his apostle to fight, the second ‘Aqaba
contained conditions involving war which were not in the first act of
fealty.  Now they bound themselves to war against all and sundry for
Allah and his apostle, while he promised them for faithful service thus
the reward of paradise.

‘UbAda b. al-WalId b. ‘UbAda b. al-SAmit from his father from his
grandfather’ UbAda b. al- SAmit who was one of the Leaders told me, ‘*We
pledged ourselves to war in complete obedience to the apostle in weal
and woe*, in ease and hardship and evil circumstances; that we would not
wrong anyone; that we would speak the truth at all times; and that in
Allah’s service we would fear the censure of none.’ ‘UbAda was one of
the twelve who gave his word at the first ‘Aqaba.^([19](#19))

**Formation of the *Ummah* (623 CE)**

\[Following the second ‘Aqaba, Muhammad migrated to Medina and laid
foundation of his blood-thirsty brotherhood.\]

The apostle wrote a document concerning the emigrants and the helpers in
which he made a friendly agreement with the Jews and established them in
their religion and their property, and stated the reciprocal
obligations, as follows: In the name of Allah the Compassionate, the
Merciful.  This is a document from Muhammad the prophet \[governing the
relations\] between the believers and Muslims of Quraysh and Yathrib,
and those who followed them and joined them and laboured with them. 
They are one community (*umma*) to the exclusion of all men. The Quraysh
emigrants according to their present custom shall pay the bloodwit
within their number and shall redeem their prisoners with the kindness
and justice common among believers.^([20](#20))

A believer shall not take as an ally the freedman of another Muslim
against him.  The Allah-fearing believers shall be against the
rebellious or him who seeks to spread injustice, or sin or enmity, or
corruption between believers; the hand of every man shall be against him
even if he be a son of one of them.  A believer shall not slay a
believer for the sake of an unbeliever, nor shall he aid an unbeliever
against a believer.  Allah’s protection is one, the least of them may
give protection to a stranger on their behalf.  Believers are friends
one to the other to the exclusion of outsiders.  To the Jew who follows
us belong help and equality.  He shall not be wronged nor shall his
enemies be aided.  The peace of the believers is indivisible.  No
separate peace shall be made when believers are fighting in the way of
Allah.

It shall not be lawful to a believer who holds by what is in this
document and believes in Allah and the last day to help an evildoer or
to shelter him.  The curse of Allah and His anger on the day of
resurrection will be upon him if he does, and neither repentance nor
ransom will be received from him. Whenever you differ about a matter it
must be referred to Allah and to Muhammad.^([21](#21))

**Muhammad turns against the Jews (623 CE)**

About this time the Jewish rabbis showed hostility to the apostle in
envy, hatred, and malice, because Allah had chosen His apostle from the
Arabs.  They were joined by men from al-Aus and al-Khazraj who had
obstinately clung to their heathen religion.  *They were hypocrites,
clinging to the polytheism of their fathers denying the resurrection;
yet when Islam appeared and their people flocked to it they were
compelled to pretend to accept it to save their lives*.  But in secret
they were hypocrites whose inclination was towards the Jews because they
considered the apostle a liar and strove against Islam.

It was the Jewish rabbis who used to annoy the apostle with questions
and introduce confusion, so as to confound the truth with falsity.  The
Quran used to come down in reference to these questions of
theirs.^([22](#22))

The first hundred verses of the *sUra* of the Cow came down in reference
to these Jewish rabbis and the hypocrites of Aus and Khazraj, according
to what I have been told, and Allah knows best.^([23](#23))

There were two parties: The B. QaynuqA‘ and their adherents, allies of
Khazraj; and al-NaDIr and Qurayza and their adherents allies of Aus. 
When there was war between Aus and Khazraj the B. QaynuqA‘ went out with
Khazraj, and al-NaDIr and Qurayza with Aus, each side helping his allies
against his own brethren so that they shed each other’s blood, while the
Torah was in their hands by which they knew what was allowed and what
was forbidden them. Aus and Khazraj were polytheists worshipping idols
knowing nothing about paradise and hell, the waking and the
resurrection, the scriptures, the permitted and the
forbidden.^([24](#24))

The apostle summoned the Jewish scripture folk to Islam and made it
attractive to them and warned them of Allah’s punishment and vengeance. 
RAfi‘ b. KhArija and MAlik b. ‘Auf said to him that they would follow
the religion of their fathers, for they were more learned and better men
than they.  So Allah sent down concerning their words: ‘And when it is
said to them, Follow what Allah has sent down, they say: Nay, but we
will follow what we found our fathers doing.  What! even if their
fathers understood nothing and were not rightly guided?’^([25](#25))

Some Muslims remained friends with the Jews because of the tie of mutual
protection and alliance which had subsisted between them, so Allah sent
down concerning them and forbidding them to take them as intimate
friends: ‘O you who believe, do not choose those outside your community
as intimate friends.  They will spare no pains to corrupt you longing
for your ruin. From their mouths hatred has already shown itself and
what their breasts conceal is greater.  We have made the signs plain to
you if you will understand.’^([26](#26))

AbU Bakr went into a Jewish school and found a good many men gathered
round a certain FinhAs, one of their learned rabbis, and another rabbi
called Ashya‘.  AbU  Bakr called on the former to fear Allah and become
a Muslim because he knew that Muhammad was the apostle of Allah who had
brought the truth from Him and that they would find it written in the
Torah and the Gospel.  FinHAS replied: ‘We are not poor compared to
Allah but He is poor compared to us.  We do not humble ourselves to Him
as He humbles Himself to us; we are independent of Him while He needs
us.’

*AbU Bakr was enraged and hit FinHAS hard in the face, saying, ‘Were it
not for the treaty between us I would cut off your head, you enemy of
Allah*!’ FinHAS immediately went to the apostle and said, ‘Look,
Muhammad, at what your companion has done.’ The apostle asked AbU Bakr
what had impelled him to do such a thing and he answered: ‘The enemy of
Allah spoke blasphemy.  He alleged that Allah was poor and that they
were rich and I was so angry that I hit his face.’ FinHAS contradicted
this and denied that he had said it, so Allah sent down refuting him and
confirming what AbU Bakr had said: ‘Allah has heard the speech of those
who say: “Allah is poor and we are rich.” We shall write what they say
and their killing the prophets wrongfully and we shall say, Taste the
punishment of burning.”^([27](#27))

**A Cruel Custom revived by Muhammad (622 CE)**

Jewish rabbis had gathered in their school when the apostle came to
Medina.  A married man had committed adultery with a married woman and
they said: ‘Send them to Muhammad and ask him what the law about them is
and leave the penalty to him.  If he prescribes *tajbIh* (which is
scourging with a rope of palm fibre smeared with pitch, the blackening
of their faces, mounting on two donkeys with their faces to the animal’s
tail) then follow him, for he is a king and believe in him. If he
prescribes stoning for them, he is a prophet so beware lest he deprive
you of what you hold.’ They brought the pair to Muhammad and explained
the position.^([28](#28))

When the apostle gave judgement about them he asked for a Torah.  A
rabbi sat there reading it having put his hand over the verse of
stoning.  ‘Abullah b. SalAm struck the rabbi’s hand, saying, ‘This, O
prophet of Allah, is the verse of stoning which he refuses to read to
you.’ The apostle said, ‘Woe to you Jews!  What has induced you to
abandon the judgement of Allah which you hold in your hands?’ They
answered: ‘The sentence used to be carried out until a man of royal
birth and noble origin committed adultery and the king refused to allow
him to be stoned.  Later another man committed adultery and the king
wanted him to be stoned but they said No, not until you stone
so-and-so.  And when they said that to him they agreed to arrange the
matter by *tajbIh* and they did away with all mention of stoning.’ The
apostle said: ‘I am the first to revive the order of Allah and His book
and to practise it.’ They were duly stoned and ‘Abdullah b.‘Umar said,
‘I was among those that stoned them.’

The apostle ordered them to be stoned, and they were stoned at the door
of his mosque.  And when the Jew felt the first stone he crouched over
the woman to protect her from the stones until both of them were
killed. This is what Allah did for the apostle in exacting the penalty
for adultery from the pair.^([29](#29))

According to a tradition from ‘Umar, the second caliph, Muhammad not
only participated in stoning the Jewish couple but also received a
revelation which is not found in the Quran as we have it at present. 
According to a *hadis* from ‘A’isha, the page on which the revelation
was written was lying on her bed when it was eaten by a goat.

‘Umar sat in the pulpit, and when the muezzins were silent he praised
Allah as was fitting and said: ‘I am about to say to you today something
which Allah has willed that I should say and I do not know whether
perhaps it is my last utterance.  He who understands and heeds it let
him take it with him whithersoever he goes; and as for him who fears
that he will not heed it, he may not deny that I said it.  Allah sent
Muhammad and sent down the scripture to him.  Part of what he sent down
was the passage on stoning; we read it, we were taught it, and we heeded
it.  *The apostle stoned* (*adulterers*) *and we stoned them after him*.
I fear that in time to come men will say that they find no mention of
stoning in Allah’s book and thereby go astray by neglecting an ordinance
which Allah has sent down.  Verily stoning in the book of Allah is a
penalty laid on married men and women who commit adultery, if proof
stands or pregnancy is clear or confession is made. Then we read in what
we read from Allah’s book: “Do not desire to have ancestors other than
your own for it is infidelity so to do.”’^([30](#30))

**Allah sanctions War against Unbelievers (622 CE)**

When Quraysh became insolent towards Allah and rejected His gracious
purpose, accused His prophet of lying, and ill treated and exiled those
who served Him and proclaimed His unity, believed in His prophet, and
held fast to His religion, He gave permission to His apostle to fight
and to protect himself against those who wronged them and treated them
badly.^([31](#31))

The first verse which was sent down on this subject from what I have
heard from ‘Urwa b. al-Zubayr and other learned persons was: ‘Permission
is given to those who fight because they have been wronged.  Allah is
well able to help them, - those who have been driven out of their houses
without right only because they said Allah is our Lord.  Had not Allah
used some men to keep back others, cloisters and churches and oratories
and mosques wherein the name of Allah is constantly mentioned would have
been destroyed.  Assuredly Allah will help those who help Him.  Allah is
Almighty.  Those who if we make them strong in the land will establish
prayer, pay the poor-tax, enjoin kindness, and forbid iniquity.  To
Allah belongs the end of matters.’ Then Allah sent down to him: ‘Fight
them so that there be no more seduction,’ i.e. until no believer is
seduced from his religion.  ‘And the religion is Allah’s’, i.e. Until
Allah alone is worshipped.^([32](#32))

When Allah had given permission to fight and this clan of the Ans5r had
pledged their support to him in Islam and to help him and his followers,
and the Muslims who had taken refuge with them, the apostle commanded
his companions, the emigrants of his people and those Muslims who were
with him in Mecca, to emigrate to Medina and to link up with their
brethren the AnSAr.  ‘Allah will make for you brethren and houses in
which you may be safe.’ So they went out in companies, and the apostle
stayed in Mecca waiting for Allah’s permission to leave Mecca and
migrate to Medina.^([33](#33))

**Wars led by Muhammad in Person (623 to 631 CE)**

Then the apostle prepared for war in pursuance of Allah’s command to
fight his enemies and to fight those polytheists who were near at hand
whom Allah commanded him to fight.  This was thirteen years after his
call.^([34](#34))

The apostle took part personally in twenty-seven (T. six) raids:

> WaddAn which was the raid of al-AbwA’.  
> BuwAT in the direction of RaDwA.  
> ‘Ushayra in the valley of Yanbu‘.  
> The first fight at Badr in pursuit of Kurz b. JAbir.  
> The great battle of Badr in which Allah slew the chiefs of  
> Quraysh (T. and their nobles and captured many).  
> BanU Sulaym until he reached al-Kudr.  
> Al-SawIq in pursuit of AbU SufyAn b. Harb (T. until he reached Qarqara
> al-  
> Kudr).  
> GhatafAn (T. towards Najd), which is the raid of DhU  Amarr.  
> BaHrAn, a mine in the HijAz (T. above al-Furu‘)  
> UHud  
> HamrA’u’l-Asad.  
> BanU NaDIr  
> DhAtu’l-RiqA‘ of Nakhl.  
> The last battle of Badr.  
> DUmatu’l-Jandal.  
> Al-Khandaq.  
> BanU Qurayza.  
> BanU LiHyAn of Hudhayl.  
> DhU Qarad.  
> BanU’l-MuSTaliq of KhuzA‘a.  
> Al-Hudaybiya not intending to fight where the polytheists opposed his
> passage.  
> Khaybar.  
> Then he went on the accomplished pilgrimage.  
> The occupation of Mecca.  
> Hunayn,  
> Al-TA’if  
> TabUk.

He actually fought in nine engagements: Badr; Uhud; al-Khandaq; Qurayza;
al-Mustaliq; Khaybar; the occupation; Hunayn; and al-TA’if.^([35](#35))

**Expeditions and Raiding Parties sent by Muhammad (622 to 632 CE)**

These were thirty-eight (T. thirty-five) in number (T. between the time
of his coming to Medina and his death).

‘Ubayda b. al-HArith was sent to the lower part (T. to the tribes) of
Thaniyatu’l-Mara (T. which is in the Hijaz); Hamza b. ‘Abdu’l-Muttalib
to the coast in the direction of al-‘IS. (Some people date Hamza’s raid
before that of Ubayda); Sa‘d b. AbU WaqqAS to al-KharrAr (T. in the
Hijaz); ‘Abdullah b. JaHsh to Nakhla; Zayd b. HAritha to al-Qarda (T. a
well in Najd); Muhammad b. Maslama’s attack on Ka‘b b. al-Ashraf;
Marthad b. AbU  Marthad al-GhanawI to al-RajI‘; al-Mundhir b. ‘Amr to
Bi’r Ma‘Una: AbU  ‘Ubayda b. al-JarrAH to DhU’l-QaSSa on the Iraq road;
‘Umar b. al-KhaTTAb to Turba in the B. ‘Amir country ; ‘AlI b. AbU 
TAlib to the Yaman; GhAlib b. ‘Abdullah al-KalbI, the Kalb of Layth, to
al-KadId where he smote B. al-MulawwaH.^([36](#36))

‘Ali to B. ‘Abdullah b. Sa‘d of Fadak; AbU’l-‘AujA’ al-SulamI to B.
Sulaym country where he and all his companions were killed; ‘UkkAsha b.
MiHSan to al-Ghamra; AbU Salama b. ‘Abdu’l-Asad to QaTan, a well of B.
Asad in the direction of Najd.  Mas‘Ud b. ‘Urwa was killed there;
Muhammad b. Maslama, brother of b. HAritha, to al-QuraTA’ of HawAzin;
BashIr b. Sa‘d to B. Murra in Fadak; BashIr b. Sa‘d in the direction of
Khaybar; Zayd b. HAritha to al-JamUm in B. Sulaym country; Zayd also to
JudhAm in Khushayn country.  So says Ibn HishAm, but al-ShAfi‘i from
‘Amr b. HabIb from Ibn IsHAq say ‘in HismA country’.^([37](#37))

**Violation of the Sacred Month (623 CE)**

The apostle sent ‘Abdullah b. Jahsh b. Ri’Ab al-AsadI in Rajab on his
return from the first Badr.  He sent with him eight emigrants, without
any of the AnsAr. He wrote for him a letter, and ordered him not to look
at it until he had journeyed for two days, and to do what he was ordered
to do, but not to put pressure on any of his companions.^([38](#38))

When ‘Abdullah had travelled for two days he opened the letter and
looked into it and this is what it said: ‘When you have read this letter
of mine proceed until you reach Nakhla between Mecca and Al-Ta’if Lie in
wait for Quraysh and find out for us what they are doing.’... A caravan
of Quraysh carrying dry raisins and leather and other merchandise of
Quraysh passed by them, ‘Amr b. al-HaDramI, ‘UthmAn b. Abdullah b.
al-MughIra and his brother Naufal the MakhzUmites, and al-Hakam b.
KaysAn, freedman of HishAm b. al-MughIra being among them.  When the
caravan saw them they were afraid of them because they had camped near
them.  ‘UkkAsha, who had shaved his head, looked down on them, and when
they saw him they felt safe and said, ‘They are pilgrims, you have
nothing to fear from them.’ The raiders took council among themselves,
for this was the last day of Rajab, and they said, ‘If you leave them
alone tonight they will get into the sacred area and will be safe from
you; and if you kill them, you will kill them in the sacred month,’ so
they were hesitant and feared to attack them.  Then they encouraged each
other, and decided to kill as many as they could of them and take what
they had.  WAqid shot ‘Amr b. al-HaDramI with an arrow and killed him
and ‘UthmAn and al-Hakam surrendered.  Naufal escaped and eluded
them. ‘Abdullah and his companions took the caravan and the two
prisoners and came to Medina with them.^([39](#39))

When they came to the apostle, he said, ‘I did not order you to fight in
the sacred month,’ and he held the caravan and the two prisoners in
suspense and refused to take anything from them.  When the apostle said
that, the men were in despair and thought that they were doomed.  Their
Muslim brethren reproached them for what they had done, and the Quraysh
said ‘Muhammad and his companions have violated the sacred month, shed
blood therein, taken booty, and captured men.’ The Muslims in Mecca who
opposed them said that they had done it in Sha‘bAn.  The Jews turned
this raid into an omen against the apostle.  ‘Amr b. al-HadramI whom
WaqId had killed they said meant '*amarati*’l-Harb (war has come to
life), *al-HaDramI meant hadarati’l-Harb (war is present), and WaqId
meant waqadati’l-Harb* (war is kindled); but Allah turned this against
them, not for them, and when there was much talk about it, Allah sent
down to his apostle: ‘They will ask you about the sacred month, and war
in it. Say, war therein is a serious matter, but keeping people from the
way of Allah and disbelieving in Him and in the sacred mosque and
driving out His people there from is more serious with
Allah.’^([40](#40))

When ‘Abdullah and his companions were relieved of their anxiety when
the Quran came down, they were anxious for reward, and said, ‘Can we
hope that it will count as a raid for which we shall be given the reward
of combatants?’ So Allah sent down concerning them: ‘Those who believe
and have emigrated and fought in the way of Allah, these may hope for
Allah’s mercy, for Allah is forgiving, merciful.’  That is, Allah gave
them the greatest hopes therein.^([41](#41))

**Allah sanctions Booty and Terrorism (624 CE)**

When \[Battle of\] Badr was over, Allah sent down the whole *SUra AnfAl*
(eighth *sUra*) about it.  With regard to their quarrelling about the
spoils there came down: ‘They will ask you about the spoils, say, the
spoils belong to Allah and the apostle, so fear Allah and be at peace
with one another, and obey Allah and His apostle if you are
believers.’^([42](#42))

Then He taught them how to divide the spoil and His judgement about it
when He made it lawful to them and said: ‘And know that what you take as
booty a fifth belongs to Allah and the apostle.’^([43](#43))

Then Allah reproached him about the prisoners and the taking of booty,
no other prophet before him having taken booty from his enemy.  Muhammad
AbU Ja‘far b. ‘Al? b. al-Husayn told me that the apostle said: ‘I was
helped by fear; the earth was made a place to pray, and clean; I was
given all-embracing words; booty was made lawful to me as to no prophet
before me; and I was given the power to intercede; five privileges
accorded to no prophet before me.’^([44](#44))

Allah said, ‘It is not for any prophet; i.e. before thee, ‘to take
prisoners’ from his enemies until he has made slaughter in the earth,’
i.e. slaughtered his enemies until he drives them from the land.  ‘You
desire the lure of this world,’ i.e. its goods, the ransom of the
captives.  ‘But Allah desires the next world,’ i.e. their killing them
to manifest the religion which He wishes to manifest and by which the
next world may be attained.  ‘Had there not previously been a book from
Allah there would have come upon you for what you took,’ i.e. prisoners
and booty, ‘an awful punishment,’ i.e. had it not previously gone forth
from Me that I would punish only after a prohibition - and He had not
prohibited them - I would have punished you for what you did.  Then He
made it lawful to him and to them as a mercy from Him and a gift from
the Compassionate, the Merciful. He said, ‘So enjoy what you have
captured as lawful and good, and fear Allah.  Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful.’^([45](#45))

**Captives killed after the Battle of Badr (624 CE)**

Then the apostle began his return journey to Medina with the unbelieving
prisoners, among whom were ‘Uqba b. AbU  Mu‘ayT and al-NaDr b.
al-HArith.  The apostle carried with him the booty that had been taken
from the polytheists and put ‘Abdullah b. Ka‘b in charge of it.

When the apostle was in al-SafrA, al-Nadr was killed by ‘AlI, as a
learned Meccan told me.  When he was in ‘Irqu’l-Zabya ‘Uqba was killed.

When the apostle ordered him to be killed ‘Uqba said, ‘But who will look
after my children, O Muhammad?’ ‘Hell’, he said, and ‘ASim b. ThAbit b.
AbU’l-AqlaH al-AnSArI killed him.^([46](#46))

**Assassination of AbU ‘Afak (CE 624)**

AbU  ‘Afak was one of B. ‘Amr b. ‘Auf of the B. ‘Ubayda clan. He showed
his disaffection when the apostle killed al-HArith b. Suwayd b. SAmit.
\[Suwayd’s fault was that he had killed his father’s murderer who
happened to be a favourite of Muhammad.\] 

The apostle said, ‘Who will deal with this rascal for me?’ whereupon
SAlim b. ‘Umayr, brother of B. ‘Amr b. ‘Auf one of the sweepers’, went
forth and killed him.^([47](#47))

**Assassination of ‘AsmA’ D. MarwAn (624 CE)**

She was of B. Umayya b. Zayd.  When AbU ‘Afak had been killed she
displayed disaffection.  ‘Abdullah b. al-HArith b. al-FuDayl from his
father said that she was married to a man of B. Khatma called YazId b.
Zayd.  Blaming Islam and its followers she said:

I despise B. MAlik and al-NabIt  
And ‘Auf and B. al-Khazraj.  
You obey a stranger who is none of yours,  
One not of MurAd or MadhHij.  
Do you expect good from him after the killing of your chiefs   
Like a hungry man waiting for a cook’s broth?^([48](#48))

When the apostle heard what she had said he said, ‘Who will rid me of
MarwAn’s daughter?’ ‘Umayr b. ‘AdIy al-KhaTmI who was with him heard
him, and that very night he went to her house and killed her.  In the
morning he came to the apostle and told him what he had done and he
said, ‘You have helped Allah and His apostle, O ‘Umayr!’ When ‘Umayr
asked if he would have to bear any evil consequences the apostle said,
‘Two goats won’t butt their heads about her.’ So ‘Umayr went back to his
people.

Now there was a great commotion among B. Khatma that day about the
affair of Bint MarwAn.  She had five sons, and when ‘Umayr went to them
from the apostle he said, ‘I have killed Bint MarwAn, O sons of Khatma. 
Withstand me if you can; don’t keep me waiting.’ That was the first day
that Islam became powerful among B. Khatma; before that those who were
Muslims concealed the fact.  The first of them to accept Islam was
‘Umayr b. ‘AdIy who was called ‘the Reader’, and ‘Abdullah b. Aus and
Khuzayma b. ThAbit. *The day after Bint MarwAn was killed the men of B.
KhaTma became Muslims because they saw the power of Islam*.^([49](#49))

**BanU QaynuqA‘ expelled from Medina (624 CE)**

Meanwhile there was the affair of the B. QaynuqA‘.  The apostle
assembled them in their market and addressed them as follows: ‘O Jews,
beware lest Allah bring upon you the vengeance that He brought upon
Quraysh and become Muslims.  You know that I am a prophet who has been
sent - you will find that in your scriptures and Allah’s covenant with
you.’ They replied, ‘O Muhammad, you seem to think that we are your
people.  Do not deceive yourself because you encountered a people with
no knowledge of war and got the better of them; for by Elohim if we
fight you, you will find that we are real men!’

A freedman of the family of Zayd b. ThAbit from Sa‘Id b. Jubayr or from
‘Ikrima from Ibn ‘AbbAs told me that the latter said the following
verses came down about them:

‘Say to those who disbelieve: you will be vanquished and gathered to
Hell, an evil resting place.  You have already had a sign in the two
forces which met’, i.e. the apostle’s companions at Badr and the
Quraysh.  ‘One force fought in the way of Allah; the other,
disbelievers, thought they saw double their own force with their very
eyes.  Allah strengthens with His help whom He will.  Verily in that is
an example for the discerning.’

The apostle besieged them until they surrendered unconditionally. 
‘Abdullah b. Ubayy b. SalUl went to him when Allah had put them in his
power and said, ‘O Muhammad, deal kindly with my clients’ (now they were
allies of Khazraj), but the apostle put him off.  He repeated the words,
and the apostle turned away from him, whereupon he thrust his hand into
the collar of the apostle’s robe; the apostle was so angry that his face
became almost black.  He said, ‘Confound you, let me go.’ He answered,
‘No, by Allah, I will not let you go until you deal kindly with my
clients.  Four hundred men without mail and three hundred mailed
protected me from all mine enemies; would you cut them down in one
morning? By Allah, I am a man who fears that circumstances may change.’
The apostle said, ‘You can have them.’^([50](#50))

\[This Jewish tribe was expelled from Medina.\]

**Assassination of Ka‘b B. al-Ashraf (624 CE)**

After the Quraysh defeat at Badr the apostle had sent Zayd b. HAritha to
the lower quarter and ‘Abdullah b. RawAHa to the upper ,quarter to tell
the Muslims of Medina of Allah’s victory and of the polytheists who had
been killed.^([51](#51))

Ka‘b b. al-Ashraf who was one of the Tyyi’ of the subsection B. NabhAn
whose mother was from the B. al-NadIr when he heard the news said, ‘Is
this true?  Did Muhammad actually kill these whom these two men mention?
(i.e. Zayd and ‘Abdullah b. RawAha).  These are the nobles of the Arabs
and kingly men; by Elohim, if Muhammad has slain these people ’twere
better to be dead than alive.’

When the enemy of Allah became certain that the news was true he left
the town and went to Mecca to stay with al-MuTTalib b. AbU WadA‘a b.
Dubayra al-Sahmi who was married to ‘Atika d. Abu’l-‘ls b. Umayya b.
‘Abdu Shams b. ‘Abdu ManAf.  She took him in and entertained him
hospitably. He began to inveigh against the apostle and to recite verses
in which he bewailed the Quraysh who were thrown into the pit after
having been slain at Badr.^([52](#52))  
   

\[Then Ka'b came back to Medina and recited more verses.\]  The apostle
said, ‘Who will rid me of Ibnu’l-Ashraf?’ Muhammad b. Maslama, brother
of the B. ‘Abdul’l-Ashhal, said, ‘I will deal with him for you, O
apostle of Allah, I will kill him.’ He said, ‘Do so if you can.’ So
Muhammad b. Maslama returned and waited for three days without food or
drink, apart from what was absolutely necessary.  When the apostle was
told of this he summoned him and asked him why he had given up eating
and drinking.  He replied that he had given him an undertaking and he
did not know whether he could fulfil it.  The apostle said, ‘All that is
incumbent upon you is that you should try.’ He said, ‘O apostle of
Allah, we shall have to tell lies.’ He answered, ‘Say what you like, for
you are free in the matter.’ Thereupon he and SilkAn b. SalAma b. Waqsh
who was AbU NA’ila one of the B. ‘Abdul’l-Ashhal, foster-brother of
Ka‘b, and ‘AbbAd b. Bishr b. Waqsh, and al-HArith b. Aus b. Mu‘Adh of
the B. ‘Abdul’l-Ashhal and AbU  ‘Abs b. Jabr of the B. HAritha conspired
together and sent SilkAn to the enemy of Allah, Ka‘b b. Ashraf, before
they came to him.  He talked to him some time and they recited poetry
one to the other, for SilkAn was fond of poetry.  Then he said, ‘O Ibn
Ashraf, I have come to you about a matter which I want to tell you of
and wish you to keep secret.’ ‘Very well,’ he replied.  He went on, ‘The
coming of this man \[Muhammad\] is a great trial to us.  It has provoked
the hostility of the Arabs, and they are all in league against us.  The
roads have become impassable so that our families are in want and
privation, and we and our families are in great distress.’ Ka‘b
answered, ‘By Elohim, I kept telling you, O Ibn SalAma, that the things
I warned you of would happen.’ SilkAn said to him, ‘I want you to sell
us food and we will give you a pledge of security and you deal
generously in the matter... I have friends who share my opinion and I
want to bring them to you so that you may sell to them and act
generously, and we will give you enough weapons for a good pledge.’
SilkAn’s object was that he should not take alarm at the sight of
weapons when they brought them.  Ka‘b answered, ‘Weapons are a good
pledge.’ Thereupon SilkAn returned to his companions, told them what had
happened, and ordered them to take their arms.  Then they went away and
assembled with him and met the apostle.^([53](#53))

The apostle walked with them as far as Baqi‘u‘l-Gharqad.  Then he sent
them off, saying, ‘Go in Allah’s name; O Allah help them.’ So saying, he
returned to his house.  Now it was a moonlight night and they journeyed
on until they came to his castle, and AbU NA’ila called out to him.  He
had only recently married, and he jumped up in the bedsheet, and his
wife took hold of the end of it and said, ‘You are at war, and those who
are at war do not go out at this hour.’ He replied, ‘It is AbU NA’ila. 
Had he found me sleeping he would not have woken me.’ She answered, ‘By
Elohim, I can feel evil in his voice.’ Ka‘b answered, ‘Even if the call
were for a stab a brave man must answer it.’ So he went down and talked
to them for some time, while they conversed with him.  Then AbU NA’ila
said, ‘Would you like to walk with us to Shi‘b al-‘AjUz, so that we can
talk for the rest of the night?’ ‘If you like,’ he answered, so they
went off walking together; and after a time AbU NA’ila ran his hand
through his hair.  Then he smelt his hand, and said, ‘I have never smelt
a scent finer than this.’ They walked on farther and he did the same so
that Ka‘b suspected no evil.  Then after a space he did it for the third
time, and cried, ‘Smite the enemy of Allah!’ So they smote him, and
their swords clashed over him with no effect.  Muhammad b. Maslama said,
‘I remembered my dagger when I saw that our swords were useless, and I
seized it.  Meanwhile the enemy of Allah had made such a noise that
every fort around us was showing a light. I thrust it into the lower
part of his body, then I bore down upon it until I reached his genitals,
and the enemy of Allah fell to the ground.  Al-HArith had been hurt,
being wounded either in his head or in his foot, one of our swords
having struck him. ... We carried him and brought him to the apostle at
the end of the night.  We saluted him as he stood praying, and he came
out to us, and we told him that we had killed Allah’s enemy.  He spat
upon our comrade’s wounds, and both he and we returned to our families.
Our attack upon Allah’s enemy cast terror among the Jews, and there was
no Jew in Medina who did not fear for his life.’^([54](chi4.htm#54))

**General Order for killing the Jews (624 CE)**

The apostle said, ‘Kill any Jew that falls into your power.’ Thereupon
MuHayyiSa b. Mas‘Ud leapt upon Ibn Sunayna, a Jewish merchant with whom
they had social and business relations, and killed him.  HuwayyiSa was
not a Muslim at the time though he was the elder brother.  When
MuHayyiSa killed him HuwayyiSa began to beat him, saying, ‘You enemy of
God, did you kill him when much of the fat on your belly comes from his
wealth?’ MuHayyiSa answered, ‘Had the one who ordered me to kill him
ordered me to kill you I would have cut your head off,’ The other asked,
‘By God, if Muhammad had ordered you to kill me would you have killed
me?’ He said, ‘Yes, by Allah, had he ordered me to cut off your head I
would have done so.’ He exclaimed, ‘By God, a religion which can bring
you to this is marvellous!’ and he became a Muslim.^([55](#55))

**A Blind Man killed on the way to Uhud (625 CE)**

Then the apostle asked his companions whether anyone could take them
near the Quraysh by a road which would not pass by them.  AbU Khaythama,
brother of B. HAritha b. al-HArith, undertook to do so, and he took him
through the *Harra* of B. HAritha and their property until he came out
in the territory of Mirba‘ b. QayzI who was a blind man, a disaffected
person.  When he perceived the approach of the apostle and his men he
got up and threw dust in their faces saying, ‘You may be the apostle of
Allah, but I won’t let you through my garden!’ I was told that he took a
handful of dust and said, ‘By God, Muhammad, if I could be sure that I
should not hit someone else I would throw it in your face.’ The people
rushed on him to kill him, and the apostle said, ‘Do not kill him, for
this blind man is blind of heart, blind of sight.’ Sa‘d b. Zayd, brother
of B. ‘Abdu’l-Ashhal, rushed at him before the apostle had forbidden
this and hit him on the head with his bow so that he split it
open.^([56](chi4.htm#56))

**Assassination of KhAlid B. SufyAn (625 CE)**

‘Abdullah b. Unays said: The apostle called me and said that he had
heard that Ibn SufyAn b. NubayH al-HudhalI was collecting a force to
attack him, and that he was in Nakhla or ‘Urana and that I was to go and
kill him. I asked him to describe him so that I might know him, and he
said, ‘If you see him he will remind you of Satan.  A sure sign is that
when you see him you will feel a shudder.’ I went out girding on my
sword until I came on him with a number of women in a howdah seeking a
halting-place for them.  It was the time for afternoon prayer, and when
I saw him I felt a shuddering as the apostle had said. I advanced
towards him fearing that something would prevent my praying, so I prayed
as I walked towards him bowing my head.  When I came to him he asked who
I was and I answered, ‘An Arab who has heard of you and your gathering a
force against this fellow \[Muhammad\] and has come to you.’ He said,
‘Yes, I am doing so.’ I walked a short distance with him and when my
chance came I struck him with my sword and killed him, and went off
leaving his women bending over him. When I came to the apostle he saw me
and said, ‘The aim is accomplished.’ I said.  ‘I have killed him, O
Apostle,’ and he said, ‘You are right.’^([57](chi4.htm#57))

**BanU Al-NadIr Jews expelled from Medina (625 CE)**

According to what YazId b. RUmAn told me the apostle went to B. al-NadIr
to ask for their help in paying the bloodwit for the two men of B. ‘Amir
whom ‘Amr b. Umayya al-DamrI had killed after he had given them a
promise of security.  There was a mutual alliance between B. al-NaDIr
and B. ‘Amir.  When the apostle came to them about the bloodwit they
said that of course they would contribute in the way he wished; but they
took counsel with one another apart, saying, ‘You will never get such a
chance again.  Who will go to the top of the house and drop a rock on
him (T. so as to kill him) and rid us of him?’ The apostle was sitting
by the wall of one of their houses at the time.  ‘Amr b. JiHAsh b. Ka‘b
volunteered to do this and went up to throw down a rock.  As the apostle
was with a number of his companions among whom were AbU  Bakr, ‘Umar,
and ‘AlI, news came to him from heaven about what these people intended,
so he got up (T and said to his companions, ‘Don’t go away until I come
to you’) and he went back to Medina.  When his companions had waited
long for the prophet, they got up to search for him and met a man coming
from Medina and asked him about him.  He said that he had seen him
entering Medina, and they went off, and when they found him he told them
of the treachery which the Jews meditated against him.  The apostle
ordered them to prepare for war and to march against them.  Then he went
off with the men until he came upon them.

The Jews took refuge in their forts and the apostle ordered that the
palm-trees should be cut down and burnt, and they called out to him,
‘Muhammad, you have prohibited wanton destruction and blamed those
guilty of it.  Why then are you cutting down and burning our
palm-trees?’

Now there was a number of B. ‘Auf b. al-Khazraj among whom were
‘Abdullah b. Ubayy b. SalUl and WadI‘a and MAlik b. AbU Qauqal and
Suwayd and DA‘is who had sent to B. al-NaDIr saying, ‘Stand firm and
protect yourselves, for we will not betray you.  If you are attacked we
will fight with you and if you are turned out, we will go with you.’
Accordingly they waited for the help they had promised, but they did
nothing and Allah cast terror into their hearts.  They asked the apostle
to deport them and to spare their lives on condition that they could
retain all their property which they could carry on camels, except their
armour, and he agreed.  So they loaded their camels with what they could
carry. Men were destroying their houses down to the lintel of the door
which they put upon the back of their camels and went off with it.  Some
went to Khaybar and others went to Syria.^([58](#58))

They left their property to the apostle and it became his personal
property which he could dispose of as he wished.  He divided it among
the first emigrants to the exclusion of the AnSAr, except that Sahl b.
Hunayf and AbU  DujAna SimAk B. Kharasha complained of poverty and so he
gave them some.  Only two of B. al-NaDIr became Muslims: YAmIn B. ‘Umayr
AbU  Ka‘b b. ‘Amr b. JiHAh and AbU Sa‘d b. Wahb who became Muslims in
order to retain their property.

Concerning B. al-NaDIr the *SUra* of Exile came down in which is
recorded how Allah wreaked His vengeance on them and gave His apostle
power over them and how He dealt with them.  Allah said: ‘He it is who
turned out those who disbelieved of the scripture people from their
homes to the first exile.  You did not think that they would go out and
they thought that their forts would protect them from Allah.  But Allah
came upon them from a direction they had not reckoned and He cast terror
into their hearts so that they destroyed their houses with their own
hands and the hands of the believers.’ That refers to their destroying
their houses to extract the lintels of the doors when they carried them
away.  ‘So consider this, you who have understanding.  Had not Allah
prescribed deportation against them,’ which was vengeance from Allah,
‘He would have punished them in this world,’ i.e. with the sword, ‘and
in the next world there would be the punishment of hell’ as well.  ‘The
palm-trees which you cut down or left standing upon their roots.’ *LIna*
means other than the best kind of dates.  ‘It was by Allah’s
permission,’ i.e. they were cut down by Allah’s order; it was not
destruction but was vengeance from Allah, ‘and to humble evildoers’. 
‘The spoil which Allah gave the apostle from them,’ i.e. from B.
al-NaDIr.  ‘You did not urge on your cavalry or riding camels for the
sake of it, but Allah gives His apostle power over whom He wills and
Allah is Almighty,’ i.e. it was peculiar to him, ‘The spoil which Allah
gave the apostle from the people of the towns belongs to Allah and his
apostle.’^([59](#59))

**Raid on BanU al-MuSTaliq (626 CE)**

The apostle received news that B. al-Mustaliq were gathering together
against him, their leader being al-HArith b. AbU DirAr, the father of
Juwayriya d. al-HArith (afterwards) wife of the apostle.  When the
apostle heard about them he went out and met them at a watering place of
theirs called al-MuraysI‘ in the direction of Qudayd towards the
shore. *There was a fight and Allah put the B. al-MuSTaliq to flight and
killed some of them and gave the apostle their wives, children, and
property as booty*.^([60](#60))

‘A’isha \[who had accompanied the apostle on this expedition\] said:
When the apostle distributed the captives of B. al-MuSTaliq, Juwayriya
fell to the lot of ThAbit b. Qays b. al-ShammAs, or to a cousin of his,
and she gave him a deed for her redemption.  She was a most beautiful
woman.  She captivated every man who saw her.  She came to the apostle
to ask his help in the matter.  As soon as I saw her at the door of my
room I took a dislike to her, for I knew that he would see as I saw
her.  She went in and told him who she was - d. of-HArith b. AbU DirAr,
the chief of his people.  ‘You can see the state to which I have been
brought. I have fallen to the lot of ThAbit or his cousin and have given
him a deed for my ransom and have come to ask your help in the matter.’
He said, ‘Would you like something better than that? I will discharge
your debt and marry you,’ and she accepted him.^([61](#61))

**Islam inspires Patricide (626 CE)**

While the apostle was by this water \[after the raid on BanU MuSTaliq\]
a party came down to it.  ‘Umar had a hired servant from B. GhifAr
called JahjAh b. Mas‘Ud who was leading his horse.  This JahjAh and
SinAn b. Wabar al-JuhanI, an ally of B. ‘Auf b. al-Khazraj, thrust one
another away from the water and fell to fighting.  The JuhanI called out
‘Men of al-AnSAr!’ and JahjAh called out ‘Men of the MuhAjirUn!’. 
‘Abdullah b. Ubayy b. SalUl was enraged.  With him was a number of his
people including Zayd b. Arqam, a young boy.  He said, ‘Have they
actually done this?  They dispute our priority, they outnumber us in our
own country, and nothing so fits us and the vagabonds of Quraysh as the
ancient saying “Feed a dog and it will devour you”.  By Allah when we
return to Medina the stronger will drive out the weaker.’ Then he went
to his people who were there and said: ‘This is what you have done to
yourselves.  You have let them occupy your country, and you have divided
your property among them.  Had you but kept your property from them they
would have gone elsewhere.’ Zayd b. Arqam heard this and went and told
the apostle when he had disposed of his enemies. ‘Umar, who was with
him, said, ‘Tell ‘AbbAd b. Bishr to go and kill him.’ The apostle
answered, ‘But what if men should say Muhammad kills his own
companions?  No, but give orders to set off.’^([62](#62))

\[The son of ‘Abdullah b. Ubayy\] came to the apostle, saying, ‘I have
heard that you want to kill ‘Abdullah b. Ubayy for what you have heard
about him.  If you must do it, then order me to do it and I will bring
you his head, for al-Khazraj know that they have no man more dutiful to
his father than I, and I am afraid that if you order someone else to
kill him my soul will not permit me to see his slayer walking among men
and I shall kill him, thus killing a believer for an unbeliever, and so
I should go to hell.^([63](#63))

**Signals for waging Wars of Conquest (627 CE)**

SalmAn al-FArisI said: I was working with a pick in the trench \[during
the Battle of the Trench\] where a rock gave me much trouble.  The
apostle who was near at hand saw me hacking and saw how difficult the
place was.  He dropped down into the trench and took the pick from my
hand and gave such a blow that lightning showed beneath the pick.  This
happened a second and a third time.  I said: ‘O you, dearer than father
or mother, what is the meaning of this light beneath your pick as you
strike?’ He said: ‘Did you really see that, SalmAn?  The first means
that Allah has opened up to me the Yaman; the second Syria and the west;
and the third the east.’ One whom I do not suspect told me that AbU
Hurayra used to say when these countries were conquered in the time of
‘Umar and ‘UthmAn and after, ‘*Conquer where you will, by Allah, you
have not conquered and to the resurrection day you will not conquer a
city whose keys Allah had not given beforehand to
Muhammad*.’^([64](#64))

**Massacre of BanU Qurayza Jews (627 CE)**

\[After the Battle of the Trench\] at the time of the noon prayers
Gabriel came to the apostle wearing an embroidered turban and riding on
a mule with a saddle covered with a piece of brocade.  He asked the
apostle if he had abandoned fighting, and when he said that he had he
said that the angels had not yet laid aside their arms and that he had
just come from pursuing the enemy.  ‘Allah commands you, Muhammad, to go
to B. Qurayza.  I am about to go to them to shake their stronghold.’

The apostle ordered it to be announced that none should perform the
afternoon prayer until after he reached B. Qurayza.  The apostle sent
‘AlI forward with his banner and the men hastened to it.  ‘AlI advanced
until when he came near the forts he heard insulting language used of
the apostle.  He returned to meet the apostle on the road and told him
that it was not necessary for him to come near those rascals.  The
apostle said, ‘Why? I think you must have heard them speaking ill of
me,’ and when ‘Ali said that was so he added, ‘If they saw me they would
not talk in that fashion.’ When the apostle approached their forts he
said, ‘You brothers of monkeys, has Allah disgraced you and brought His
vengeance upon you?’ They replied, ‘O AbU’l-QAsim, you are not a
barbarous person.’

The apostle besieged them for twenty-five nights until they were sore
pressed and Allah cast terror into their hearts.^([65](#65))

Then they sent to the apostle saying, ‘Send us AbU  LubAba b.
‘Abdu’l-Mundhir, brother of B. ‘Amr b. ‘Auf (for they were allies of
al-Aus), that we may consult him.’ So the apostle sent him to them, and
when they saw him they got up to meet him.  The women and children went
up to him weeping in his face, and he felt sorry for them. They said,
‘Oh AbA LubAba, do you think that we should submit to Muhammad’s
judgement?’ He said, ‘Yes,’ and pointed with his hand to his throat,
signifying slaughter. \[But they did not get the message\].^([66](#66))

In the morning they submitted to the apostle’s judgement and al-Aus
leapt up and said, ‘O Apostle, they are our allies, not allies of
Khazraj, and you know how you recently treated the allies of our
brethren.’ Now the apostle had besieged B. QaynuqA‘ who were allies of
al-Khazraj and when they submitted to his judgement ‘Abdullah b. Ubayy
b. SalUl had asked him for them and he gave them to him; so when al-Aus
spoke thus the apostle said: ‘Will you be satisfied, O Aus, if one of
your own number pronounces judgement on them?’ When they agreed he said
that Sa‘d b. Mu‘Adh was the man.^([67](#67))

When Sa‘d reached the apostle and the Muslims the apostle told them to
get up to greet their leader.  The muhAjirs of Quraysh thought that the
apostle meant the AnSAr, while the latter thought that he meant
everyone, so they got up and said ‘O AbU  ‘Amr, the apostle has
entrusted to you the affair of your allies that you may give judgement
concerning them.’ Sa‘d asked, ‘Do you covenant by Allah that you accept
the judgement I pronounce on them?’ They said Yes, and he said, ‘And is
it incumbent on the one who is here?’ (looking) in the direction of the
apostle not mentioning him out of respect, and the apostle answered
Yes. Sa‘d said, ‘*Then I give judgement that the men should be killed,
the property divided, and the women and children taken as
captives*.’^([68](#68))

Then they surrendered, and the apostle confined them in Medina in the
quarter of d. al-HArith, a woman of B. al-NajjAr.  Then the apostle went
out to the market of Medina (which is still its market today) and dug
trenches in it.  T*hen he sent for them and struck off their heads in
those trenches as they were brought out to him in batches*.  Among them
was the enemy of Allah Huyayy b. Akhtab and Ka‘b b. Asad their chief. 
*There were 600 or 700 in all, though some put the figure as high as 800
or 900*.  As they were being taken out in batches to the apostle they
asked Ka‘b what he thought would be done with them.  He replied, ‘Will
you never understand? Don’t you see that the summoner never stops and
those who are taken away do not return?  By Elohim it is death!’ This
went on until the apostle made an end of them.^([69](#69))

‘A’isha \[who was watching the gory scene\] said: ‘Only one of their
women was killed.  She was actually with me and was talking with me and
laughing immoderately as the apostle was killing her men in the market
when suddenly an unseen voice called her name.  ‘Good heavens,’ I cried,
‘what is the matter?’ ‘I am to be killed,’ she replied. ‘What for?’ I
asked.  ‘Because of something I did,’ she answered.  *She was taken away
and beheaded*.^([70](#70))

*The apostle had ordered that every adult of theirs should be
killed*.^([71](#71))

*Then the apostle divided the property, wives, and children of B.
Qurayza among the Muslims, and he made known on that day the shares of
horse and men, and took out the fifth*.  A horseman got three shares,
two for the horse and one for his rider.  A man without a horse got one
share.  On the day of B. Qurayza there were thirty-six horses.  It was
the first booty on which lots were cast and the fifth was taken. 
*According to its precedent and what the apostle did the divisions were
made, and it remained the custom for raids*.

*Then the apostle sent Sa‘d b. Zayd al-AnSAri brother of b. ‘Abdu’l
Ashhal with some of the captive women of B. Qurayza to Najd and he sold
them for horses and weapons*.

*The apostle had chosen one of their women for himself*, RayHAna d. ‘Amr
b. KhunAfa, one of the women of B. ‘Amr b. Qurayza, and she remained
with him until she died, in his power.  The apostle had proposed to
marry her and put the veil on her, but she said: ‘Nay, leave me in your
power, for that will be easier for me and for you.’ So he left her.  She
had shown repugnance towards Islam when she was captured and clung to
Judaism.  So the apostle put her aside and felt some displeasure.  While
he was with his companions he heard the sound of sandals behind him and
said, ‘This is Tha‘laba b. Sa‘ya coming to give me the good news of
RayhAna’s acceptance of Islam’ and he came up to announce the fact. 
This gave him pleasure.

Allah sent down concerning the trench and B. Qurayza the account which
is found in the *SUra* of the Confederates.^([72](#72))

\[Regarding BanU Qurayza, Allah said\], ‘And Allah turned back those who
disbelieved in His wrath’ i.e. Quraysh and GatafAn… ‘And He brought down
those of the Scripture people who helped them,’ i.e. B. Qurayza, ‘from
their strongholds’ the forts and castles in which they were.  ‘And he
cast terror into their hearts; some you slew and some you captured,’
i.e. he killed the men and captured the women and children. ‘And caused
you to inherit their land and their dwellings, and their property, and a
land you had not trod,’ i.e. Khaybar.  ‘For Allah can do all
things.’^([73](#73))

**Raid on BanU al-Mulawwah (627 CE)**

We went on until we came to (T the valley of) al-KadId at sunset.  We
were in the wadi and my companions sent me on to scout for them.  So I
left them and went on until I came to a hill overlooking the enemy’s
camp.

We gave them time until they quietened down and went to sleep (T. until
their cattle returned in the evening and they milked them and lay down
quietly, and a third of the night passed) and towards dawn we attacked
them and killed some and drove off the cattle.  They cried out to one
another for aid, and a multitude that we could not resist came at us and
we went on with the cattle and passed Ibn al-BarSA and his companion and
carried them along with us.  The enemy were hard on our heels and only
the Wadi Qudayd was between us, when Allah sent a flood in the wadi from
whence He pleased, for there were no clouds that we could see and no
rain.  It brought such water that none could resist it and none could
pass over.  And there they stood looking at us as we drove off their
cattle.  Not one of them could cross to us as we hurried off with them
until we got away; they could not pursue us, and we brought them to the
apostle.

A man of Aslam on the authority of another of them told me that *the
war-cry of the apostle’s companions that night was Slay*! 
*Slay*!^([74](#74))

**Raid on BanU TamIm (627 CE)**

The apostle sent him to raid them, and he killed some and captured
others.  ‘A’isha said to the apostle that she must free a slave of the
sons of Isma‘Il, and he said, ‘The captives of B. al-‘Anbar are coming
now.  We will give you one whom you can set free.’ When they were
brought to the apostle a deputation from B. TamIm rode with them until
they reached the apostle. They spoke to the apostle on their behalf and
he liberated some and accepted ransom for others.^([75](#75))

**Raid on al-GhAba (627 CE)**

We set forth taking our arrows and swords until we arrived near the
settlement in the evening as the sun was setting. I hid at one end and
ordered my companions to hide at the other end of the camp and told them
that when they heard me cry ‘Allah akbar’ as I ran to the camp they were
to do the same and run with me.  There we were waiting to take the enemy
by surprise or to get something from them until much of the night had
passed.  Now they had a shepherd who had gone out with the animals and
was so late in returning that they became alarmed on his behalf.  Their
chief this RifA‘a b. Qays got up and took his sword and hung it round
his neck, saying that he would go on the track of the shepherd, for some
harm must have befallen him; whereupon some of his company begged him
not to go alone for they would protect him, but he insisted on going
alone.  As he went he passed by me, and when he came in range I shot him
in the heart with an arrow, and he died without uttering a word. I leapt
upon him and cut off his head and ran in the direction of the camp
shouting ‘Allah akbar’ and my two companions did likewise, and by Allah,
shouting out to one another they all fled at once with their wives and
children and such of their property as they could lay hands on
easily. We drove off a large number of camels and sheep and brought them
to the apostle and I took RifA’a’s head to the apostle, who gave me
thirteen of the camels to help me with the woman’s dowry, and I
consummated my marriage.^([76](#76))

**Raid on the BajIlIs (627 CE)**

In the raid of MuHArib and B. Tha‘laba the apostle had captured a slave
called YasAr, and he put him in charge of his milch-camels to shepherd
them in the neighbourhood of al-JammA’.  Some men of Qays of Kubba of
BajIla came to the apostle suffering from an epidemic and enlarged
spleens, and the apostle told them that if they went to the milch-camels
and drank their milk and urine they would recover, so off they went. 
When they recovered their health and their bellies contracted to their
normal size they fell upon the apostle’s shepherd YasAr and killed him
and stuck thorns in his eyes and drove away his camels. The apostle sent
Kurz b. JAbir in pursuit and he overtook them and brought them to the
apostle as he returned from the raid of DhU Qarad.  *He cut off their
hands and feet and gouged out their eyes*.^([77](#77))

**Raid on BanU JudhAm (627 CE)**

The apostle sent Zayd b. HAritha against them and that was what provoked
the raid of Zayd on JudhAm… Zayd’s force came up from the direction of
al-AulAj and attacked... They rounded up the cattle and men they found
and killed al-Hunayd and his son and two men of B. al-AHnaf and one of
B. al-KhaSIb.^([78](#78))

**Raid on DUmtu’l-Jandal (627 CE)**

Then he ordered ‘Abdu’l-RaHmAn b. ‘Auf to make his preparations for the
expedition.  In the morning he wore a black turban of cotton.  The
apostle told him to approach and unwound it and then rewound it leaving
four fingers or so loose behind him, saying, “Turban yourself thus, Ibn
‘Auf, for thus it is better and neater.” Then he ordered BilAl to give
him the standard and he did so.  Then he gave praise to Allah and prayed
for himself. He then said, “Take it, Ibn ‘Auf; *fight everyone in the
way of Allah and kill those who disbelieve in Allah.  Do not be
deceitful with the spoil; do not be treacherous, nor mutilate, nor kill
children.  This is Allah’s ordinance and the practice of his prophet
among you*.”^([79](#79))

**Raid on BanU FazAra (627 CE)**

Zayd also raided WAdi’l-QurA, where he met B. FazAra and some of his
companions were killed; he himself was carried wounded from the field. 
Ward b. ‘Amr b. MadAsh, one of B’. ‘Sa‘d b. Hudhayl, was killed by one
of B. Badr.  When Zayd came he swore that he would use no ablution until
he raided B. FazAra; and when he recovered from his wounds the apostle
sent him against them with a force.  He fought (T. he met) them in
WAdi’l-QurA and killed some of them... Umm Qirfa FATima d. RabI‘a b.
Badr was taken prisoner *She was a very old woman*, wife of MAlik.  Her
daughter and ‘Abdullah b. Mas‘ada were also taken.  *Zayd ordered Qays
b. al-MusaHHar to kill Umm Qirfa and he killed her cruelly* (*T. by
putting a rope to her two legs and to two camels and driving them until
they rent her in two*).  Then they brought Umm Qirfa’s daughter and
Mas‘ada’s son to the apostle.  The daughter of Umm Qirfa belonged to
Salama b. ‘Amr b. al-Akwa‘ who had taken her.  She held a position of
honour among her people, and the Arabs used to say, ‘Had you been more
powerful than Umm Qirfa you could have done no more.’ *Salama asked the
apostle to let him have her and he gave her to him and he presented her
to his uncle* Hazn b. AbU Wahb and she bare him ‘Abdu’l-RaHmAn b.
Hazn.^([80](#80))

**Assassination of SallAm ibn Abu’l-HUqayq (627 CE)**

When the fight at the trench and the affair of the B. Qurayza were over,
the matter of SallAm b. AbU’l-Huqayq known as AbU RAfi‘ came up in
connexion with those who had collected the mixed tribes together against
the apostle.  Now Aus had killed Ka‘b b. al-Ashraf before Uhud because
of his enmity towards the apostle and because he instigated men against
him, so Khazraj asked and obtained the apostle’s permission to kill
SallAm who was in Khaybar.

One of the things which Allah did for His apostle was that these two
tribes of the AnSAr, Aus and Khazraj, competed the one with the other
like two stallions: if Aus did anything to the apostle’s advantage
Khazraj would say, ‘They shall not have this superiority over us in the
apostle’s eyes and in Islam’ and they would not rest until they could do
something similar.  If Khazraj did anything Aus would say the same.

When Aus had killed Ka‘b for his enmity towards the apostle, Khazraj
used these words and asked themselves what man was as hostile to the
apostle as Ka‘b? And then they remembered SallAm who was in Khaybar and
asked and obtained the apostle’s permission to kill him.^([81](#81))

Five men of B. Salima of Khazraj went to him... As they left, the
apostle appointed ‘Abdullah b. ‘AtIk as their leader, and he forbade
them to kill women or children.  When they got to Khaybar they went to
SallAm’s house by night, having locked every door in the settlement on
the inhabitants.  Now he was in an upper chamber of his to which a (T. 
Roman) ladder led up.  They mounted this until they came to the door and
asked to be allowed to come in.  His wife came out and asked who they
were and they told her that they were Arabs in search of supplies.  She
told them that their man was here and that they could come in.  ‘When we
entered and we bolted the door of the room on her and ourselves fearing
lest something should come between us and him.  His wife shrieked and
warned him of us, so we ran at him with our swords as he was on his
bed.  The only thing that guided us in the darkness of the night was his
whiteness like an Egyptian blanket.  When his wife shrieked one of our
number would lift his sword against her; then he would remember the
apostle’s ban on killing women and withdraw his hand; but for that we
would have made an end of her that night. When we had smitten him with
our swords ‘Abdullah b. Unays bore down with his sword into his belly
until it went right through him, as he was saying *QaTni*, *qaTnI*, i.e.
It’s enough.’^([82](#82))

Then he came to them and told them the news, and they picked up their
companion and took him to the apostle and told him that they had killed
Allah’s enemy.  *They disputed before him as to who had killed him, each
of them laying claim to the deed*. The apostle demanded to see their
swords and when he looked at them he said, ‘It is the sword of ‘Abdullah
b. Unays that killed him; I can see traces of food on it.’^([83](#83))

**Killing of Jews by Treachery (628 CE)**

‘Abdullah b. RawAha raided Khaybar twice; on one occasion he killed
al-Yusayr b. RizAm.  Now al-Yusayr (T. the Jew) was in Khaybar
collecting GhatafAn to attack the apostle.  The latter sent ‘Abdullah b.
RawAha with a number of his companions, among whom were ‘Abdullah b.
Unays, an ally of B. Salima.  When they came to him \[al-Yusayr\] they
spoke to him (T. and made him promises) and treated him well, saying
that if he would come to the apostle he would give him an appointment
and honour him.  They kept on at him until he went with them with a
number of Jews.  ‘Abdullah b. Unays mounted him on his beast (T. and he
rode behind him) until when he was in al-Qarqara, about six miles from
Khaybar, al-Yusayr changed his mind about going to the apostle. 
‘Abdullah perceived his intention as he was preparing to draw his sword,
so he rushed at him and struck him with his sword cutting of his leg. 
Al-Yusayr hit him with a stick of *shauHaT* wood which he had in his
hand and wounded his head (T. and Allah killed Yusayr). All the
apostle’s companions fell upon their Jewish companions and killed them
except one man who escaped on his feet (T. his beast).  When ‘Abdullah
b. Unays came to the apostle he spat on his wound and it did not
suppurate or cause him pain.^([84](#84))

**Neighbouring Rulers invited to Islam (628 CE)**

The apostle went out to his companions and said: ‘Allah has sent me as a
mercy to all men, so take a message from me, Allah have mercy on you...’

Then the apostle divided his companions and sent SalIt b. ‘Amr b. ‘Abdu
Shams b. ‘Abdu Wudd, brother of B. ‘Amir b. Lu’ayy, to Haudha b. ‘AlI
ruler of al-YamAma; al-’AlA’ b. al-HaDramI to al-Mundhir b. SAwA,
brother of B. ‘Abdu’l-Qays’ ruler of al-Bahrayn; ‘Amr b. al-AS to Jayfar
b. JulandA and ‘AbbAd his brother the AsdIs, rulers of ‘UmAn; HAtib b.
AbU  Balta‘a to the Muqauqis ruler of Alexandria. He handed over to him
the apostle’s letter and the Muqauqis gave to the apostle four slave
girls, one of whom was Mary mother of IbrAhIm the apostle’s son; Dihya
b. KhalIfa al-KalbI- al-KhazrajI he sent to Caesar, who was Heraclius
king of Rome.^([85](#85))

**Conquest of Khaybar (628 CE)**

When the apostle marched from Medina to Khaybar he went by way of ‘ISr,
and a mosque was built for him there; then by way of al-SaHbA’.  Then he
went forward with the army until he halted in a wadi called al-RajI‘,
halting between the men of Khaybar and GhaTafAn so as to prevent the
latter reinforcing Khaybar, for they were on their side against the
apostle.

When GhatafAn heard about the apostle’s attack on Khaybar they gathered
together and marched out to help the Jews against him; but after a day’s
journey, hearing a rumour about their property and families, they
thought that they had been attacked during their absence, so they went
back on their tracks and left the way to Khaybar open to the apostle.

The apostle seized the property piece by piece and conquered the forts
one by one as he came to them.  The first to fall was the fort of NA‘im;
there MahmUd b. Maslama was killed by a millstone which was thrown on
him from it; then al-QamUS the fort of B. AbU’l-Huqayq.  *The apostle
took captives from them among whom was SafIya d. Huyayy b. AkhTab who
had been the wife of KinAna b. al-RabI‘ b. AbU’l-Huqayq, and two cousins
of hers.  The apostle chose SafIya for himself*.

DiHya b. KhalIfa al-KalbI had asked the apostle for SafIya, and when he
chose her for himself he gave him her two cousins. *The women of Khaybar
were distributed among the Muslims*.  The Muslims ate the meat of the
domestic donkeys and the apostle got up and forbade the people to do a
number of things which he enumerated.^([86](#86))

KinAna b. al-RabI‘,  who had the custody of the treasure of B. al-NaDIr
was brought to the apostle who asked him about it.  He denied that he
knew where it was.  A Jew came (T. was brought) to the apostle and said
that he had seen KinAna going round a certain ruin every morning early. 
When the apostle said to KinAna, “Do you know that if we find you have
it I shall kill you?” he said Yes.  The apostle gave orders that the
ruin was to be excavated and some of the treasure was found.  When he
asked him about the rest he refused to produce it, *so the apostle gave
orders to al-Zubayr b. al-‘AwwAm, ‘Torture him until you extract what he
has,’ so he kindled afire with flint and steel on his chest until he was
nearly dead.  Then the apostle delivered him to Muhammad b. Maslama and
he struck off his head*.^([87](#87))

When the apostle married *SafIya in Khaybar or on the way, she having
been beautified and combed, and got in a fit state for the apostle* by
Umm Sulaym d. MilHAn mother of Anas b. MAlik, *the apostle passed the
night with her in a tent of his*.  AbU AyyUb, KhAlid b. Zayd brother of
B. al-NajjAr passed the night girt with his sword, guarding the apostle
and going round the tent until in the morning the apostle saw him there
and asked him what he meant by his action. He replied, ‘I was afraid for
you with this woman for you have killed her father, her husband, and her
people, and till recently she was in unbelief, so I was afraid for you
on her account.’ They allege that the apostle said ‘O Allah, preserve
AbU AyyUb as he spent the night preserving me.’^([88](#88))

When the spoil of Khaybar was divided, al-Shaqq and NatA fell to the
Muslims while al-KatIba was divided into five sections: Allah’s fifth;
the prophet’s share (T. fifth); the share of kind-red, orphans, the poor
(T. and wayfarers); maintenance of the prophet’s wives; and maintenance
of the men who acted as intermediaries in the peace negotiations with
the men of Fadak. To Muhayyisa, who was one of these men, the apostle
gave thirty loads of barley and thirty loads of dates.  Khaybar was
apportioned among the men of al-Hudaybiya without regard to whether they
were present at Khaybar or not.^([89](#89))

When the apostle had finished with Khaybar, Allah struck terror to the
hearts of the men of Fadak when they heard what the apostle had done to
the men of Khaybar.  They sent to him an offer of peace on condition
that they should keep half of their produce.  Their messengers came to
him in Khaybar or on the road or after he came to Medina, and he
accepted their terms. Thus Fadak became his private property, because it
had not been attacked by horse or camel.^([90](#90))

The apostle took Khaybar by force after fighting and Khaybar was part of
what Allah gave to him as booty.  The apostle divided it into five parts
and distributed it among the Muslims, and after the fighting the
population surrendered on condition that they should migrate.  The
apostle called them and said that if they wished he would let them have
the property on condition that they worked it and the produce was
equally divided between both parties and he would leave them there as
long as Allah let them stay.  They accepted the terms and used to work
the property on those conditions.  The apostle used to send ‘Abdullah b.
RawAHa and he would divide the produce and make a just assessment.  When
Allah took away His prophet, AbU Bakr continued the arrangement until
his death, and so did ‘Umar for the beginning of his amIrate.  *Then he
heard that the apostle had said in his last illness.  ‘Two religions
shall not remain together in the peninsula of the Arabs*’ and he made
inquiries until he got confirmation.  Then he sent to the Jews saying,
‘Allah has given permission for you to emigrate’, quoting the apostle’s
words.  ‘If anyone has an agreement with the apostle let him bring it to
me and I will carry it out; he who has no such agreement let him get
ready to emigrate.’ Thus ‘Umar expelled those who had no agreement with
the apostle.^([91](#91))

**Raid on Mu’ta in Syria (629 CE)**

The apostle sent his expedition to Mu’ta in JumAda’l-UlA in the year 8
and put Zayd b. HAritha in command; if Zayd were slain then Ja‘far b.
AbU TAlib was to take command, and if he were killed then ‘Abdullah b.
RawAha.  The expedition got ready to the number of 3,000 and prepared to
start.  When they were about to set off they bade farewell to the
apostle’s chiefs and saluted them.  When ‘Abdullah b. RawAHa took his
leave of the chiefs he wept and when they asked him the reason he
said, ‘By Allah, it is not that I love the world and am inordinately
attached to you, but I heard the apostle read a verse from Allah’s book
in which he mentioned hell and I do not know how I can return after I
have been in it?^([92](#92))

The people went forward until when they were on the borders of the
BalqA’ the Greek and Arab forces of Heraclius met them in a village
called MashArif.  When the enemy approached, the Muslims withdrew to a
village called Mu’ta.  There the forces met and the Muslims made their
dispositions, putting over the right wing Qutba b. QatAda of the B.
‘Udhra, and over the left wing an AnSArI called ‘UbAya b. MAlik.

When fighting began Zayd b. HAritha fought holding the apostle’s
standard, until he died from loss of blood among the spears of the
enemy.  Then Ja‘far took it and fought with it until when the battle
hemmed him in he jumped off his roan and hamstrung her and fought till
he was killed.  *Ja‘far was the first man in Islam to hamstring his
horse*.

When Ja‘far was killed ‘Abdullah b. RawAHa took the standard and
advanced with it riding his horse.  He had to put pressure on himself as
he felt reluctant to go forward.^([93](#93))

Then he dismounted and a cousin of his came up with a meat bone, saying,
‘Strengthen yourself with this, for you have met in these battles of
yours difficult days.’ He took it and ate a little. Then he heard the
sounds of confusion in the force and threw it away, saying, ‘And you are
still living?’ He seized his sword and died fighting.^([94](#94))

\[KhAlid b. al-WalId who had converted to Islam some time earlier and
joined this expedition, led the Muslim army in retreat to Medium. 
Hearing the report\] the apostle said: ‘Zayd took the standard and
fought with it until he was killed as a martyr; then Ja‘far took it and
fought until he was killed as a martyr.’ Then he was silent until the
faces of the AnSAr fell and they thought that something disastrous had
happened to ‘Abdullah b, RawAHa.  Then he said: ‘Abdullah took it and
fought by it until he was killed as a martyr. *I saw in a vision that
they were carried up to me in Paradise upon beds of gold*. I saw
‘Abdullah’s bed turning away from the beds of the other two, and when I
asked why, I was told that they had gone on but he hesitated before he
went forward.’^([95](#95))

**Vindictive Killings after the Conquest of Mecca (630 CE)**

The apostle had instructed his commanders when they entered Mecca only
to fight those who resisted them, except a small number who were to be
killed even if they were found beneath the curtains of the Ka‘ba.  Among
them was ‘Abdullah b. Sa‘d, brother of the B. ‘Amir b. Lu’ayy.  The
reason he ordered him to be killed was that he had been a Muslim and
used to write down revelation; then he apostatized and returned to
Quraysh and fled to ‘UthmAn b. ‘AffAn whose foster-brother he was.  The
latter hid him until he brought him to the apostle after the situation
in Mecca was tranquil, and asked that he might be granted immunity. 
They allege that the apostle remained silent for a long time till
finally he said yes.  When ‘UthmAn had left he said to his companions
who were sitting around him, ‘I kept silent so that one of you might get
up and strike off his head!’ One of the AnSAr said, ‘Then why didn’t you
give me a sign, O apostle of Allah?’ He answered that a prophet does not
kill by pointing.^([96](#96))

Another was ‘Abdullah b. Khatal of B. Taym b. GhAlib.  He had become a
Muslim and the apostle sent him to collect the poor tax in company with
one of the AnSAr.  He had with him a freed slave who served him. (He was
a Muslim.) When they halted he ordered the latter to kill a goat for him
and prepare some food, and went to sleep.  When he woke up the man had
done nothing, so he attacked and killed him and apostatized. He had two
singing-girls FartanA and her friend who used to sing satirical songs
about the apostle, so he ordered that they should be killed with
him.^([97](#97))

Another was al-Huwayrith b. Nuqaydh b. Wahb b. ‘Abd b. QuSayy, one of
those who used to insult him in Mecca.

Another was Miqyas b. HubAba because he had killed an AnSArI who had
killed his brother accidentally, and returned to Quraysh as a
polytheist.  And SAra freed slave of one of the B. ‘Abdu’l-Muttalib; and
‘Ikrima b. AbU  Jahl.  SAra had insulted him in Mecca.

‘Abdullah b. Khatal was killed by Sa‘Id b. Hurayth al-MakhzUmI and AbU
Barza al-AslamI acting together.  Miqyas was killed by Numayla b.
‘Abdullah, one of his own people.

As for Ibn KhaTal’s two singing-girls, one was killed and the other ran
away until the apostle, asked for immunity, gave it her. Similarly SAra,
who lived until in the time of ‘Umar a mounted soldier trod her down in
the valley of Mecca and killed her.  Al-Huwayrith was killed by
‘AlI.^([98](#98))

**The Battle of Hunayn (630 CE)**

When HawAzin heard how Allah had given the apostle possession of Mecca,
MAlik b. ‘Auf al-NaSrI collected them together. There assembled to him
also all ThaqIf and all Nasr and Jusham; and Sa‘d b. Bakr, and a few men
from B. HilAl.^([99](#99))

When the prophet heard about them he sent ‘Abdullah b. AbU  Hadrad
al-AslamI to them and ordered him to go among them and stay with them
until he learned all about them, and then bring him back the
news. ‘Abdullah went and stayed with them until he learned that they had
decided to fight the apostle and the dispositions of HawAzin, and then
came back to tell the apostle.^([100](#100))

Then the apostle marched with 2,000 Meccans and 10,000 of his companions
who had gone out with him when he conquered Mecca, 12,000 in
all.^([101](#101))

\[AbU  QatAda, who fought in the battle in the valley of Hunayn\], said:
On the day of Hunayn I saw two men fighting, a Muslim and a polytheist. 
A friend of the latter was making to help him against the Muslim, so I
went up to him and struck off his hand, and he throttled me with the
other; and by Allah he did not let me go until I smelt the reek of
blood.  He had all but killed me and had not loss of blood weakened him
he would have done so.  But he fell and I struck and killed him, and was
too occupied with the fighting to pay any more attention to him.  One of
the Meccans passed by and stripped him, and when the fighting was over
and we had finished with the enemy *the apostle said that anyone who had
killed a foe could have his spoil*.  I told the apostle that I had
killed a man who was worth stripping and had been too occupied with
fighting at the time and that I did not know who had spoiled him.  One
of the Meccans admitted that I had spoken the truth and that the spoil
was in his possession.  ‘So pay him to his satisfaction on my behalf
from his spoil.’ AbU Bakr said, ‘No, by Allah, he shall not “give him
satisfaction” from it.  Are you going to make one of Allah’s lions who
fought for His religion go shares with you in his prey?  Return the
spoil of the man he killed to him!’ The apostle confirmed AbU Bakr’s
words, so I took the spoil from him and sold it and bought with the
money a small palm-grove.  It is the first property I ever held.  One I
do not suspect told me: AbU TalHa alone took the spoil of twenty
men.^([102](#102))

RabI’a b. Rufay‘ b. UhbAn b. Tha‘laba b. Rab?‘a b. YarbU‘ b. SammAl b.
‘Auf b. Imru’ul-Qays who was called after his mother Ibn Dughunna more
often overtook Durayd b. al-Simma and took hold of his camel’s halter,
thinking that he was a woman because he was in his howdah.  And lo, it
was a man; he made the camel kneel and it was a very old man - Durayd b.
al-Simma.  The young man did not know him and Durayd asked him what he
wanted and what was his name.  He told him and said that he wanted to
kill him, and struck him with his sword to no effect.  Durayd said,
‘What a poor weapon your mother has given you! Take this sword of mine
that is behind the saddle in the howdah and strike me with that above
the spine and below the head, for that is the way I used to strike men. 
Then when you come to your mother tell her that you have killed Durayd
b. al-Simma, for many’s the day I have protected your women.’ The B.
Sulaym allege that RabI‘a said, ‘When I smote him he fell and exposed
himself, and lo his crotch and the inside of his thighs were like paper
from riding horses bareback. When RabI‘a returned to his mother he told
her that he had killed him and she said, ‘By Allah, he set free three
mothers and grandmothers of yours.’^([103](#103))

**Devastation at TA’if (630 CE)**

\[The apostle\] went on until he halted near al-TA’if and pitched his
camp there.  Some of his companions were killed by arrows there because
the camp had come too close to the wall of al-TA’if and the arrows were
reaching them.  The Muslims could not get through their wall for they
had fastened the gate.  When these men were killed by arrows he (T.
withdrew and) pitched his camp near where his mosque stands today.  He
besieged them for some twenty days.

The apostle besieged them and fought them bitterly and the two sides
exchanged arrows, until when the day of storming came at the wall of
al-TA’if a number of his companions went under a testudo and advanced up
to the wall to breach it.  ThaqIf let loose on them scraps of hot iron
so they came out from under it and Thaq-lf shot them with arrows and
killed some of them. The apostle ordered that the vineyards of ThaqIf
should be cut down and the men fell upon them cutting them
down.^([104](#104))

Then Khuwayla d. HakIm b. Umayya b. HAritha b. al-AuqaS al-SulamIya,
wife of ‘UthmAn b. Maz‘Un, asked the apostle to give her the jewellery
of BAdiya d. GhaylAn b. Salama, or the jewellery of al-FAri‘a d. ‘AqIl
if Allah gave him victory over al-TA’if, for they were the best
bejewelled women of ThaqIf.  I have been told that the apostle said to
her, ‘And if ThaqIf is not permitted to me, O Khuwayla?’ She left him
and went and told ‘Umar, who came and asked the apostle if he had really
said that.  On hearing that he had, he asked if he should give the order
to break camp, and receiving his permission he did so.

When the army moved off Sa‘Id b. ‘Ubayd b. AsId b. AbU  ‘Amr b. ‘AllAj
called out, ‘The tribe is holding out.’ ‘Uyayna b. HiSn said, Yes, nobly
and gloriously.’ One of the Muslims said to him, ‘Allah smite you,
‘Uyayna!  Do you praise the polytheists for holding out against the
apostle when you have come to help him?’ ‘I did not come to fight ThaqIf
with you,’ he answered, ‘but I wanted Muhammad to get possession of
al-TA’if so that I might get a girl from ThaqIf whom I might tread (T.
make pregnant) so that she might bear me a son, for ThaqIf are a people
who produce intelligent children.’^([105](chi4.htm#105))

**Lust for Loot and Bribes (630 CE)**

Then a deputation from HawAzin came to him in al-Ji‘rAna where he held
6,000 women and children, and sheep and camels innumerable which had
been captured from them in the Battle of Hunayn.  The deputation from
HawAzin came to the apostle after they had accepted Islam, saying that
the disaster which had befallen them was well known and asking him to
have pity on them for Allah’s sake.  One of the HawAzin of the clan B.
Sa‘d b. Bakr (T. it was they who had provided the fostermother for the
apostle) called Zuhayr AbU Surad said: ‘O Apostle of Allah, in the
enclosures are your paternal and maternal aunts and the women who
suckled you who used to look after you.’^([106](#106))

The apostle said, ‘Which are dearest to you?  Your sons and your wives
or your cattle?’ They replied, ‘Do you give us the choice between our
cattle and our honour?  Nay, give us back our wives and our sons, for
that is what we most desire.’ He said, ‘So far as concerns what I and
the B. ‘Abdu‘l-MuTTalib have they are yours.  When I have prayed the
noon prayer with the men then get up and say, “We ask the apostle’s
intercession with the Muslims, and the Muslims’ intercession with the
apostle for our sons and our wives.” I will then give them to you and
make application on your behalf.’ When the apostle had ended the noon
prayers they did as he had ordered them and he said what he had promised
to say. Then the MuhAjirs said that what was theirs was the apostle’s,
and the AnSAr said the same.^([107](#107))

The apostle gave ‘AlI a girl called Rayta d. HilAl b. HayyAn b. ‘Umayra
b. HilAl b. NASira b. QuSayya b. NaSr b. Sa‘d b. Bakr; and he gave
‘UthmAn a girl called Zaynab d. HayyAn; and he gave ‘Umar a girl whom
‘Umar gave to his son ‘Abdullah.

\[‘Abdullah b. ‘Umar related\]: I sent her to my aunts of B. Jumah to
prepare and get her ready for me until I had circumambulated the temple
and could come to them, wanting to take her when I returned.  When I had
finished I came out of the mosque and lo the men were running about, and
when I asked why they told me that the apostle had returned their wives
and children to them, so I told them that their woman was with B. Jumah
and they could go and take her, and they did so.^([108](#108))

When the apostle had returned the captives of Hunayn to their people he
rode away and the *men followed him, saying, ‘O apostle, divide our
spoil of camels and herds among us’ until they forced him back against a
tree and his mantle was tom from him and he cried, ‘Give me back my
mantle*, men, for by Allah if you had (T. I had) as many sheep as the
trees of TihAma I would distribute them among you; you have not found me
niggardly or cowardly or false.’

*The apostle gave gifts to those whose hearts were to be won over,
notably the chiefs of the army, to win them and through them their
people*.^([109](#109))

When the apostle had distributed these gifts among Quraysh and the
Bedouin tribes, and the AnSAr got nothing, this tribe of AnsAr took the
matter to heart and talked a great deal about it, until one of them
said, ‘By Allah, the apostle has met his own people.’ Sa‘d b. ‘UbAda
went to the apostle and told him what had happened.  He asked, ‘Where do
you stand in this matter, Sa‘d?’ He said, ‘I stand with my people.’
‘Then gather your people in this enclosure,’ he said.  He did so, and
when some of the MuhAjirs came, he let them come, while others he sent
back.  When he had got them altogether he went and told the apostle, and
he came to them, and after praising and thanking Allah he addressed them
thus: ‘O men of AnSAr, what is this I hear of you?  Do you think ill of
me in your hearts?  Did I not come to you when you were erring and Allah
guided you; poor and Allah made you rich; enemies and Allah softened
your hearts?’ They answered; ‘Yes indeed, Allah and His apostle are most
kind and generous.’ He continued: ‘Why don’t you answer me, O AnSAr?’ 
They said, ‘How shall we answer you?  Kindness and generosity belong
to.  Allah and His apostle.’ He said, ‘Had you so wished you could have
said - and you would have spoken the truth and have been believed - You
came to us discredited and we believed you; deserted and we helped you;
a fugitive and we took you in; poor and we comforted you. *Are you
disturbed in mind because of the good things of this life by which I win
over a people that they may become Muslims while I entrust you to your
Islam*?  Are you not satisfied that men should take away flocks and
herds while you take back with you the apostle of Allah?  By Him in
whose hand is the soul of Muhammad, but for the migration I should be
one of the AnSAr myself. If all men went one way and the AnSAr another I
should take the way of the AnSAr.  Allah have mercy on the AnSAr, their
sons and their sons’ sons.’ The people wept until the tears ran down
their beards as they said: ‘We are satisfied with the apostle of Allah
as our lot and portion’.  Then the apostle went off and they
dispersed.^([110](#110))

**Raid on BanU Tayyi’ (631 CE)**

\[‘AdIy, the son of HAtim Tayyi’, a great hero of pre-Islamic Arabia,
had migrated to Syria when he saw Muhammad triumphant.  He, related\]:
In my absence the apostle’s cavalry came and among the captives they
took was HAtim’s daughter, and she was brought to the apostle among the
captives of Tayyi’.  The apostle had heard of my flight to Syria. 
HAtim’s daughter was put in the enclosure by the door of the mosque in
which the captives were imprisoned and the apostle passed by her.  She
got up to meet him, for she was a courteous woman, and said, ‘O apostle
of Allah, my father is dead and the man who should act for me has
gone. If you spare me God will spare you.’ He asked her who her man was
and when she told him it was ‘AdIy b. HAtim he exclaimed, ‘The man who
runs away from Allah and His apostle.^([111](#111))

**Raid on TabUk (631 CE)**

The apostle ordered his companions to prepare to raid the Byzantines at
a time when men were hard pressed; the heat was oppressive and there was
a drought; fruit was ripe (T. and shade was eagerly sought) and the men
wanted to stay in the shade with their fruit and disliked travelling at
that season.  Now the apostle nearly always referred allusively to the
destination of a raid and announced that he was making for a place other
than that which he actually intended.  This was the sole exception, for
he said plainly that he was making for the Byzantines because the
journey was long, the season difficult, and the enemy in great strength,
so that the men could make suitable preparations.  He ordered them to
get ready and told them that he was making for the
Byzantines.^([112](#112))

The apostle heard that the hypocrites were assembling in the house of
Suwaylim the Jew (his house was by JAsUm) keeping men back from the
apostle in the raid on TabUk.  So the prophet sent TalHa b. ‘Ubaydullah
with a number of his friends to them with orders to bum Suwaylim’s house
down on them. TalHa did so, and al-DaHHak b. KhalIfa threw himself from
the top of the house and broke his leg, and his friends rushed out and
escaped.^([113](#113))

When the apostle reached TabUk YuHanna b. Ru’ba governor of Ayla came
and made a treaty with him and paid him the poll tax.  The people of
JarbA’ and Adhruh also came and paid the poll tax.  The apostle wrote
for them a document which they still have.

Then the apostle summoned KhAlid b. al-WalId and sent him to Ukaydir at
DUma.  Ukaydir b. ‘Abdu’l-Malik was a man of Kinda who was ruler of
DUma; he was a Christian.  The apostle told KhAlid that he would find
him hunting wild cows.  KhAlid went off until he came within sight of
his fort.  It was a summer night with a bright moon and Ukaydir was on
the roof with his wife.  The cows were rubbing their horns against the
gate of the fort all the night.  His wife asked him if he had ever known
anything of the kind in the past, and urged him to go after them.  He
called for his horse, and when it was saddled he rode off with a number
of his family, among them a brother called HassAn.  As they were riding
the apostle’s cavalry fell in with them and seized him and killed his
brother. Ukaydir was wearing a gown of brocade covered with gold. 
KhAlid stripped him of this and sent it to the apostle before be brought
him to him.^([114](#114))

Then KhAlid brought Ukaydir to the apostle who spared his life and made
peace with him on condition that he paid the poll tax.  Then he released
him and he returned to his town.^([115](#115))

**Allah sanctions Breach of Pledge (631 CE)**

The apostle… sent AbU Bakr in command of the *Hajj* in the year 9 to
enable the Muslims to perform their *Hajj* while the polytheists were at
their pilgrimage stations.  AbU  Bar and the Muslims duly
departed.^([116](#116))

A discharge came down permitting the breaking of the agreement between
the apostle and the polytheists that none should be kept back from the
temple when he came to it, and that none need fear during the sacred
month.  That was a general agreement between him and the polytheists;
meanwhile there were particular agreements between the apostle and the
Arab tribes for specified terms.  And there came down about it and about
the disaffected who held back from him in the raid on TabUk, and about
what they said (revelations) in which Allah uncovered the secret
thoughts of people who were dissembling.  We know the names of some of
them, of others we do not.  Allah said: ‘A discharge from Allah and His
apostle towards those polytheists with whom you made a treaty’, i.e.
those polytheists with whom you made a general agreement.  ‘So travel
through the land for four months and know that you cannot escape Allah
and that Allah will put the unbelievers to shame.  And a proclamation
from Allah and His apostle to men on the day of the greater pilgrimage
that Allah and His apostle are free from obligation to the polytheists,’
i.e. after this pilgrimage.  ‘So if you repent it will be better for
you; and if you turn back know that you cannot escape Allah.  Inform
those who disbelieve, about a painful punishment except those
polytheists with whom you have made a treaty,’ i.e. the special treaty
for a specified term, ‘since they have not come short in anything in
regard to you and have not helped anyone against you.  So fulfil your
treaty with them to their allotted time.  Allah loves the pious.  And
when the sacred months are passed,’ Allah means the four which he fixed
as their time, ‘then kill the polytheists wherever you find them, and
seize them and besiege them and lie in wait for them in every ambush. 
But if they repent and perform prayer and pay the poor-tax, then let
them go their way.  Allah is forgiving, merciful.’^([117](#117))

Then Allah said: “The polytheists are nothing but unclean, so let them
not approach the sacred mosque after this year of theirs, and if you
fear poverty’ that was because the people said ‘the markets will be cut
off from us, trade will be destroyed, and we shall lose the good things
we used to enjoy,’ and Allah said, ‘If you fear poverty Allah will
enrich you from His bounty,’ i.e. in some other way, ‘if He will.  He is
knowing, wise.  Fight those who do not believe in Allah and the last day
and forbid not that which Allah and His apostle have forbidden and
follow not the religion of truth from among those who have been given
the scripture until they pay the poll tax out of hand being humbled,’
i.e. as a compensation for what you fear to lose by the closing of the
markets. Allah gave them compensation for what He cut off from them in
their former polytheism by what He gave them by way of poll tax from the
people of scripture.^([118](#118))

**Invasion of Palestine Planned (632 CE)**

The apostle sent UsAma to Syria and commanded him to take the cavalry
into the borders of the BalqA’ and al-DArUm in the land of Palestine. 
So the men got ready and all the first emigrants went with UsAma.

While matters were thus the apostle began to suffer from the illness by
which Allah took him to what honour and compassion He intended for him
shortly before the end of Safar or in the beginning of
Rabi‘u’l-awwal. It began, so I have been told, when he went to
Baqi‘u’l-Gharqad in the middle of the night and prayed for the dead. 
Then he returned to his family and in the morning his sufferings
began.^([119](#119))

The apostle found the people tardy in joining the expedition of UsAma b.
Zayd while he was suffering, so he went out with his head bound up until
he sat in the pulpit.  Now people, had criticized the leadership of
UsAma, saying, ‘He has put a young man in command of the best of the
emigrants and the helpers.’ After praising Allah as is His due he said,
‘O men, dispatch UsAma’s force, for though you criticize his leadership
as you criticized the leadership of his father before him he is just as
worthy of the command as his father was.’ Then he came down and the
people hurried on with their preparations.  The apostle’s pain became
severe and UsAma and his army went out as far as al-Jurf, about a stage
from Medina, and encamped there and men gathered to him. When the
apostle became seriously ill UsAma and his men stayed there to see what
Allah would decide about the apostle.^([120](#120))

**Last Will (632 CE)**

The apostle wore a black cloak when he suffered severe pain.  Sometimes
he would put it over his face, at others he would take it off, saying
the while, ‘Allah slay a people who choose the graves of the prophets as
mosques,’ warning his community against such a practice.

On the same authority I was told that the last injunction the apostle
gave was in his words ‘Let not two religions be left in the Arabian
peninsula.’

‘A’isha used to say, ‘When the apostle died the Arabs apostatized and
Christianity and Judaism raised their heads and disaffection
appeared. The Muslims became as sheep exposed to rain on a winter’s
night through the loss of their prophet until Allah united them under
AbU Bakr.’^([121](#121))

**Islam sustained by the Sword (632 CE)**

When the apostle was dead most of the Meccans meditated withdrawing from
Islam and made up their minds to do so.  ‘AttAb b. Asid^([122](#122))
went in such fear of them that he hid himself.  Then Suhayl b. ‘Amr
arose and after giving thanks to Allah mentioned the death of the
apostle and said, ‘That will increase Islam in force.  If anyone
troubles us we will cut off his head.’ Thereupon the people abandoned
their intention and ‘AttAb reappeared once more. This is the stand which
the apostle meant when he said to ‘Umar: ‘It may well be that he will
the a stand for which you cannot blame him.’^([123](#123))

**Conclusion**

Machiavelli who had studied the history of prophets has observed in his
magnum opus that “all well-armed prophets have conquered and the unarmed
failed”.^([124](#124))

In fact, prophets other than Muhammad had arisen in Arabia itself,
before, alongside and after Muhammad.  But all of them had failed
because they did not raise armies and assemble arsenals.  Muhammad
succeeded because he equipped his mission with a mailed fist.  It may be
noted that while he had only 301 ill-equipped warriors with him in the
Battle of Badr (622 CE), he had 10,000 well-equipped men when he marched
into Mecca eight years later (630 CE) and 30,000 when he planned an
invasion of Palestine on the eve of his death (632 CE).

The term ‘*jihAd*’ may have acquired a mystic meaning for Muslims who
believe in Muhammad’s “revelations”, and the divinity of Allah.  But for
the historian who studies recorded facts and uses normal human reason to
reach conclusions, ‘*jihad*’ is no more than physical aggression
preceded by ideological aggression.  
 

**Footnotes: **

------------------------------------------------------------------------


