+++
title = "07 CHAPTER 5 THE ORTHODOX EXPOSITION OF JIHAD"

+++
**CHAPTER 5**

**THE ORTHODOX EXPOSITION OF *JIHAD***

Imam Abu Hanifa, the eighth-century systematizer of Muslim law, is held
in the highest regard by Muslims all over the world.  He is also the
most important authority for Muslims in India, a majority of whom
subscribe to his school (*mazhab*).  And the most outstanding treatise
of his school is the *HidAyah* compiled by Shaykh Burhan-ud-din Ali who
flourished in the 12th century (CE).  The Shaykh claims to have studied
all earlier commentaries on the Quran and the Hadis belonging to the
schools of MAlik, ShAfii and Hanbal, besides that of Hanifa.

The *HidAyah* in its original Arabic is still the standard textbook for
students of *fiqh* (jurisprudence) in famous Muslim seminaries such as
the Dar-ul-Ulum at Deoband.  It was translated into English for the
first time by Charles Hamilton of the East India Company and published
from London in 1791.  A reprint has been brought out recently by a
Muslim publishing house in New Delhi.

This voluminous work deals with all the traditional subjects that are
common to this class of commentaries.  What interests us in the present
context, however, is its Book IX: *The Institutes*.  The translator
observers: “This book contains a chief part of what may be properly
termed the political ordinances of Muhammad and is useful both in a
historical and a legal view - in the former, as it serves to explain the
principles upon which the Arabians proceeded in their first conquests,
(and in which they have been imitated by all successive generations of
Mussulmans), and in the latter, as many of the rules here laid down,
with respect to subjugated countries, continue to prevail, in all of
that description at the present day.”

We shall summarise below some of the chapters from Book IX to show the
character of *jihAd*.  It will be noticed that the learned Shaykh quotes
the Quran and the precedents set by the Prophet, in order to clinch
every point.

**Doctrine of Permanent War**

Chapter I introduces *jihAd* by stating that it “is established as a
divine ordinance, by the word of Allah, who has said, in the Koran,
‘Slay the infidels,’ and also by a saying of the Prophet, ‘War is
permanently established until the day of judgment’.” But it is not “a
positive injunction (*farz-ayn*)” for the individual Muslim and is
“enjoined only for the purpose of advancing the true faith.” If it is
made a “positive injunction,” every Muslim everywhere will have to
engage in war, “in which case the materials for war (such as horses,
armour and so forth) could not be procured.” Therefore, “the sacred
injunction concerning war is sufficiently served when it is carried on
by any one party or tribe of Mussalmans.” On the other hand, if “no one
Mussalman were to make war, the whole of the Mussalmans would incur the
criminality of neglecting it.”

War becomes a “positive injunction” when “infidels invade a Mussalman
territory” and the Imam (leader) of the time “issues a general
proclamation requiring all persons to stand forth and fight.” All. 
Muslims “whether men or women” have to obey the Imam whether he be “a
just or unjust person.” In case the Muslims of the territory invaded
fail to “repulse the infidels,” war becomes a “positive injunction” for
Muslims in the neighbouring lands.  “All the Mussalmans from east to
west” must move into the war by stages, till the “infidels are
repulsed.”

In conclusion, it is stated that “the destruction of the sword (*qatl*)
is incurred by infidels, although they be not the first aggressors, as
appears from various passages in the sacred writings, which are
generally received to this effect.”

**Manner of Waging War**

Chapter II discusses the “manner of waging war.” In principle, Muslims
should not invade an “infidel” territory without first inviting the
“infidels” to embrace Islam or pay *jizyah* (capitation-tax).  The
“infidels” must be made to know that they are being “attacked for the
sake of religion and not for the sake of taking their property, or
making slaves of their children.” War is automatically terminated if the
“infidels” embrace Islam or agree to pay capitation-tax.

In practice, however, the Muslims can mount surprise attacks “on the
infidels, slay them, and take their property.” This breach of principle
invites no censure because “that which protects (namely, Islam) does not
exist in them, nor are they under protection by place,” that is, they
are not citizens of an Islamic state.  It is “laudable” to warn the
“infidels” in advance.  But it is “not incumbent as it appears in the
*Naki Saheeh* that the Prophet plundered and despoiled the tribe of
Mooslick by surprise; and he also agreed with AsAma, to make a predatory
attack upon Cobna at an early hour, and then set it on fire.”

**Slaughter of Women and Children**

Similarly, “slaying of the women or infant children of infidels” is also
prohibited in principle.  But if a Muslim slays them, he invites no
censure.  It may also be noted that slaying of women and children is not
prohibited on grounds of mercy but because they constitute a part of the
plunder of which Muslim conquerors should not be deprived.

**Total War**

If the “infidels” refuse to embrace Islam or pay capitation-tax, Muslims
should attack them “with all manner of warlike engines (as the Prophet
did by the people of Tayeef), and also set fire to their habitations (in
the same manner as the Prophet fired Baweera), and must inundate them
with water, and tear up their plantations, and tread down their grains.”
All these methods are ,4 sanctified by the law” because they weaken the
“infidels”, break their will to resistance and reduce their resources.

**Treatment of the Handicapped**

Disfiguring of people is also prohibited.  Although the Prophet had
“disfigured the Oorneans,” a subsequent “revelation” abrogated the
practice.  Muslims should not slay women or children or men who are aged
or blind or bed-ridden or paralytic or dismembered of the right hand. 
Imam ShAfii disagrees.  He sanctions slaying of all these categories of
“infidels” because, according to him, “infidelity is an occasion of
slaughter being allowable.” In any case, if “infidels” of these
categories get killed in the course of war, it is of no consequence. 
They can also be slain if they “attempt to fight.” A woman who is “a
queen or chief” should be slain for sure because she may cause trouble
if she remains alive.

**A Son can Slay his Father**

It is forbidden to a Muslim to slay his father.  But if the father
happens to be an “infidel” and comes out to fight, the son “should hold
him in view” till someone else comes and kills him.  In case the father
attacks the son, the father can be slain by the son without any
hesitation.

**Strategies of Peace**

Chapter III is on “making peace.” If the Imam \[leader of the jihAd\]
finds that peace with the “infidels” is in the interest of Muslims, he
should agree to it, as the Prophet had done with the “infidels” of
Mecca.  Peace “is war in effect, where the interest of the Mussalmans
requires it.” But when peace is not in the interest of Muslims, it is
not lawful, “as this would be abandoning war, both apparently and in
effect.”

The Imam can also violate a time-bound truce with the “infidels” and go
to war if “it is most advantageous for the Mussalman interest to break
it \[the truce\].” When the circumstances change in favour of the
Muslims, observation of an agreed truce is tantamount to “a desertion of
war, both in appearance and also in effect, and war is an ordinance of
Allah and the forsaking of it is not becoming.”

Making peace with the “infidels” in exchange for property is lawful if
“the Mussalmans stand in need of the property.” But if the property is
not needed by the Muslims, it is not lawful to make peace in exchange
for it, “since peace is a desertion of war, both in appearance and in
effect.” Similarly, if the Muslims are harassed by the “infidels” and
offered peace in exchange for property, the Imam should not make peace
“as this would be a degradation of Mussalman honour.” But if the Muslims
face extermination, it is lawful to purchase peace with property.

**Division of Plunder**

Chapter IV deals with “plunder and the division thereof.” If an
“infidel” country is conquered by force of arms, the Imam can divide it
among the Muslims “in the same manner as the Prophet had divided Kheebir
among his followers.” He can also leave it in the hands of the original
inhabitants, “exacting from them a capitation-tax, and imposing a
tribute on their lands.” He should decide what is best in the
circumstances.  His decision regarding land should also dictate his
disposal of the moveable property of the “infidels”.  If the “infidels”
are to lose their lands, their entire moveable property should also be
taken away from them.  In case they are to continue with the cultivation
of lands, they should be allowed to retain “such a portion of their
moveable property as may enable them to perform their business.”

**War-Prisoners are Part of Plunder **

The Imam has three courses open to him regarding “infidels” captured in
war.  He can put them to death “because the Prophet put captives to
death, and also because slaying them terminates wickedness.” Or, he can
sell them into slavery so that “the evil of them is remedied, at the
same time as the Mussalmans reap an advantage.” Or, he can make them
*zimmis* “according to what is recorded of Omar.” But it is not lawful
“to release the idolaters of Arabia or apostates.” They are to be
slaughtered straight-away.

If the prisoners of war embrace Islam, they should not be put to death. 
But it is lawful to sell them into slavery even after their conversion
“because the reason for making them slaves had existence previous to
their embracing the faith.”

It is not lawful to exchange “infidel” prisoners in Muslim hands with
Muslim prisoners in “infidel” hands.  Such an exchange helps the
“infidels” because the “infidel” prisoners who are released “will again
return to fight the Mussalmans.” On the other hand, if Muslim prisoners
are left in “infidel” hands, the “injury” is confined only to those
Muslims and “does not extend to the other Mussalmans.” Release of
“infidel” prisoners in exchange for property is also unlawful.  But it
can also be considered if the Mussalmans need the property “because the
Prophet released the captives taken at Biddir for a ransom.” An
“infidel” prisoner who embraces Islam can also be exchanged for a Muslim
prisoner in “infidel” hands, provided “there be no apprehension of his
apostatizing.”

Imam ShAfii says that “infidel” prisoners can be released gratuitously
also in order to confer favour upon them.  He cites the example of the
Prophet who had released some captives as a matter of favour after the
Battle of Badr.  But this course of action has been abrogated by “the
text of the Quran” which says, “Slay the idolaters, wherever ye find
them.”

Muslims are free “to feed their cattle with plunder whilst in the
enemy’s country.” They can themselves eat such “plunder as fit food.”
This is in keeping with what the Prophet had said at Khybar, “Eat the
food found in plunder, and feed your cattle with the forage.”

**Sharing the Property of the Converts and the Killed**

If an “infidel” in a hostile land embraces Islam, “his person is his
own... because a Mussalman cannot be subjected to bondage.” His infant
children should also be left with him together with whatever moveable
property he may possess.  The Prophet had said, “whoever becomes a
Mussalman, and is possessed of property in his own hands, such property
belongs to him.” But his immoveable properties “become the property of
the public treasury”, that is, should be treated as plunder.  So also
his wife and “her foetus”, if she happens to be pregnant.

The Imam should keep one-fifth of the plunder for himself and divide the
rest among the soldiers, “as it was thus the Prophet divided it.” There
are many minor details regarding the share of a horseman as compared to
that of a foot-soldier, rewards to be given to women, children and
slaves who helped the army, and “an extraordinary gratuity” to be paid
to *zimmis* who worked as guides.

Gratuity should also be paid to particular persons over and above their
share of plunder, in case they showed special zeal in killing the
“infidels”.  The Imam can make them zealous in fighting by declaring,
“whoever kills an infidel will have his garments.” Allah had commanded
that course to the Prophet in the Quran by saying, “Excite the
believers.”

Imam ShAfii maintains that “the personal effects of the person slain
belong to the slayer.” He quotes the Prophet who had said, “whoever
slays an infidel is entitled to his personal property.” But the Prophet
had also said that “No more appertains to you of the property of the
person you have slain, than your Imam may think proper to allow.” In any
case, it should be remembered that personal property means “whatever may
be found upon the person of the slain, such as clothes, weapons, and
armour, and also the animal upon which he rode, together with the
equipage such as the saddle and so forth, or whatever may be found upon
him in his girdle or pocket, such as purse or gold and so forth.”
Anything carried for him “on another animal by his servant”, is not to
be treated as his personal property.

**The Status *of Zimmis***

Chapter VIII concerns *jizyah* or capitation-tax.  When Muslims conquer
an “infidel” country by force of arms, “the inhabitants, together with
their wives and children are all plunder and property of the state, as
it is lawful to reduce to slavery all infidels.” Imam ShAfii says that
“destruction is incurred by all infidels”, that is, they should be put
to death immediately after they surrender.  But the Quran provides for
capitation-tax by paying which the *kitAbis* (People of the Book) can
buy their lives.  The Prophet had also said, “Take from every male and
female and adult one Deenar or cloth to that value.” All others,
particularly the idolaters (*mushriks*), are “subject to the original
penalty, which is destruction.”

*KitAbis* can become *zimmis* on agreeing to pay capitation-tax.  They
have to live under certain disabilities.  They cannot build new churches
or synagogues.  The rule, however, applies only to cities because “the
tokens of Islam (such as public prayer, festivals, and so forth) appear
in cities.” New places of worship can be built by the *zimmis* in the
villages.  They can also repair old places of worship which fall into
decay.

The *zimmis* should also look distinct from Muslims “in point both of
garments and equipage.” They should not be “allowed to ride upon horses,
or to use armour, or to use the same saddles and wear the same garments
or headgear as the Mussalmans.” The reason for this distinction in dress
and equipage is that “Mussalmans may be held in honour.” If the *zimmis*
look no different, Mussalmans may salute them first, which is
dishonourable.  The *zimmis* should, therefore, be made to wear “a
woollen cord or belt round their waists or outside of their garments.”
In no case should this cord or belt be made of silk.

The wives of *zimmis* should be “kept separate from the wives of
Muslims, both in public roads, and also in the baths.” The *zimmis*
should put some distinctive sign on their houses so that “beggars who
come to their door may not pray for them.” Some theologians recommend
that *zimmis* should not be “permitted to ride at all, except in cases
of absolute necessity.” In any case, a *zimmi* should alight “wherever
he sees any Mussalmans assembled.” Rich *zimmis* should be “Prohibited
from wearing rich garments.”

**The Hadis on *JihAd***

The doctrine of *jihAd* is expounded in numerous books on the Shariat,
as also in collections of *fatwas* such as *FatAwa-I-‘AlamgIri* compiled
in the reign of Aurangzeb.  In India, the “infidels” referred to were
always Hindus.  The only exception was a call for *jihAd* against the
Christian invaders of an Islamic kingdom in India.  The book was written
by Shykh Zeenu’d-Din, a Muslim theologian who lived in the reign of Ali
I Adil Shah (1557-1580 CE) of Bijapur.  His aim was “the arousing of the
faithful to engage in holy warfare against the worshippers of crucifixes
\[Portuguese Christians\]” who were engaged in “infamous machinations
against the religion of Islamism” in Malabar.  We have chosen him also
because he cites in full many sayings of the Prophet recorded in various
collections of Hadis.  We quote him verbatim.

He introduces the doctrine in the following words written in his preface
to the book:

‘Further, the Imam-Ahmud (on whom be peace!) has related on the
authority of Al-Mikdad that he heard the Prophet (for ever blessed) to
exclaim: “There shall not remain a dwelling in the city, or on the
plain, on which Allah shall not cause to descend the word of Islamism,
which shall dignify him \[who is\] already righteous, and condemn him
who lives in sin, to the salvation of the one, and the everlasting ruin
of the other.” For those whom “Allah would exalt, will he make of the
number of true believers, whilst, those whose destruction has been
predetermined, shall seal it by rejecting this holy faith, which
indeed,” said I, “has Allah for its author and its end.” Now be it
known, that Allah most high bath willed, that the faith of Islamism
should flourish throughout the chief of the inhabited regions of the
earth; *in some countries making the sword and compulsion the means of
its dissemination, in others preaching and exhortation*…’^([1](#1))

Coming to the doctrine itself, he continues in the main text:

‘Know then, that infidels shall be regarded in two distinct points of
view.  And first: those who are dwelling peaceably in their own
countries, and against whom if one person only from any party of Moslems
shall go forth to war, the divine co d on this subject will have been
sufficiently observed, and the remainder of his brethren are not called
upon to proceed against them.  But should no one be found thus to offer
himself as the holy champion of his party, then it becomes the duty of
all to arm.  Secondly: The case of infidels who shall invade the
territories of the Moslems, as is now the case in the contest in which
we are engaged.  Now to attack these, becomes an act of paramount duty
for every pious Mahomedan, and for all who would support their religion,
whether bond or free, male for female, of the city or of the plain,
without being dependent on or guided by the consent or refusal of
master, husband, father or creditor, or of any other person to whom he
or she might in other matters owe obedience; since to engage in this
warfare is imperative on every person whether within three days’ journey
of the position of the infidels or beyond that distance; should the
forces of the faithful not be sufficiently strong to admit of their
services being dispensed with.  It is the duty of him who is the leader
in this holy war to take counsel, and concert measures with his
companions, regarding the manner in which hostilities should be carried
on, setting in order their ranks: and, should any plunder fall into
their hands, first causing it to be collected into one place, and
afterwards distributing it, giving the effects of the slain to those by
whose swords they fell.  And regarding this subject of the division of
booty, whatever shall have been the personal property of the infidel
(for instance, his clothes, boots, waistbelt, purse of money, or any
cash or portion of his pay, or rings of silver or gold that shall be
found on his person, with his weapons and horse, and saddle and bridle),
of all these the chief shall make an equal division into five shares. 
Of these shares, one being again divided by him into five portions.  And
of these portions, one shall be set aside for the general good of the
Moslems, to be appropriated in the repairing of breaches, the building
of fortifications and bridges, the raising of mosques, and for defraying
the salaries of Cazees and Imams.  Another shall be given to the
descendants of the Prophet (upon whom be the blessing and peace of
Allah!), to the descendants of Hashum and the descendants of Motalleb. 
One portion shall be distributed amongst those who are orphans, and one
amongst the poor and destitute, in whose number the fakeers shall be
included.  The fifth portion shall go to travellers.  And the four
shares out of five that remain shall be the property of the captors and
those who were present at the time of the battle, and who actually were
engaged in it. Further, he who combats against infidels, should offer up
prayers and supplication to Allah for victory; occupying himself in the
performance of acts of piety, reposing especially his whole trust in
Allah (most high), before engaging in this holy warfare: for Allah it is
who makes to prosper …^([2](#2))

‘Verily, Almighty and all Hallowed, bath said, “It has been written;
that war against infidels is incumbent on you; nevertheless ye are
averse to engage in it. Take care, however, that herein ye do not refuse
that which is profitable for you, and perchance desire that which shall
injure you, for the Lord is omniscient, whilst your understandings are
blinded.”^([3](#3)) Further he said, “Surely Allah has purchased of the
faithful their lives and possessions, in that he has vouchsafed unto
them the blessings of paradise if they will fight for the cause of
Allah; and whether they kill others or be themselves slain, of this the
promises are made sure to them, both by the Tourat, the Injeel, and the
Koran. And who shall be more faithful to his covenant than Allah! 
Rejoice ye, then, in the covenant which ye have made, for by it shall ye
obtain great happiness.”^([4](#4)) And he said, “nose who expend their
wealth in the cause of Allah and to advance his religion, may be
compared to a grain of corn, which produces seven ears, and in each of
which are a hundred grains; for Allah giveth increase where he will, and
is all-bounteous and all-wise.”^([5](#5)) And he said, “Consider not
those who have been slain in the cause of Allah as dead, but rather as
yet alive in the presence of their Allah, being filled with joy for that
of which, by the grace of Allah, they have been thought
worthy, rejoicing for the sake of those who following, have not hitherto
arrived where they themselves are, seeing that both fear and grief are
far from them.”^([6](#6)) And it is related in the Soheih of Bookharee
and Moossellim, upon the authority of Abu-Horeirah (of whom may Allah
approve!), that it was once asked of the Prophet (upon whom may the
blessing and peace of Allah for ever rest!) what act was of all the most
meritorious: he answered, “faith in Allah, and in his prophet; after
this,” added he, “fighting in the cause of religion;” and then,
“pilgrimage to Mecca.” Moreover the same authors, upon the same
authority, have written, that the Prophet (upon whom be the blessing and
peace of Allah!) declared, “Allah has made it incumbent upon him who
goes forth in his cause, that he should do so with firm trust in him,
and with faith in his prophet.  *If he shall return in safety he shall
be rewarded by the plunder which he shall have acquired; but if he shall
be slain, then paradise awaits him*.” Abu-Horeirah also has said, the
Prophet declared (on him be peace!), “I swear by him from whom I have
derived my being, that there exists not amongst the faithful one who can
reject me, and who shall be found to deny that merit which I have
ascribed to fighting for the sake of Allah; and I swear by him in whose
hands is my life, that I not only desire to die in so holy a cause, but
that if I possessed three lives, I would cheerfully resign them all in
the same manner!” Abu Horeirah further says, the Prophet (on whom be
peace!) declared, “He who goes forth to contend for Allah, shall be
considered equal in merit to those who practise upon themselves all the
austerities and bodily mortifications which have been commanded by
Allah; nor shall the holy warrior be considered to have omitted either
prayer or self-discipline whilst he shall be absent in this warfare.”
Further, on the authority of the same associate, the Prophet (on him be
peace!) is declared to have said, “There has no one been wounded in
fighting for Allah but that it is known to Allah, and who shall not
appear on the last day; from whose wound also the blood that flows shall
be of a golden hue, and its odour that of musk.” Anas moreover has
related that the Prophet (on him be peace!) declared, “Although to fight
in the cause of Allah is a service of mortal danger, yet of all things
in the world it is the best which a man can perform, and shall afford
the most satisfaction.” Further, said he, the Prophet (on him be peace!)
declared, “There is no one who has found admission into paradise, who
would desire to return again into the world, except it were that he
might find the glorious death of a martyr; for nothing could be an
inducement to him to leave the happiness of paradise for this world,
unless he could for ten times make surrender of his life for Allah.”
Also Jaber (Allah rest satisfied with him!), relates, that a man said to
the Prophet (on him he peace!) on the fatal day of Ohod, “O thou
Prophet! I discern that my death draws nigh, where shall my spirit be?”
He answered, “in paradise.” On hearing this, the warrior cast from him
the dates that were in his hands, and rushing into the conflict, fought
desperately until he was slain.  And Sahal Ben-Saad relates, that the
Prophet (on him be peace and blessing!) declared, “To sit astride your
horse, for one day in contending for Allah, is a higher satisfaction
than all else that the world can afford.” Abu Moosa also relates, that
one came to the Prophet (on whom be the blessing and peace of Allah!)
and asked, “the man who slays to obtain plunder, or he who fights to
perpetuate his fame, or he who enters the combat in order that he may
obtain martyrdom and behold the place prepared for him, which of these
three fights most for Allah, and serves him in the truest way?” He
answered, “He who fights in observance of the word of Allah, he it is
who is before all, and he who renders to Allah the most faithful
service.” And Abu Saud-ul-Hazree relates, that the Prophet (on him be
peace!) declared, “He of all mankind is the most righteous whose faith
is sincere, and who freely expends his life and substance in fighting
for Allah.” Bookharee also, upon the authority of Abu Horeirah, that the
Prophet (on him be peace!) declared, “Verily, in paradise there are a
hundred degrees of elevation, and each distinct; and Allah has promised
to those who fight for his sake, the intermediate space between one
degree and the other, as the space which exists between the heavens and
the earth.  When Allah shall enquire of you, which degree ye desire,
then answer ye, ‘Firdoos, since it is in the centre of paradise, and
situated in the most delightful and exalted part of it; above being the
throne of the All-merciful, and out of it the rivers of paradise
flowing.” Further, Abu-Abas has related, that the Prophet (on him be
peace!) declared, “He who shall not arouse himself from slumber, and
exert himself in the service of Allah, him shall the fire of hell
receive.” And Abu-Kais also says, “I heard Saad relate, that he, with
certain Arabs (of whom he was chief) had gone out to fight for Allah
against unbelievers, the Prophet (on whom be peace!) being also of their
company; and no food being procurable, except the leaves of trees, one
of their party devoured a quantity of these, equal to what a camel or
sheep would eat, nevertheless he suffered no harm!” Moreover Abu
Horeirah (Allah rest satisfied with him!) related, that the Prophet (on
him be peace!) declared, “He who shall bestow a horse upon one who would
enlist himself under the banner of the Most High, and be one who has
faith in Allah and in his promises, surely both the food of that horse
and the sustenance of his rider, with the ordure of the former, shall be
placed in the scales for his advantage on the day of judgment.”
Moossellim further relates from that commentator (Abu Horeirah), that
the Prophet (on him be peace!) declared, “He who shall die without
having fought for Allah, or who never proposed that duty to himself,
verily consigns himself to destruction by his hypocrisy.” Again, “The
infidel, and he who slays him, shall not be gathered in the fire
together!” Again, “Of mankind he is the most meritorious, who shall urge
on his horse when fighting for Allah; flying forward, as it were, upon
his back; disregardless of whatever shall reach his hearing, although
horrible; neither being averted by any sounds of lamentation that shall
assault him, although so terrible, indeed, as to frighten away from him
all sense of death and destruction: for neither the man who shall seize
upon the plunder of infidels (and whose head shall be almost turned with
his good fortune), or he who in the solitude of the desert shall mortify
his body by rigid privations and prayer, and so shall have obtained full
knowledge of Allah, shall be compared with him first spoken of, although
they shall not be without their reward.” And Jabir Ben Surmah relates,
that the Prophet (on him be peace!) declared, “Verily the true faith
shall stand first, and the wearers of the turbans shall fight in defence
of it until the last day.” Soliman the Persian also relates, that he
heard the Prophet (on him be peace!) declare, “To urge forward a horse
in this holy warfare for one night and one day, is better than fasting
for a whole month, or than the practice of rigid watchfulness during all
that time.  Now if when so engaged he shall be slain, he has
accomplished that for which he lived, and has obtained a provision for
himself, being placed beyond the reach of all further perfidy and
trouble.” And Akbat Ben Aamir relates: “I heard the Prophet (on him be
peace!) when mounted in the pulpit, exclaim, O Moslems, promise that
only which ye are able to perform, for instance, the exertion of your
strength and skill in shooting arrows.  Your archery it is that I
require; your archery only will serve me.” Further he said: “I heard the
Prophet (on him be peace!) declare, He who learnt the art of archery and
afterwards neglected it, is not of our number.” Again Abu Masood-ul
Ansaree relates, that a man approaching the Prophet with a bridled camel
in his hand said to him, “This I devote to the service of Allah;”
whereupon the Prophet exclaimed (on him be peace!), “Unto thee on the
day of the resurrection shall seven hundred camels be given, all of them
bridled.” Musrooh relates, also: “We asked of Abdullah Ben Masood
regarding the following saying: ‘Ye shall not consider those who have
been slain in the cause of Allah as dead, but rather as yet alive in the
presence of their Allah, enjoying that which has been provided for
them.”^([7](#7))  He answered, ‘We indeed inquired of the Prophet
regarding this saying, when he declared to us, - Their, spirits are in
the belly of the green bird, to enlighten which candles are suspended
from the throne of Allah (by which is implied paradise), where all
desires are fulfilled.  Then they (these spirits) shall desire the
sights of these candles, when Allah shall make visible to them his
etherical presence, to the extent of their capability of discernment. 
For when Allah said, ‘what desire ye?’ they answered, ‘what can we
desire, we who are placed in paradise, where all our wishes are
anticipated.’ Then Allah spoke to them after the same manner three
times; and when they perceived that he had ceased to address them, they
prayed to him, saying: ‘O Lord, we desire that our souls may return
again to their bodies, in order that we may again surrender up our lives
for thy sake.’ But He, the Almighty, knowing that this was not necessary
for them, ceased to converse with them.” And upon the authority of
Abdullah Ben Omar Ben Aas, it is related, that the Prophet (on him be
peace!) declared, “In the conflict for the cause of Allah all earthly
things shall perish, save only the true faith.” Anas also relates.  “I
had gone forth with the Prophet and with his companions, when he was
attacked by the infidels, who furiously assaulted him.  Then the Prophet
(blessing and peace be upon him!) exclaimed: ‘Prepare ye to enter
paradise, which exceeds in expanse both heaven and earth.’ The Amir
Ben-al-Himam upon this cried out, ‘Huzzah, Huzzah!’ The Prophet demanded
(on him be peace!) ‘What meanest thou in thus shouting, Huzzah! 
Huzzah?’ He answered: ‘O Prophet, I take Allah to witness that I so
exclaimed, only from the hope that is before me of becoming one of the
inhabitants of paradise.’ The Prophet replied, ‘Behold! thou art already
one.’ He added, ‘Cast from thee the dates that thou holdest in thy hand,
in order that thou mayest partake of those that thou shalt find in
paradise.’ Further, the Prophet said, ‘I also would desire of those
dates prepared for me, and which shall give life without end.’ Al-Himam
exclaimed, ‘Thou hast said truly:’ and thereupon throwing from him the
dates that he had in his hand, he rushed forward to the combat, slaying
all around him, till he himself fell.” Further Tirmuzee and Abu Daood
have related, upon the authority of Fuzalut-Ben-Abeed, that the Prophet
(on him be peace!) exclaimed, “Whenever one shall resign his breath, at
that hour his work is finished; except him only who dies when charging
the enemies of Allah, and whose account shall not be closed until the
last day, who shall be delivered also from the purgatory of the grave.”
Again Abu Daood, from Abu-Humamah, relates that the Prophet (on him be
peace!) declared, “He who has not fought for Allah, and has not given of
his substance to those who have, or who has dissuaded any one of his
people from that meritorious work, Allah verily has cast that person
into hell-fire already, not reserving him for the last day.”
Imam-Ben-Hussain has related also, that the Prophet (on him be peace!)
declared, “There shall always remain for me a tribe of my people, who
shall fight and slay in the cause of truth, and whose exterior shall
give evidence of their inward feelings, until that time when they shall
last of all destroy the Antichrist.” And Tirmuzee relates, upon the
authority of Ibn-Abbas, that the Prophet (on him be peace!) declared,
“There are two descriptions of eyes, which the fire of hell shall not
destroy; the eyes that weep in contemplating the indignation of Allah,
and the eyes which are closed when in the act of combat for the cause of
Allah.” Again Abu-Horeirah; that one of the associates of the Prophet
(on him be peace!) when proceeding to battle, having turned aside into a
cave in which were grapes and a limpid stream, exclaimed, “If those who
are my companions will excuse me from proceeding with them further, I
will take up my dwelling in this cave.” On his saying this before the
Prophet (on him be peace!), he answered, “Thou shalt not do this, for
*the merit of all of you who go out to fight for Allah, is greater than
what ye could acquire, if ye were to spend seventy years in offering up
prayers in the house of Allah*:^([8](#8)) for if, indeed, ye desire to
be forgiven of Allah, and to be hereafter admitted into paradise, then
must ye go forth to fight for Allah, since he who in this holy warfare
shall wound but a she-camel, he is truly deserving of paradise.”
Further, Abu-Tirmuzee and Al-Nusaeee, upon the authority of
Abu-Horeirah, relate that the Prophet (on whom be peace!) declared, “He
who falls a martyr experiences none of the pangs of death; except,
indeed, it be such sensations as men experience when surprised by joy.”
And Haram-Ben-Ateek relates, that the Prophet (on him be peace!)
declared, “He who shall bestow any of his substance in the cause of
Allah, or for the support of his religion, there shall be written down
for him seven hundred-fold.” And Ibn-Inajih has related it upon the
authority of Alee, and Abu Adruda, and Abu Horeirah, and Abu-Amamah, and
Abdullah-Ben-Omar, and Ben-Abdullah, and Imran Ben-Hoossain (with all of
whom may Allah rest satisfied! and who all agree in this account), that
the Prophet (on him be peace!) declared, “He who has contributed of his
wealth to those who fight for Allah, and remained at home, for every
dirhem that he has so expended, he shall receive seven hundred-fold.”
And after declaring this, he recited the following saying: “For Allah
shall give increase where he will, He who is all beneficent and all
wise.” And Abu-Daood has related upon the authority of Ibn-Abbas (Allah
rest satisfied with him!) that the Prophet (on him be peace!) declared
to his associates, “When your brethren were slain on the day of Ohod,
Allah transported their souls into the belly of the green bird, from
whence the rivers of paradise flow forth, and where they partake of its
fruits, and behold the candles of Allah suspended in the shadow of his
throne.  Now when they perceived the purity and sweetness of their food
and drink, and the pleasantness of their places of rest, they exclaimed,
‘Oh! where shall we find one who shall carry intelligence to our
brethren on earth that we are in paradise, where the practice of
mortifications is not required, or the seventies of war experienced.’
And Allah, most High, whose name be praised, made answer, ‘I will
disclose this for your sakes.’ Therefore, Allah most High revealed that,
saying, ‘Consider not those as dead who have fallen in the cause of
Allah, but as yet living:’” - besides many other passages of the same
import.  Further, Hakim relates, from Abu-Moosa Al-Asharee, that the
Prophet (on him be peace!) declared - “*in the shades of the scimitars
is paradise prefigured*.” And Ibn-Majah has narrated it from Anas, that
the Prophet (on him be the blessing and the peace of Allah!) declared,
“He who shall resign his life in the cause of Allah, whatever pollutions
he shall have collected about him shall be changed into musk on the last
day.” Al-Tibranee also has related it, (in the Kubeer), on the authority
of Ibn-Omar, that the Prophet (on him be peace!) declared, “*He who
shall a afflict his head with pain in the cause of Allah, whatever crime
was before this lying at his charge, shall now be pardoned*.” And
Waellah relates, that the Prophet (on him be peace!) declared, “Whoever
has lost his life in my cause may hereafter contend in the
deep.”^([9](#9)) Ad-Dillumee also, in his work called the
Musnud-al-Firdous, relates, that Abu-Horeirah said, that the Prophet (on
him be peace!) declared, “*that to fight for one hour in supporting the
religion of Allah, was better than to make fifty pilgrimages to Mecca*.”
By which he meant to say, that the future reward that shall await the
first act shall exceed that awarded to pilgrimages, however many in
number.  And the cause of this pre-eminence being given to the holy
warrior is this, that he truly risks his life and all that he possesses
for the sake of Allah, whilst others also reap the advantage of this
self-devotion, which cannot be said of pilgrimages to Mecca, where the
benefit extends no further than to the pilgrim himself.’^([10](#10))

**Conclusion**

This is the authentic exposition of *jihAd* to which many passages of
the Writ Petition refer.  It is a far cry from the “defensive war” it
has been made into by S.D. Collet in her *Life and Letters of Raja
Rammohan Roy*, quoted by the Attorney-General of India in his
submissions and commanded by Justice Basak in his judgment.  There
should be no doubt that jihAd is an out and out aggressive war to be
waged by Muslims, ceaselessly and in an uncompromising manner, for the
total destruction of non-Muslims.  Of course, there is provision in it
for change of strategy and tactics to suit the size of Muslim strength
in a given situation.  But that does not affect its essential character.

**True Character of the Quran**

The fact is that the Quran can pass as a religious scripture only so
long as its verses are not related to their concrete context in the life
of the Prophet.  Once we learn to do that from the theologians of Islam,
the Quran comes out in its true colour as a comprehensive compendium on
continued and total war against the “infidels”.  Allah also drops his
mask and shows up in his real role as a deux *ex machina* prompted to
pronounce pieces which suit the stage-manager’s convenience.  Swami
Dayananda saw through the whole game when he nailed down Allah as
“Muhammad’s domestic servant”.

The swordsmen of Islam have always felt self-righteous and believed
fervently that they are carrying out the commandments of Allah when they
practise *jihAd* as per prescriptions of the Prophet.  The Quran gives
them a clean conscience for committing the most heinous crimes and
heaping unbelievable cruelties on helpless human beings.  
 

**Footnotes: **

^(^([1](#1a))Tuhfat-ul-Mujahideen translated from Arabic by M.J. Rowlandson, London, 1933, pp. 3-5.  Emphasis added. )

^(^([2](#2a))Ibid., pp. 15-21. )

^(^([3](#3a))Quran, 2.216. )

^(^([4](#4a))Quran, 9.111. )

^(^([5](#5a))Quran, 2.261. )

^(^([6](#6a))Quran, 3.169-70. )

^(^([7](#7a))Quran, 3.169. )

^(^([8](#8a))The temple or sacred mosque of Mecca is probably here meant. )

^(^([9](#9a))The allusion in this passage is obscure.  The Prophet’s meaning probably is, that having thus established his devotion and courage, he is prepared to meet any danger.  The sea, from the monsters that inhabit it, is generally quoted by eastern writers as the climax of all that is horrible.)

^(^([10](#10a))Tuhfat-ul-Mujahideen, pp. 25-46.  Emphases added.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------


