+++
title = "12 CHAPTER 10 A CLOSE LOOK AT ALLAH OF THE QURAN"

+++
**CHAPTER 10**

**A CLOSE LOOK AT ALLAH OF THE QURAN**

The one name which Muslims hate and fear most is that of Chengiz Khan. 
He is a spectre which has haunted Muslim historians for centuries.  He
swept like a tornado over the then most powerful and extensive Islamic
empire of Khwarazm.  In a short span of five years (1219-1224 CE), he
slaughtered millions of Muslims, forced many others including women and
children into slavery, and razed to the ground quite a few of the most
populous and prosperous cities of the Muslim world at that time.

Muslim and Mongol historians have preserved a record of Chengiz Khan’s
doings in region after region and city after city.  We present some of
that record in order to point out how closely it resembles the record of
*jihAds* waged by Muslim swordsmen in India and elsewhere.

**Cities on the Jaxartes Frontier**

“There was no army to dispute the passage of the Jaxartes with Chengiz. 
He despatched Juji against *Jund*, his second and third sons, Chaghatai
and Ogtai, against *Otrar*; and his other officers against *Khojend,
Fanakat*, etc.; while he personally proceeded against *Samarqand* and
*Bukhara*.  Otrar was defended by Ghayir Khan with an army of 60,000;
the city resisted for five months after which Ghayir’s subordinate,
Qaracha, surrendered with his men in the hope of mercy but was put to
death.  The inhabitants, ‘both wearers of the veil and those who wore
*kulah* (hat) and turbans’ were taken out of the city, while the Mongols
plundered their houses.  Young men were picked up for the levy (*hashr*)
and the artisans for service.  Ghayir Khan retreated into the ark with
20,000 soldiers.  They held out for another month and died fighting.  No
other city in Trans-Oxiana was able to hold out for so long.  Juji sent
a Muslim merchant, Haji Hasan, who had long been in Chengiz’s service,
to ask the citizens of *Sughnaq* to submit.  But some persons attacked
Haji with cries of *Allah-O-Akbar* and put him to death. In retaliation
for this, the Mongols slaughtered the whole population in seven
days.^([1](#1))

“*Fanakat*: The garrison led by Iltegu Malik fought for three days and
then asked for quarter.  All soldiers were put to death but the civil
population, apart from the artisans and the young men required for the
levy, was spared.  *Khojend*: Timur Malik, the commander, fortified
himself in an island and then escaped to the Khwarazm Shah after a
series of heroic exploits, but *Khojend* shared the fate of other cities
and its young men were drafted into the *hashr* (levy). Here the number
of the levy is given as 50,000 while the Mongol army was
20,000.^([2](#2))

**Bukhara and Samarqand**

“Though Samarqand was nearer, Chengiz decided to proceed first against
Bukhara by way of Zarnaq and Nur.  Both cities surrendered and were
treated in the usual Mongol manner…  The citadel of Bukhara was in
charge of Kok Khan, a Mongol who had fled from Chengiz and taken service
with the Sultan. Kok decided to fight to the bitter end, but the
citizens preferred to submit and sent their religious representatives to
invite Chengiz into the town…^([3](#3))

“But the problem of Kok Khan and the garrison in the *ark* remained. 
They were fighting to sell their lives as dear as possible and sallied
forth against the Mongols both day and night.  Now the houses of Bukhara
were made entirely of wood, apart from the Juma mosque and a few
palaces; consequently, when Chengiz ordered the houses near the *ark* to
be set on fire, the whole city was consumed by the flames.  Ultimately
the *ark* was captured and all soldiers were put to death.  Further, as
to the Qanqali Turks, all male children who stood higher than the butt
of a whip, were put to death, and more than thirty thousand corpses were
counted, ‘while their smaller children and the children of their
notables and their women-folk, slender as the cypress, were reduced to
slavery.’ All the civil inhabitants of Bukhara, male and female, were
brought out to the plain of Musalla, outside the city; the young and the
middle-aged, who were fit for service in the levy against Samarqand were
picked up, and the rest were spared.  When Chengiz left the place,
‘Bukhara was level plain.’^([4](#4))

“The Sultan had thrown a garrison of 60,000 Turks and 50,000 Tajiks into
Samarqand and strengthened its defence.  It was thought that ‘Samarqand
could stand a siege of some years’; so Chengiz decided to subdue the
country round Samarqand first, and when he had finished doing so, the
fate of Samarqand was sealed.  Chengiz did not fight for two days after
he had encircled the city; on the third and fourth day there was some
fighting; on the fifth day the civil population sent its Qazi and
Shaikhul Islam to offer its submission.  The city-ramparts were pulled
down and next day the citadel was captured between the morning and
afternoon prayers.  About thirty thousand Qanqalis and Turks with some
twenty high amirs of the Sultan were put to death; but some fifty
thousand people whom the Qazi and the Shikhul Islam had taken under
their protection were left unmolested.  The rest of the population was
taken out and counted, while their houses were plundered.  Some thirty
thousand men were selected for their craftsmanship and an equal number
for the levy…

**Khwarazm**

“The citizens refused to submit.  ‘They opposed the Mongols in all the
streets and quarters of the town; in every lane they engaged in battle
and in every *cul-de-sac* they resisted stoutly... The greater part of
the town was destroyed; the houses with their goods and treasures were
but mounds of earth and the Mongols despaired of benefiting from the
stores of their wealth.’ When the Mongols succeeded in capturing the
town, which now lay in shambles, they drove the people into the open;
more than a hundred thousand craftsmen were selected and sent to the
countries of the east; the children and young women were taken away as
captives. Order was given for the rest to be slaughtered; every Mongol
soldier had to execute twenty-four persons…^([5](#5))

**Campaign by Yeme and Subetai**

“The mission of these two brothers was to capture the Sultan \[of
Khwarazm\] alive; in this they failed.  But Subetai succeeded in
capturing Turkan Khatun and the Sultan’s *haram* in the Mazendaran
castle of llal along with his wazir, Nasiruddin.  When they were brought
before Chengiz at Taliqan, he had Nasiruddin tortured and all the male
sons of the Sultan put to death…  Their army of 30,000 was really
insufficient for the conquest of the region, and very often Yeme and
Subetai had to march separately. They resorted to massacres wherever
they could, in order to create an atmosphere of terror in which
provisions may be forthcoming…^([6](#6))

**Merv**

“All the inhabitants of Merv, both men and women, were brought out, kept
on the plain for four days and nights and then ordered to be put to
death.  Every Mongol soldier had to execute three to four hundred
persons.  One Saiyyid Izzuddin Nasseba, along with some friends who had
escaped the massacre, passed thirteen days and nights in counting such
corpses as they could easily discover.  The total came to one million
and three hundred thousand (February 1221). This does not seem to be an
exaggerated figure in view of the fertility of the Merv valley.  But
people collected in the city again and again and were repeatedly
destroyed…^([7](#7))

**Naishapur**

“While Tului was attacking Merv, Toghachar Kurgen, a son-in-law of
Chengiz, appeared before Naishapur with an army of 10,000.  He was shot
dead by a stray arrow and apologists for Mongol misdeeds have found in
this a justification for the complete destruction of Naishapur.  While
waiting for Tului’s arrival, Toghachar’s army withdrew to attack smaller
towns.  Sabzwar (also called Baihaq) was captured after three days of
severe fighting, a general massacre was ordered and 70,000 corpses were
counted.  Two other cities, Nuqan and Qar, were also conquered and their
inhabitants slaughtered.  Tului on his arrival refused to accept the
submission of Naishapur.  So the battle commenced on Wednesday (7 April
1221) and by Saturday the city-ramparts were in Mongol hands.  All the
inhabitants were brought out and slaughtered; Toghachar’s wife then
entered the city with her escort and slew those who had survived.  Even
cats and dogs were not spared.  ‘The only inhabitants of Naishapur left
alive were forty artisans, who were taken to Turkistan on account of
their skill.  For seven days and nights water was flown into the city so
that barley may be sown there. It is said in some histories that the
dead were counted for twelve days and that there were one million and
forty thousand corpses, apart from the corpses of women and
children…^([8](#8))

**Herat**

“Ilchikdai succeeded in reducing Herat after a siege of six months and
seventeen days and forced his way into the city on a Friday morning (AD
1222).  ‘For seven days the Mongols devoted themselves exclusively to
killing, burning and destroying the buildings.  A little less than one
million and six hundred thousand of the inhabitants were
martyred.’ Ilchikdai then proceeded against the fort of Kaliwayan, but
he sent back a Mongol contingent of 10,000, who put to death about a
hundred thousand Musalmans who had collected at Herat again.”^([9](#9))

**Commandments of Tengiri**

We are not mentioning here the horrors heaped by Halaku Khan, the
grandson and successor of Chengiz, who inherited the Mongol empire west
of the Jaxartes.  He sacked many more cities in Iran, Iraq and Syria,
destroyed the hideout of the assassins at Almut, killed the last Abbasid
Caliph in the most cruel manner, and levelled with the ground the holy
city of Baghdad which had been the capital of Islamdom for five hundred
years.  The story is far more blood-soaked than that enacted by Chengiz
Khan.

Few people, Muslim or non-Muslim, apart from specialists of Mongol
theology and history, suspect that Chengiz Khan did what he did not, “on
his own” but “on orders” from his “One God whom they called *Tengiri or
Tengiri*.”^([10](#10))  Professor Mohammad Habib, who has studied
Mongolian lore on the subject, sums up the situation.  “Chengiz Khan,”
he writes, “who sincerely believed that *Il* had given him and his
family and his officers the commission to dominate the world for all
time and that defiance of him was resistance to a clear order of
*Tengiri*, must have been delighted when he heard thaTengirit he would
have to face no field-force and that the enormous Khwarazmian army had
been divided and sealed up in the inner citadels of cities or put on the
top of inaccessible hill forts.”^([11](#11))  We come across similar
sentiments in medieval Muslim historians when they thank Allah for
having bottled up the Hindu rajas in fortified cites or citadels.

Professor Habib adds: “Chengiz Khan was prepared to kill as many
Musalmans as may be necessary and, to be on the safe side, a lot more. 
In any case, it was *Tengiri’s* order; consequently, Chengiz in clear
conscience was not responsible.  This reign of terror through wholesale
massacres was warning to all mankind; there was nothing secret about
it.  Chengiz and his successors wanted it to be advertised to the whole
world. Consequently, the official historians of the Mongols, like
Juwayni and Rashiduddin, while justifying these massacres as due to
‘disobedience and revolt’, are careful in explaining their exact
character and extent.”^([12](#12))Chengiz Khan himself told the Muslim
magnates of Bukhara that “I am the punishment of God; if you had not
committed great sins, God would not have sent a punishment like me upon
you.”^([13](#13))

**Mongol Historians vis-à-vis Muslim Historians**

It may be pointed out that medieval Muslim historians such as Al-Utbi,
Hasan Nizami, Abdullah Wassaf, Amir Khusru and Muhammad Qasim Firishtah,
from all of whom we have quoted, belong to the same blood-thirsty tribe
as the Mongol historians.  They wrote glowing accounts of *jihAd*, not
so much out of admiration for their heroes as in order to proclaim to
the world the fate that awaited those who did not worship Allah of the
Quran.  These historians also use expressions such as “disobedience and
revolt (*sarkashi*)” for which Allah was punishing the “accursed
*kAfirs*” of Hindustan.  We do not find a trace of pity or sorrow or
sympathy in these historians while they dilate on stories of slaughter,
pillage, plunder and the plight of women and children.  On the contrary,
they derive immense satisfaction from describing the most dreadful
scenes of death and devastation.  Timur and his lineal as well as
spiritual descendant, Babur, were convinced that they could not leave to
mere court scribes the sacred task of recording what the sweep of their
swords did in the service of Allah.  So they themselves took time from
their crowded schedules and wrote or dictated the record with
considerable relish.  As one reads these royal historians describing the
scenes of bloodshed and rapine they enacted, one can almost see them
licking their lips as if after a hearty meal following upon a keen
appetite.

**How Chengiz Khan communicated with Tengiri**

Minhajus Siraj, the famous historian who wrote in the middle of the
thirteenth century, was in his teens when Chengiz Khan let loose his
blood-thirsty hordes on the Muslim world.  Later in life, he met persons
who had seen from close quarters the performance of the Mongol
conqueror. His religious predisposition led Minhaj to believe that “some
satans had become his \[Chengiz Khan’s\] friends.”^([14](#14)) But in
spite of this strong prejudice, he has left for posterity a faithful
pen-portrait of Chengiz Khan receiving “revelations” from Tengiri.  He
writes in his TabqAt-i-NAsiri: “After every few days he would have a fit
and during his unconsciousness he would say all sorts of things.  It was
like this.  When he had his first fit and the satans, after overpowering
his mind, informed him of his forthcoming victory, he put the clothes
and the cloak he was then wearing in a sealed bag and carried it about
with him.  Whenever this fit was about to overpower him, (he would put
on these clothes) and talk about every event, victory, campaign, the
appearance of his enemies, and the conquest of the territories he
wanted.  Someone would write down all he said, put (the papers) in a bag
and seal them. When Chengiz recovered consciousness, everything was read
out to him and he acted accordingly.  Generally, in fact always, his
designs were successful.”^([15](#15))

**Chengiz Khan’s “*Fit*” compared with Muhammad’s “*Wahy*”**

Chengiz Khan’s “*fit*” for getting into contact with Tengiri resembles,
rather too closely to be missed, the “*wahy*” in which Allah
communicated the Quran to the prophet of Islam.  One wonders what it
would have read like if Chengiz Khan or his followers had cared to
compile in a Book all that Tengiri told him before he breathed his last
in 1227 CE at the age of 63.  For all we know, it might have been
another version of the Quran, at least so far as it concerns aggression
against other people’s lands, cutting the heads of those who resist the
aggression, plundering their properties, destroying their dwelling
places, and selling their women and children into concubinage and
slavery.

**Another Quran, but…**

It is only in one respect that the *Quran* revealed by Tengiri might
have differed from the *Quran* revealed by Allah.  It seems that, quite
unlike Allah, Tengiri was not intolerant towards revelations other than
his own.  Professor Habib writes: “The Musalmans, whom Chengiz Khan
murdered in such enormous numbers, were surprised at his belief in *his*
God and at his undoubted tolerance in religious matters.  Having no
priests of their own, the leaders of steppe society were remarkably
tolerant to the priests of all other cults - Muslim, Christian, Taoist,
Buddhist…  they were expected to pray in their own way… Lastly, the
Mongols had no objection to intermarriage, and even Chengiz Khan gave
one of his daughters in marriage to a Muslim chief, Arsalan Khan of
Kayaliq.”^([16](#16)) Again: “In the precincts of Samarqand he \[Chengiz
Khan\] is said to have had discussions with two Muslim scholars and
expressed his agreement with the Islamic belief in Allah and all its
four rites except the Haj.  ‘God is everywhere, and you can find him
everywhere’.”^([17](#17))

This was definitely an improvement on the decrees of Allah who has
commanded his faithful to go out first for the priests and religious
places of other people; who has forbidden on pain of death the marriage
of a Muslim to a non-Muslim unless the latter is first converted to the
“only true faith”, and who has stated in so many words his marked
partiality for the mosque at Mecca (Ka‘ba).

On the other hands, Tengiri was as particular as Allah that the mutual
relations among the Mongols should be guided by a stem code of conduct. 
Minhajus Siraj records: “The justice of Chengiz Khan was so severe that
no one except the owner had the courage to pick up a whip that had
fallen by the road-side. Lying and theft were things quite unknown in
his army and no one could find any trace of them.”^([18](#18))  We are
reminded of the strict rules which Allah has laid down in the Quran
regarding the conduct of one Muslim towards another.

And that brings us to the crucial and quintessential question.

**Evaluation of Allah**

Should we cite *only* the stem code which the Mongols observed among
themselves and proclaim that Tengiri stood for stark honesty and
straight truth in human relations?  Should we ignore or overlook the
gruesome fate which Tengiri had decreed for the Muslims, their lives,
their honour, their women and children, their cities and their
properties?  Should we proclaim that Tengiri was something divine and
that Chengiz Khan who carried out his commandments quite faithfully
should be hailed as a hero?

Yet that is exactly what the votaries of Allah do themselves and want us
to do.  They cite certain rules which Allah had revealed regarding
sharing of plunder among the Muslims or pertaining to their
participation in congregational prayers, and want us to believe that
Allah stands for social equality and human brotherhood!  At the same
time, we are advised not even to notice the barbarities which Allah
wants the Muslims to heap on the non-Muslims.  And if we fail to respond
positively and try to judge Allah not in terms of isolated *Ayats* but
on the basis of the Quran as a whole, we run the risk of being run down
as bigots, as lacking in respect for the religion of a sister
community!  The logic which declares Tengiri to be a satan and denounces
Chengiz Khan as an archcriminal but which, in the same breath, proclaims
Allah as divine and hails the Ghaznavis, Ghuris, Timurs and Baburs as
heroes, is, to the say the least, worse than casuistry.

The Quran can claim to be derived from a “divine source” only if we
concede Allah’s claim to be divine.  But the Quran itself provides ample
evidence that its Allah is quite a questionable character even by
ordinary ethical standards, not to speak of spiritual standards. 
Theologians of Islam have got away with the plea that the Quran has a
“divine source” simply because its Allah has not yet been subjected to
the scrutiny he deserves on account of his role in human history.  He
will continue to torment mankind till he is found out for what he is,
and exorcised from minds on which he has acquired a stranglehold.

**Failure in Finding Out Allah of the Quran**

Christian scholars of Islam have failed to nail down Allah of the Quran
because he is the re-incarnation, under another name, of Jehovah whom we
meet in the Bible.  They only reject Muhammad as a prophet and call him
an impostor, which is quite dishonest if we keep in mind the biblical
prophets, particularly Moses.

The scholars of European Enlightenment who were influenced by Hindu,
Chinese, Greek and Roman traditions of spirituality and culture, have
judged Jehovah quite correctly and identified him as the main source of
darkness which prevailed in Europe during the Middle Ages.  But they
have so far neglected Allah of the Quran and not weighed him in the same
balance of rationalism, humanism and universalism on which Jehovah was
weighed and found wanting.

Hindus have been the worst in their neglect of Allah of the Quran who
has plagued them for more than thirteen hundred years.  Hindu scholars
and saints have been equating him with *ParamAtman*, even with
*Parabrahma*, without finding out, in the first place, whether Allah of
the Quran is at all equal to the comparison.  As a corollary, they have
been hailing the Quran as a “divine revelation” and Islam as a
“*dharma*”.  They feel perplexed only by the Muslim behaviour pattern
which does not square with the expectations they have built round these
eulogies.  Hindu politicians have continued to cherish the fond belief
that they can manage the Muslims and draw them into the national
mainstream by fawning upon the Quran and glorifying its Allah.  But that
Allah has so far frustrated all their hopes.

The story of Tengiri we have cited may help Hindus in general and Hindu
scholars, saints and politicians in particular, to see the prototype and
start having a close look at Allah of the Quran.  It may also help them
to see the truth about revelatory or prophetic or biblical creeds.  The
biblical prophets have revealed nothing divine, nothing derived from a
supracosmic or superhuman source.  They have only revealed themselves,
that is, the ordinary human nature which is brimful of dark drives.  In
fact, the ordinary man has always been more honest about his animal
appetites.  The biblical prophets, on the other hand, start by deceiving
themselves and end by deceiving others when they dress up the same
appetites in pretentious language and pass them off as impersonal
revelations.  
 

**Footnotes: **

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[](index.htm)**


