+++
title = "05 FROM JUSTICE, LORD, DELIVER US!"

+++

La jhustic', moun amit, e coum' les arenteles: 0 prend reinq' les mussets, le tuon peurc' la toeIe. 

-SAINTONGE PROVERB 

ONE SOLID REASON for the peasant's abiding suspicion of all corners lay in the devastating intrusions of the alien law and its representatives into his world. Adolphe Blanqui, very far from a radical, called lawmen the true scourge of rural populations. The rural populations evidently agreed. In the Limousin the farmer's evening prayers would long include the tag line "Deliver us from all evil and from justice." The same formula survived in Charente into the 1930's: "My God, deliver us from all ill and from justice!"l 

When asked what was meant by justice, the peasant's answer inevitably included some reference to "the cornered hats" or "the blue coats": not just the gendarmes, but all those in their train, from the bailiff and the tax collec- tor (still known as the tithe collector in Confolentais) to the lowliest forest guard and gamekeeper. All that had to do with "justice" was a cause for fear. The countryside was full of lieux-dits with ominous names like La Potence, La Justice, and Le Gibet, all synonymous. Breton fishermen called a certain bird sergent after the bailiff-sergent de justice-because it stole sardines from other, smaller birds. Similarly, the notorious brigands who haunted the Mor- laix-Lannion road in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries got their name from the official collector of tithes and tolls. The royal archer, predecessor of the gendarme, survived in Burgundian lore as a bugbear, and in the descrip- tion of a naughty child: wicked as an archer. Maconnais tales of the nineteenth century even present jurors as doomed to eternal remorse, ashamed to face the light of day and hiding their faces from any passing stranger.2 

The man of law was not necessarily an officer of the court or the state. He could be that special kind of businessman described by the French term homme d'affaires-a retired bailiff, some clerk of the court who had sold his commis- sion, a lawyer without clients, or a onetime law student who had chosen to drop by the way, cultivating (as Blanqui at mid-century put it) at the same time his little garden and his little cases, with moneylending and land specu- 

From Justice} Lord, Deliver Us! 

lation thrown in. Whatever he was, he could only be bad: "Process servers are rascals, lawyers are lickspittles, attorneys are thieves."3 It was a proverb that other peasants would have readily shared with their fellows in Upper Brittany, where legend had it that even Saint Ives, patron of lawyers, had been forced to slip into heaven when Saint Peter was not looking and had managed to remain there only because no bailiff could be found to serve him with an eviction notice."" 

The countryman, so often illiterate, always believed himself diddled by the educated or semi-educated men with whom he had to deal-and he very often was. The legal costs of settling an inheritance might amount to three-quarters of the estate. Loans were surrounded by a vast and intricate array of legal fees, which were generally inflated by clever manipulation. The same was often true of land sales. Court costs alone, even of the most modest proportions, could appear astronomical to men and women who hoarded every copper. And paper, official documents, few as they were compared with what we must contend with, baffied and overwhelmed the simple man. Negligence on the part of mayors or their assistants could lead to the loss of a birth certificate, and to a costly but unavoidable verification of civil status on the eve of a mar- riage. Through ignorance or inertia a would-be seller could find himself faced with a demand for a deed of property that he had never dreamed existed. No wonder that in 1848 so many peasants would have loved to massacre mag- istrates and their like!4 

These, the bailiffs, the tax collectors, the gendarmes, were the principal in- termediaries between the country people and the wider community of the nation. For the peasants of I11e-et-Vilaine, as a passing officer found reason to deplore in 1875, France was taxes. Or as a country doctor put it, France was "the agents of the state."1I 

Little as they were loved, the agents of the state had their work cut out for them. Rural crime was far more prevalent in the nineteenth century than has been generally conceded to date, a vaster problem certainly than I can fully cover here. The War Ministry Archives fairly bulge with reports of thefts, rapes, robberies, fires set in vengeance or out of spite, infanticides, parricides, and suicides; with fights, scuffles, brawls, frays, even pitched battles between poachers and gendarmes, poachers and gamekeepers, smugglers and customs men, peasants and forest guards, rival villages, youth gangs, and conscripts; and with countless homicides, premeditated murders, and attempted murders, by pistol, revolver, gun, rifle, fowling piece, knife, dagger, ax, club, staff, cud- gel, hammer, adze, rock, compass, iron bar, or by a sharp weapon or blunt instrument that defied further description, or quite simply by foot or fist.s 

Still, criminal records can mislead the student and make him take the ex- 

• Roger Devigne, Le Ugendaire de France (Paris, 1942), pp. 76-77. Devigne also cites this familiar proverb: Sanctus Yvo erat Brito, / Advocatus et non latro, / Res miranda populo. {Old Saint Ives he was a Breton, / Man of law and yet no thief, / Wondrous thing beyond belief.} 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

ceptional for the commonplace. Figures are not very revealing when we know that statistics continued to be poor until the century was nearly gone, and that much slipped through the official net besides. 

The judgment of contemporaries is no more trustworthy, but it is suggestive. Their attention, as we might expect, was focused on what went on in towns, at first because that was where civilized life was centered, later because that was where the dire side of modern civilization showed itself. In 1833 A. M. Guerry saw cities as improving men's behavior and restricting their ability to escape justice. But by 1891 Emile Levasseur, in his massive study of French 

.45+ 

~ 21-28 .14-17 .8-10 

Map I. Crime rate by number of persons charged per 100,000 population, 1831-1880. National average: 17. The diagonal roughly separates the most undeveloped areas from the developed areas. SOURCE: Emile Levasseur, LA Population jranraise, 2: 461. 

From Justice, Lord, Deliver Us! 53 populations, was insisting on the temptations cities held for criminals, and the opportunities they offered them. Perhaps, as a fin-de-siecle sociologist equably remarked, urban life favored evildoers as much as it hindered them.1 All the same, Levasseur's findings reflected the experience of the latter half of the century. Whereas in the 1840's some 60 percent of all the accused crim- inals lived in rural parishes, in the early 1880'S over 50 percent were urban. Given the slow rise of the urban population (roughly from a quarter to a third of the total population between 1851 and 1881), its share of crime had grown markedly in two score years. During the 1880'S and 1890's criminals were (proportionately) more than twice as numerous in towns as in the country.8 They also, on the whole, committed different crimes. Crimes against prop- erty, notably theft, were more frequent in cities than in the countryside. Ho- micide, on the other hand, was more of a rural crime. In 1880 there were II murders per million population in the countryside against 9.3 in towns; by 1887 the gap had widened, to become 11.1 to 8.6. In general, crimes against persons, especially assault (and battery), accounted for a great proportion of rural criminality.* But certain offenses against property were also character- istic: arson, vandalism, poaching, and trespass. Unfortunately we have no rigorous analyses of court records to give us a view of rural crime in its spe- cific details. Obviously, when we find offenses like bris de cloture increasing sixfold and the destruction of crops increasing fourfold in the half-century before 1880, we know that these crimes scarcely refer to towns. But it does seem that as the statistics on crime in general increased, those categories of offenses most typical of rural areas (hunting, fishing, poaching) fell steadily: 275·5 per 100,000 population in 1854, 74.9 in 1874, 50.2 in 1900, 43.7 in 1912, 24.3 in 1921.9 

Experts do not .agree on the way criminality as such developed. Some look at the declining figures of major crimes coming to assizes, others at the steady advance in the number of offenses tried in correctional courts. One might hazard a guess that since the crime rate for the country as a whole remained fairly steady for a century after 1850 while the proportion of older people in the population grew, and since the aged as a group are less disposed to crime, the younger criminals were having to sin harder to keep statistics up. A for- tiori, this is particularly true where crimes of violence are concerned. Such 

• Emile Durkheim, Le Suicide (1912 ed.), p. 403; Denis Szabo, Crimes et villes, pp. 62, 12I. Some 50 years before, Guerry had contrasted the thievish north and northeastern parts of France with the brutal violent Midi: the richer the area, the more crimes against property. He had pro- posed that the border between the two coincided with the limits of olive culture, but had stressed at the same time the variety of internal differences, which "despite the regularity of our new administrative divisions still forces us to recognize within the kingdom something like distinct nations, each with its own language, mores, practices, and traditional prejudices" (A. M. Guerry de Champneuf, Essai sur la statistique morale de la France, Paris, 1833, p. 40). In 1880 "crimes against persons" still exceeded crimes against property in seven departments: Savoy, Hautes- and Basses-Alpes, Aveyron, Lozere, Pyrenees-Orientales, and Corsica (Gabriel Tarde, La Criminalite comparee, p. 155).54 THE WAY THINGS WERE crimes, as we have noted, were relatively more numerous in rural commu- nities. Given that the population of rural communities tended to stagnate or to decrease during the century after 1850, while the proportion of aged in- creased, the countryside's contribution to crime statistics, especially those most characteristic of its violent past, ought to have decreased as well. It would be interesting to see if the data bear out this hypothesis. 

Crimes connected in one way or another with, sex are hardest of all to es- timate. The most accessible figures are on the crimes stemming from unwanted pregnancies; the bulk of them concern the towns and most often involve do- me sties, that is, poor girls in trouble living away from home, where conceal- ment might have been arranged. At any rate, abortion and infanticide seem to have been common enough in the countryside, at least in regions where large families were more of a hindrance than a help. These practices too re- flected at the least a matter-of-fact attitude to life, and sometimes what we would have to say was a total disregard for life, as in the case of a mother who helped her daughter kill her unwanted child, boil it, and feed it to the pigs; or that of a twenty-two-year-old girl who gave birth to her child alone, dis- membered it, burned some of the pieces, and threw the rest into the cesspit.10 But this can be no more than the tip of the iceberg. In the absence of substan- tial data, all one can hope for is a general impression, rough and approximate. My general impression is that violence was a fact of everyday life, and that it receded only slowly, and then selectively: it persisted within the family long after intervillage fights all but disappeared. Cases of assault and battery appear to have increased, as in the rest of France; and so did the self-inflicted violence of suicide. 

Like much of the violence, many "crimes" reflected a world where the con- ditions of life remained primitive. On Brittany's rocky shores, just as the flotsam of shipwrecked vessels was fair game, so were the survivors who made it to shore. Scavengers quickly deprived them of anything they might have on them-watches, money~ or rings. Shipwrecking or what was left of it, like smuggling or brigandage (often related trades), contributed resources that complemented the economy of scarcity.ll It also bore witness to the survival of conditions we more often connect with the Ancien Regime, which, after all, was not very far away. Those isolated regions that the prefect of Nantes alluded to in 1812, "where the power of magistrates is weak and that of inertia almost invincible," were still to be found under the July Monarchy. Roads were not safe; forests were even more dangerous. Breton peasant stories are full of the adventures of men, women, and children who take refuge for the night only to find they have fallen into the hands of robbers.1Z 

The answer lay in viable communications. In the North African Ansarine re- gion the brigands who had long harassed the area were finally dislodged in the twentieth century, "when the trail from Mateur to Tebourba ... was turned into a passable road." But in nineteenth-century France few roads crossed 

From Justice, Lord, Deliver Us! 55 the forests, moors, or mountain wastes, and brigands found safe haven there. In 1840 Breton beggar bands-truands from the Breton truhe (pity) or pos- sibly from tryan (vagabond)-were still supposed to follow a single leader, Coesre (Caesar?), and to meet annually on the Pn~-a-Gueux, near Kerospec. In 1858 Princess Bacciochi had them driven out of Colpo (Morbihan), on what is now the route from Locmine to Vannes; but they set up quarters in other parts and only the twentieth century saw an end to their organized crime. In 1844 the military reports stiU spoke of outlaws taking refuge in the wilds of Gevaudan, as they had done a generation or two before. In 1853 the commanding general at Bourges reported a criminal who remained beyond the reach of the law "in the vast perimeter of forests between the departments of Nievre, Saone-et-Loire, and COte-d'Or"; and the Minister of Justice ap- pealed to the Minister of War to help clear the area around Gouloux in Nievre's arrondissement of Chateau-Chinon,"" The forests still stretch over the area today much as they did a century ago, but they are crossed by roads. Gouloux itself, released from the close embrace of the forests, is now a cross- roads on the east-west road from Burgundy to the Loire. 

Brigandage persisted longest in Corsica; and in its most remote and least developed areas, at least, the island bore little or no resemblance to the rest of France.t Still, it is interesting to find the sub-prefect of Bastia boasting in 18g6 that bandits had disappeared from his arrondissement: "The ease of travel, the low mountains, the ever more numerous farmlands, would pre- vent an armed band from hiding for long from the gendarmerie." Yet, Corte and Sartene continued to be infested with bandits: "armed robbery, plunder, robber bands, stealing, pillaging, holding up travelers," read the reports. Gangs ruled the countryside, levied taxes, condemned people to death and carried out their verdicts. But then, as the sub-prefect of Sartene explained ill 1908, his arrondissement was the most mountainous, the poorest, and the wildest section of the island.la 

In Corsica, as elsewhere, but more than elsewhere, conditions had to change before their criminal expression could change. But policing had to become more efficient as well. There had to be more policemen; and more efficient policemen than the local grocer or tobacconist, schoolmaster or shopkeeper, 

·Jean Cuisenier, L'Ansarine, p. 24; H.-F. Buffet, En Bretagne morbihannaise, p. 235; Ar- chives de la Guerre, MR 1274 (1844), GBI (Jan. 25, 1853). Some authorities recognized that besides making policing easier, roads would create employment and, by improving conditions, would lessen crime. In 1833 the sub-prefect of Die (Drome) wrote to his superior, pressing for a road so the timber of Vercors could be exploited. This "mettrait fin aux habitudes de devastion et de fraude qui sont malheureusement trop communes chez les habitants du Vercors et qui les mettent sans cesse aux prises avec la justice correctionnelle. La facilite de se procurer des moyens d'existence par une industrie legitime les ramenerait a des sentiments plus honnetes." The road, and the benefits it was supposed to bring, would have to wait for half a century. (Georges Jarti, "L'Etablissement des routes," p. 243.) t "La Corse se meut sous la Constitution de 1&75 avec une ~me du XIVe siecle italien," re- marked a French jurist in 1887 (quoted in Madeleine-Rose Marin-Muracciole, L'Honneur des femmes en Corse du XIIle si?cle a nos jours, Paris, 1964, p. 2). 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

who often doubled as part-time officers. If they had the time, that is: the man who served as police chief in Brienon (Yonne) in 1855 did not; he resigned in that year to tend to his several profitable businesses. And they had to speak the local language, unlike the commissaire Flaubert found at Pont-l' Abbe in 1846, who had to use the local gamekeeper as interpreter.14 

Even the makeshift services of a garde champetre were wanting in some number of places. In 1856 one-quarter of the communes with rural territory had none; and many of the others would have been better off without them. But the Second Empire did preside over a great expansion of the forces of law and order, installing police superintendents in rural areas* and increasing the number of gendarmerie brigades whose special province was the country- side. One result of this expanded police power was a steep rise in the quantity of reports and charges drawn up annually by the gendarmes; by 1880 these numbered some 189,000, nearly quadruple the yearly average of 56,000 in the 1840'S.15 Another result was a similarly steep decline in the activities of such anachronistic criminals as highwaymen and brigand gangs. 

Brigandage in fact was soon stamped out in all save the most isolated places, but smuggling, which played a real part in many a local economy, espe- cially around the periphery of the nation, proved much hardier. And under- standably so, since all recognized the smuggler's usefulness and few thought his work a crime. Indeed, he was regarded with much favor. The legendary fame of Mandrin, the eighteenth-century bandit, undoubtedly grew out of this view, but also from the general feeling that avoiding tolls and taxes, though clearly illegal, was not necessarily immoral. For that matter, members of the Basque clergy explicitly taught that since indirect taxes were contrary to canonical and social justice, smuggling was not a sin. Their flock certainly agreed. Somethil1g of the same lesson was taught in a vastly popular children's novel of the 1830's, which went into a fifteenth reprinting in 1889. It pre- sented smugglers in the friendliest light, and even had the hero and the local mayor lending them a helping hand against customs guards without a second thought. But then, as military observers explained, for the inhabitants of the Pyrenees at least, smuggling was their only resource, the only trade they had, part of local customs.16 In time the mountain men found new resources, and smuggling ceased to be the chief occupation in even the poorer valleys. But the state monopoly of match production created a new crime: the making and sale of contraband matches, the resource of poor people, catering to poor people, to the turn of the century at the very least.17 

The strongest evidence of archaic survivals, among the most ancient and certainly the most violent, comes from the records of the affrays between vil- lages, which continued in some places to the First World War, but whose golden age seems to have ended with the stricter police methods of the Second 

• Though they were spread thin compared with the urban areas. In 1860 Hautes-Alpes and Lozere had seven commissaires de canton each against 70 in Nord and 19 in Lyon (Howard C. Payne, Police State, pp. 213, 246). 

From Justice, Lord, Deliver Us! 57 Empire. The Statistique du departement du Lot, published in 1831, refers to "the bellicose temperament of Quercy-men," apparent "in those wars that break out between parishes and that give rise to real battles." And this was no exaggeration; the Lot archives contain a very fat file on the subject-bloody scenes, combats, disorders, serious wounds, treaties of peace, and rumors of war-with the local national guard playing its part, sometimes fighting other national guards or gendarmes, sometimes intervening to restore order. Simi- larly in Provence we hear of two villages near Nice whose inhabitants agreed to settle their differences in pitched battles with no recourse to the law what- ever happened, only to become enmeshed in endless litigation when they ignored their mutual promises.18 

When traditional warfare of this sort died down, the tradition lived on in clashes between gangs, generally youthful, representing rival wards of the same village, rival hamlets of the same parish, or rival villages of the same district. A typical instance among many occurred at Plogastel-Saint-Germain in Finistere, where in March 1866 the canton's draft board met for the annual drawing of lots that would show who would perform seven years' military service and who would escape duty. When the contingent of draft-age youths from Plozevet arrived, everyone else fell on them, and the tiny village square of Plogastel became the scene of "a frightful struggle" in which more than 300 participants of all ages, using staves, stones, and cudgels, gouging and biting, fought themselves out, the authorities finding it impossible to separate them. Before it was over, all had been wounded more or less lightly, though none complained: "vieille rancune qui vient de se traduire par une rixe nou- velle." 

What happened was this. The lads of Plozevet, marching en corps behind their banner, were determined to march around the village cross-a practice started in 1848 that was supposed to ensure "good" draft numbers-and the rest of the youths were just as determined that they should not. In previous years the mayor of Plogastel, who knew what to expect, had managed to keep the peace by insisting on general disarmament and seeing that all conscripts who came into town were barehanded. In 1866, however, the gendarmes had pooh-poohed his fears of trouble, and everyone had been allowed to keep the cudgels that the Breton peasant seldom laid aside. The copious correspondence this affair gave rise to is revealing: we find superstition at work, and moreover, surrounding a practice of very recent origin (traditions become immemorial not because they are old, but because memory is fallible); a long-standing hostility between rival hamlets; a natural recourse to violence; and the irrele- vance of outside authorities to local practices (no one offered resistance to the gendarmes or soldiers who sought to intervene; they just ignored them). "Try to understand the ways of the peasant young," the mayor of Plogastel wrote to the prefect, "and their need for violent contrasts to their agricultural labors. "19 

The mountains of Auvergne, where miners fished with dynamite and gangs 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

of toughs roamed the countryside, seem to have been another center of vio- lence-endless brawls and scuiRes, between men who wielded ax or pick as easily as knife or gun, tended to end in stabbings, shootings, and other forms of massacre reminiscent of the American frontier. The slightest squabble could end in murder and mayhem: men were shot or battered to death "fol- lowing an argument," blows were exchanged, shots fired, picks brandished, because of "a futile discussion," "a futile wrangle," for "the most futile mo- tive." A son shot at his mother, killing his young sister; two lads hunting together fell out over a jay, and one shot the other. And so it went.20 One wonders whether in a stark world this was not a form of relaxation, of rough entertainment, among the few available. But the frequency with which judg- ments for coups et blessures show violence occurring without apparent cause also suggests the pent-up anger and resentment of the hopeless, which too long contained finally broke out in a blind violence that offered some relief.21 

Thefts were among the most common and revealing breaches of the law. Most of them were pathetically small, like the two sous that were taken as booty from an old woman in a forest near Lombez (Gers); or the jersey, knife, and 50 centimes extracted from an old man of Saint-Cernin (Cantal); or the rich haul of the housebreaker of the Lectoure region who made off with a net, a pruning knife, a candle, a towel, and one piece of bread. One guesses that the "injures et voies de fait relative au partage d'un morceau de lard vole," noted at Sainte-Menehould (Marne) in the year XIII, were reproduced under subsequent regimes. There are several instances of girls who seem to have been tempted, or anyway were alleged to have been tempted, by kerchiefs. A typical case involved a young girl in the employ of an ironing- woman at Elne (Pyrenees-Orientales), who was accused of stealing a small cambric handkerchief worth one franc; her vehement denials availed her no more than a suspended sentence.22 Petty and pitiful, cases such as these bear witness to a world of small possessions and great need. 

The police were less welcome when they intervened to establish or restore a public order alien to the populations. Some felt their liberty increasingly restricted-more so, complained the men of Tarascon (Ariege) in 1848, than before 1789.23 Historical memory may have been faulty, or the representa- tives of public order thicker under foot. Whatever the case, two jurisdictions in particular created endless trouble: hunting and forests. Each deserves a study of its own. And each testifies to the fact that the country people did not allow their traditional practices to be upset easily. 

"Our populations, as you know," wrote the sub-prefect of Ch~teaulin in the summer of 1853, "hold the figure of the gendarme sacred." Yet the same file where this implausible assertion appears shows that gendarmes were fre- quently attacked when they interfered with local gambling, drinking, and poaching habits or with the accepted behavior for pilgrimages or fairs, espe- cially when the interference was pressed so far as arrest or confiscation. Indeed, 

From lustice, Lord, Deliver Us! 59 in Ariege the attempt to arrest local men could set off what were described as "insurrections."24 But Ariege, like most of the Pyrenees, was of a particularly inflammable mood because of the incessant friction over forest rights. 

The legislation introduced in the late years of the Restoration limiting ac- cess to the forests fed violent hatreds wherever free range had been a way of life and the forest's resources indispensable to even a marginal living. The Forest Code of 1827 gave broad powers to the French administration and the rather surly foresters, rangers, and guards it recruited among populations plagued by underemployment. This authority was used at the expense of the local population to preserve great stands of trees and foster reforestation, largely for the sake of a wooden navy that would no longer exist when the new planta- tions reached maturity. The peasants knew little and cared less about such CoI- bertian aims. They knew only that arbitrary and incomprehensible decisions meant that their animals could no longer graze, and that they could no longer gather kindling or firewood, as they had done as far back as memory could stretch. Maurice Agulhon has recorded the bitter conflicts to which this gave rise in Provence. From the Restoration right through the Second Empire, the records show similar, and similarly violent, reactions from Burgundy and Dauphine to Anjou, Gascony, and the Pyrenees. The number of offenses soared: not only trespass, pilfering, and theft, but acts of vengeance against guards and against the prohibited forests and plantations themselves. The poor rose in wrath (as they did in Gers in 1828 or in Cantal in 1839) and cut down thousands of trees; and army or national guard units had to inter- vene to quell riot after riot. Strange rumors ran wild, such as the one in 1851 that spread through the villages on the outskirts of the Ombree forest in Anjou with the false news that the people could gather wood at will; within a day, some 2,000 bundles had been carried off. The rural court files tally huge numbers of crimes and misdemeanors connected with forestry, and the number continued to run high for years, tapering off only after the 1850's, when such offenses began to be treated with greater leniency. But the pre- ceding period left its mark on popular thought, and many a folk legend doomed the forest guard to eternal damnation, condemned after death to haunt the forests he used to patrol. 

In Ariege, however, the conflict maintained its intensity well after it died down in other areas. There, large-scale violence had erupted as early as 1829, when the Demoiselles-bands of peasants disguised in long shirts and bon- nets, often with blackened faces, armed sometimes with guns but mostly with woodsmen's axes-ranged the countryside to strike suddenly and by night against gendarmes, forest guards, jails, and restrictive landowners. The War of the Demoiselles (as it has been called) reflected the resentment of people to whom the law, almost any law but forest legislation particularly, appeared alien and destructive. Their sense of injustice was overwhelming. In 1848 the General Council of Ariege explained that the peasants had come to hate the 

60 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

forests themselves, and hoped that if they ravaged them enough they would get rid of their oppressors. That same summer the chief government prose- cutor in Toulouse, reporting the forest fires that were being set in his j uris- diction and the raids to mutilate the trees, recognized that "the rural popula- tions of these areas are imbued with the idea that they have been unjustly despoiled of property rights they have held from time immemorial." They said· as much in one of their songs-one of many: 

Nous houlen exulp aquesto montagno, He que noste hen, Et que nous apparten .... 

They want to steal our mountain, Which is our good estate, And which belongs to us .... 

The situation was aggravated by the overbearing and corrupt nature of the personnel who were entrusted with enforcing the law. Many of the reports of mayors and other officials over the period 1843-S9 speak of foresters and forest agents who were strange to the region, ignorant of local practices and rights, let alone needs, and worse yet ill-paid and hence usually corrupt, crush- ing the local people with their exactions. No wonder that smoldering resent- ment flared into open rebellion over and over: in 1829-30, 1842, 1848, and again, though less intensely, 187<rJ'I. In 1879 the sub-prefect of Prades (Pyre- nees-Orientales) noted with relief that friction had diminished and that dis- turbances were fewer. Though Michel Chevalier records the persistence of sav- age Guzet, battles, court notably records one do in suggest 1895 over a gradual a proposed acceptance government of the new fir plantation conditions.at 25 In the arrondissement of Saint-Palais (Basses-Pyrenees) de/its forestiers num- bered 145 in 1856-far, far ahead of the next-most-common categories of oifenses, theft (46) and begging (32). But they fell sharply thereafter, to 29 in 1866,32 in 1880, and a mere seven in 1905.26 A draining of the population, new sources of revenue, and, quite simply, time had finally turned past injus- tice into present usage. 

The right to hunt was another source of friction. In Gers a huge set-to at a village festival, in which two gendarmes were seriously manhandled and for which 15 men were eventually imprisoned, was attributed in the first in- stance to popular resentment over the imposition of a higher fee on hunting permits.· The measure was patently undemocratic, cutting into the food sup- 

• The rioting took place at the little village of Aujan near Mirande (1973 pop. 144), where on June 24, 1850, the fete patronale had drawn more than 4,000 visitors from 30 neigh boring communes. Those arrest('d all belonged to the "classes infimes de ia societe," and their "revolt"· was termed "inconceivable," the more so since the accused did not know one another. (Archives Nationales, BB 30 370; Agen, July-Oct. 1850.) In 1851 the general prosecutor at Aix-en-Pro- vence wrote of the great discontent at the 25-franc fee set on hunting permits ("Let it be lowered to 10 francs, and they will pay!"), and of the frequent clashes between "honest landowners shooting on their own land" and gendarmes enforcing an unpopular law (ibid.; Aix-en-Provence, Nov. 11, 1851). Hunting permits, introduced in 1844 partly to combat poaching, could only be obtained from the departmental prefecture, after an application on papier timbre: an accumula- tion of costs and complications. After 1861 they were delivered at the sub-prefecture. By the 1890's nearly 400,000 permits were issued annually. See Pierre Dufrenoy, Histoire du droit de chas.ft! et du droit de peche dans ['ancien droit franrais (Paris, 1896), especially p. 8. 

From I ustice, Lord, Deliver Us! 

ply and into a major source of revenue or pleasure of all but the wealthiest peasants, and it made for constant trouble. Not thefts but hunting offenses were the commonest cases brought before the rural courts of the Second Em- pire. At Bazas (Gironde) the year 1856 saw 45 hunting violations against 43 thefts; the year 1867,92 against 41. Similarly, at Ch~teaulin (Finistere), 1856, 86 against 71; 1867, 95 against 72. The number of cases seems to have fallen with the easier laws of the Third Republic: at Bazas from 92 in 1867 to 53 in 1909 (no figures are available for the 1880'S); at Ch~teaulin from 95 in 1867 to 52 in 1880 and 31 in 19Q6.27 

Legislation of course created crime: such other familiar practices as beg- ging, drunkenness, gleaning, gathering wood, and peddling without a permit also became offenses. Modernization created crime too. Conscription brought with it failure to report, desertion, and self-mutilation to escape the draft- all criminal offenses. The use of traditional weights and measures became i11egal. New hygienic regulations governing the practice of medicine or mid- wifery, the sale of drugs, and the control of contagious diseases in cattle and humans found their reflection in police records and in courts."" Improved diet encouraged the enterprising not only to sell adulterated milk, but to circum- vent the controls placed on pepper (1907) and mustard (1913) as well. The introduction of postage stamps was followed by a law (1849) making the re- use of cancelled stamps a crime. Here we find a particularly striking example of how novelties became the ordinary. The civil court records of Sainte-Mene- hould list 18 offenses on this score in the 1850's, four in the 1860'S, four in the 1870's, and two in the 1880'S, the last in 1886. The court of Bazas (Gironde) tried 12 such offenses in 1856, none in 1867, one in 1880, and none thereafter. Among the first four transgressions two were committed by girls who were released for obviously not knowing what the stamps were all about ("these little images," one of the accused called them). Railways also brought regu- lations and infractions thereof. At Bazas these rose from two in 1867 to 19 in 1909. At Chateaulin in 1886 an eleven-year-old boy was fined for throwing an apple on the right-of-way of the Nantes-Landerneau railroad. 28 

But if modernization could create new crimes, or at least legislate them into being, it also worked to eliminate or alter the old ones. Thus, at Ch~teau­ lin the number of offenses for coups et blessures almost tripled between 1856 and 19Q6,29 but far from indicating a rising tide of violence, this change was due to a greater readiness to lodge complaints for actions long taken for granted. The nature of the charges clearly changed. One finds fewer brawls, and more and more complaints by women, especially wives, for whom the 

• It is well to remember that not all laws were enforced as stringently in the countryside as in the cities. Thus a law of 1873 had made public drunkenness a minor offense and if repeated, a misdemeanor. Yet records suggest that the law was rarely applied in rural areas. One commen- tator, in 1875 (Dr. Lunier, quoted in Emile Levasseur, La Population franraise, 2: 439), attrib- uted this laxity to the influence of publicans, who were often village council men or mayors. I would attribute it rather to a combination of local attitudes and small police forces. See F. Du- bid, La Question du vagabondage, pp. 251-52. 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

occasional or regular thrashing had once been a matter of course. Certainly, the consideration of legal costs helped to stay many an eager hand. The little boy who threw an apple on the tracks was fined only one franc; but with legal costs his parents paid nearly So francs in all. Beating one's wife might cost as little as five francs, beating a strange woman four times as much; and a good fight between men could bring some days in prison with work left undone and wages unearned-plus fines, of course. But these costs were at the low end of the scale. In any given case the costs could climb as high as 20 or 30 francs (IQ-IS days' wages), an astronomic sum for families with only a tiny income. If more people-and especially women-lodged complaints around the turn of the century, it must have been only in part because the mores of their little world had changed; the family budget must also have allowed it. Wives and children continued to be beaten, to be sure, but more of them seem to have revolted. By 1906 one even finds the Chateaulin court handing down a judgment on the specific charge of ill-treating children. 

Offenses against minors, mostly sexual, were common enough; they are a running theme through the legal files from one year to another. But at the turn of the century a new note sounds. At Sainte-Menehould, for the first time in the records, the court held that the abuse of a young child was a crime: the earliest judgment was brought in 1900; another followed in 1902, two in 1905, one in 1913. At Saint-Palais (Basses-Pyrenees) nine cases of this sort came to court in the year 1905 alone. And Chateaulin followed suit, as we have seen, in 1906. They did so under a law passed in 1874 for the protec- tion of children. It had taken a quarter of a century or more for urban values and urban legislation to penetrate the more isolated parts of the countryside. It would have taken longer at an earlier time. Now-tentatively, reluctantly, but relentlessly nevertheless-all parts of rural France were being drawn into the modern world. 

And yet a measure of just how long the old order, or disorder, took to pass can be found in the persistence of beggars and of begging vagrants as one of the major social problems of the nineteenth century. Extinction de la men- dicite was a separate rubric requiring specific mention in the weekly and monthly reports local officials submitted to their superiors. 

The Cahiers of 1789 are full of complaints against vagabond beggars, of references to the fear they spread and the extortions they extracted in the name of charity. Misery (especially the misery of strangers) did not evoke sympathy, only unease and fear. The Revolution and the Empire set thou- sands adrift who had little hope of haven. Even when the worst had settled into normal want, poor regions like Brittany went through horrifying famines. In 1814, a priest tells us, the starving poor gathered in hordes of several thou- sand on the beach at Cesson (COtes-du-Nord) looking for shellfish, which they devoured raw so great was their hunger. Physically weakened to the 

From Justice, Lord, Deliver Us! 

point where they could not even cope with a cooking fire, several still tried to carry something back to their families, only to fall along the roadside and die. Other hordes of starving peasants swarmed into the towns and tried to intimidate the city folk into charity, but the burghers barricaded themselves behind their doors and left the starving yokels to die in the streets or to be driven out by the military.3o 

Mass suffering of this order was exceptional, or would become so. Indigency was not: indigence, vie precaire, mendicite are a triple and recurrent theme.'*' In Loir-et-Cher begging was the only obvious recourse when "the scourge of indigence" struck the rural proletariat. In regions like Beauce even poor labor- ers generally managed to tread the fine line between poverty and destitution. But in the Perche, explained an agricultural survey of 1848, begging was as chronic as penury; people were so used to it that they did not feel the least shame about it. There was the precarious economic situation, always on the point of collapse. There was the unexpected disaster, like a fire or flood, which sent its victims begging by the roadside. There was, quite simply, perpetual want, under whose merciless rule beggars, permanent or occasional, were un- avoidable. During the hard winter of 1847 the prefect of Cantal reported that the poor had to resort to begging. That was their only hope; and, after all, those who begged from door to door found bread.31 

The city poor, of course, had certain forms of organized charity to fall back on. Beggars accordingly crowded into cities whenever they could, and espe- cially at times of famine, attracted by these resources: the concentration of private charity, the bureaux de bienfaisance, the food and alms that the rich and pious distributed on regular days and hours. This may be why a city like Toulouse was full of beggars through the 1840's and 1850's. "One couldn't take a step r complained the Annuaire de la Haute-Garonne in 1848] without being assailed, importuned, and often insulted by these wretches who laid bare to all eyes their sores, fictitious or real. They even invaded our homes, and one could rid oneself of their importunities only by yielding them alms."32 Many of these wretches came from Ariege, especially from the mountainous areas, where begging was an ancient tradition, every winter precipitating a seasonal migration into the more fertile plains or even further afield. Solidly anchored in custom and an essential part of the normal subsistence pattern, such begging migrations endured to the very end of the Second Empire, even though conditions had by then improved. As the prefect of Ardeche correctly observed, the migrations persisted because of the sheer inability to break with established habits. Some of those who went down into the "good country" 

• Of course, not all poor people begged. In May 1829 the mayor of Moulins reported that almost a third of the people in his area were indigents (4,574 in a population of 14,195), but that only 200 of these were habitual beggars (L.-J. AlIary, Moulins, I8jl-36, p. 24). "Many suf- fer in silence" (Archives Departementales, Cantal 110 Ml, Feb. 8, 1847). But in Creuse, accord- ing to an official report in 1854, there was one beggar for every 56 inhabitants (Alain Corbin, "Limousins migrants," p. 654).THE WAY THINGS WERE 

while snow covered their barren lands were not even poor, and many of the migrants were encouraged by village authorities, who could have ended the flow by the simple expedient of withholding the passports that were essential for travel."" A testimonial to the beggars' enterprise was an annual Beggars' Fair, the fera de Montmerle, held every summer near the hamlet of Chargue~ rand (Allier); the war of 1870 seems to have marked its end. At Montmerle the begging folk of Bourbonnais sold the rags, used clothes, and linens, house- hold goods and junk that they had gathered from as far afield as Roanne and Renaison in Loire (many even took along a donkey to carry their haul).33 

Few beggars were this organized, to be sure, but most traveled far afield. In Maine-et-Loire we hear that in 1865 most of them came "from the depths of Brittany"; and indeed the peninsula always had a rich crop of indigents. The sponsor of a traditional marriage feast in Cornouaille or Morbihan, which into the late nineteenth century included a special dinner and dance for the poor, had to count on an attendance of 200 or more at the event. Not all of these, presumably, were regular beggars; but it is hard to draw the line be- tween regular and occasional beggary. In the Aube of the late nineteenth cen- tury, when hard times struck, whole families turned to charity, with the young, the old, and the sick begging for bread from door to door; these were clearly not professional beggars on the order of the familiar abonnes with their regu- lar rounds. But in the ports of Brittany, cannery workers and fishermen worked when they could, and begged or sent their children to beg when they could not. Similarly, in Cotentin at the turn of the century, Paul Mayer tells us, some villages survived only by sending their children to beg for bread and sous among the farms, and their women to beg for firewood. "There is no humilia- tion in it. All know it is the only means to avoid starvation. And farmers feel that alms cost them less than raising [their workers'] wages." Still, they would also have had to accommodate the vagrant beggars who passed through, many (noted a Breton report of 1890) coming from some nearby marriage or feast. Occasional or chronic, begging was clearly, as a police superintendent remarks, "anchored in local custom." All poor regions bred and exported beggars, as Savoy did right through the early decades of the Third Republic, a plague that left authorities completely helpless.s4 

In the towns, where there was generally some representative of the police and where, in any case, neighbors provided reassurance and if need be support, beggars could be kept within certain limits. But in the country, wrote a com- missaire in Gers in 1876, "they are real tyrants and many deliberately make themselves feared by their threats."33 

• Archives Nationales, FiclII Ariege 7 (Mar. 1857), FicIII Ardeche 11 (Apr. 1859); Andre Armengaud, Le! Population! de l'est-Aqttitain, p. 291. Perhaps they chose not to interfere be- cause, as the prefect of Puy-de-Dome remarked in 1843, villages like Saint-Jean-des-Olliere, in the Livradois, whose inhabitants regularly went off to beg with false certificates testifying that their homes had burned down, paid their taxes very punctually (see Andre G. Manry, Histoire del'Auvergnt:, Toulouse, 1974, p. 398). 

From Justice, Lord, Deliver Us! 

More fear. By Jules Meline's estimate, there were around 400,000 beggars and tramps in 1905 (over 1 percent of the total population). "Battalions of the famished, a real scourge for our countryside," the swarms of vagabonds cre- ated a feeling of insecurity that contributed to a rural exodus, especially of the bourgeoisie, fearful for their safety.sB These are more than the reactionary fantasies of a conservative politician. Meline knew his Vosges. But other evi- dence corroborates his views. Court records show that beggars often menaced those who refused them alms, generally quite humble people, or women who could ill defend themselves. Fences torn down, fruit trees or crops maliciously damaged, fields flooded, fires set from spite-the authorities received such re- ports over and over. Into the twentieth century the Cantal archives swelled with circulars and reports: beggars and vagabonds enter isolated houses and farms, demand food and drink, sometimes even money (though this seems somewhat doubtful), threaten reprisals, vengeance ... all the southwest in- vaded every spring by lame and crippled beggars ... the country people com- plain; they are afraid.s1 A writer in 1894 observed that in Bresse and Savoy houses tended to be crowded into hamlets-as they did along the Sac me, or between Macon and Nantua-partly for fear of beggars. In Bresse they said of families that took an isolated house: "There are people who are not afraid to be murdered."3B 

Arrests on charges of vagrancy and begging rose from 2,500 in 1830 to 20,000 in 1890, and 50,000 in 1899. But law enforcement, mostly urban, did not dimin- ish anxiety; it merely reflected it. In the Sainte-Menehould district only 16 vagrants had been charged in the 1843-75 period; 35 were rounded up in 1876-1910. At Saint-Palais, where vagrancy was a worse sore, arrests nearly doubled between 1856 and 1880, from 13 to 24. The year 1905 saw 36 cases brought before the court. By then the high tide of vagabondage was beginning to recede, reflecting the economic upturn. The incidence of vagrancy seems to have paralleled bad times, so that depressed prices put many people on the road who would not have otherwise moved about.39 Emile Durkheim pointed out, in his study of suicide (whose rate also rose markedly in the 1890'S),* that in economic crises the specifically economic effects are less significant than the disruptions of the collective order: the ruptures in the balance of society and life that set men and women adrift from their moorings. This could well apply to vagrancy, too, though more straightforwardly material explana- tions might suffice. At any rate, while the beggars and tramps roamed, and while the memory of their roaming lingered on, the idle, loitering figure of the vagrant cast a dark shadow over the countryside. 

Yet one should keep in mind that not all pressure was physical. The whole 

• Le Suicide (1912 ed.), p. 271. It would be misleading to make too much of the coincidence. In fact, the suicide rate had been rising steadily through the century. It declined slightly in 1896-1905, then rose again. By 1913, in a time of great prosperity, the rate had passed its pre- 1896 peak (Maurice Halbwachs, Les Causes du suicide, p. 92). 

66 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

weight of traditional morality argued against turning away the stranger or the poor.· Many popular tales taught that reward came to those who fed the hungry or sheltered the weary traveler. Fear of supernatural retribution, espe- cially if predicted by a desperate or unscrupulous supplicant, must have been more effective than a brandished cudgel. At the same time, charity (which often meant hospitality) to strangers and especially to the poor reflected more than fear of supernatural or criminal retribution. It attested to the social func- tion of the wayfarer, who repaid hospitality by carrying news and telling what he had learned on his travels. Beggars, and part-time beggars like rag- and-bone merchants, hawkers, peddlers, knife-grinders, were also gatherers and dispensers of information, as were others who trod the roads: millers and tai- lors, carters and showmen.40 In Lower Brittany especially, as Emile Souvestre noted, "the beggar is also the bard, the news carrier and commercial traveler of this wholly patriarchal civilization."41 

But the two useful functions that begging may have performed-supple- menting an uncertain subsistence in an economy in which catastrophes were frequent and remedies rare, providing a loose communications network- were outdated. Beggary survived, as we have seen, but it ceased to be endemic. What is perhaps more important, it was no longer taken for granted. It be- came an anomaly. Beggars themselves grew ashamed to beg. The Vergou- gnans of the Pyrenees-Orient ales wore a mask so as not to be recognized when they came to the door. And when, in Roussillon and in Herault, the crisis of I907 brought back misery of a kind unknown by most for over a generation, a local doctor saw the new beggars wearing masks toO.42 

Indigence continued. But now it wore a mask. That was not only new in itself; it was indicative of the modern attitude toward grinding poverty. 

• Charity could be a source of social prestige; conversely, stinginess could tell against one. In Aubrac one candidate for the elections of 1898 seems to have tried to denigrate an opponent by getting local tramps to complain of the man's ill-treatment of them (L'Aubrac, 2: 186). 
