+++
title = "06 A WEALTH OF TONGUES"

+++

"Parlez franrrais," says the master to the pupil. "Monsieur, je parle comme je save et comme je poude." The villager forgets a little of his mother tongue at school, and learns only a parody of French. 

-ABBE M. M. GORSE 

IN 1863, ACCORDING to official figures, 8,381 of France's 37,510 communes spoke no French: about a quarter of the country's population. The Ministry of Public Instruction found that 448,328 of the 4,018,427 schoolchildren (ages seven to thirteen) spoke no French at all, and that another 1,4go,2~ spoke or understood it but could not write it, suggesting an indifferent grasp of the tongue. In 24 of the country's 89 departments, more than half the communes did not speak French, and in six others a significant proportion of the com~ munes were in the same position (see Map 3). In short, French was a foreign language for a substantial number of Frenchmen, including almost half the children who would reach adulthood in the last quarter of the century. 

The manuscript from which these figures are drawn (see Appendix table, pp. 498-S01) is the last statistical survey I have found on the awkward subject of patois, as the various languages, idioms, dialects, and jargons of the French provinces were generally described. Some of the data are suspect on their face, but one would want to accept them with caution in any event, since the Minis~ try of Public Instruction had every reason to exaggerate success and to conceal failure. Apart from the internal evidence, other official statements show that the survey in fact underestimated the situation. 

Thus in Bouches~du~Rh8ne, Cantal, Haute~Savoie, and Vaucluse the schools reported that more than 10 percent of their pupils did not speak French, a strange discrepancy when all around them that tongue was supposed to be in general use. Still more odd, in Herault more than a quarter of the children did not speak French, in Lozere an even higher percentage did not, and in Dordogne fully a third did not-but all three departments were "French~ speaking." Yet a third of the children suggests at least a third of their elders and, sure enough, the Etat de l'instruction primaire for 1864 reported patois "in general use" in Dordogne and, despite the schools' efforts, "as indestructible as the air breathed in each 10cality."1 

IHmJ wholly french-speaking 

E3 ~ largely cantonsholdingto french-speaking thclrown but with dialects some Map 2. French-speaking departments, 1835. SOURCE: Abel Hugo, La France pittoresque (Paris, 1835), I: Ifi. • ~ liliid 

all or nearly all communes 

cohesive groups of communes non-french-speaking 

non-french-speaking 50% + of communes non-french-speaking 

• patois indicated 

significant proporrion of communes non -french -speak i ng 

questionable 

Map 3. Patois-speaking communes, 1863. SOURCE: Archives Natio- nales, pa 3160, Ministere de I'instruction pubJique, "Statistique: Etats divers." 

A Wealth of Tongues 

Other figures in the survey conflict with outside evidence. In Loire-Inferieure French seems to have the department to itself. And yet as late as 1889 a linguist insisted that throughout the inland sections of the department, people spoke Vendeen or Poitevin patois, and that at Batz (a small Celtic enclave near Le Croisic) they still spoke Breton. Not a grave oversight, perhaps, but enough to shake one's confidence. Nievre too seems wholly French-speaking in the 1863 statistics. Yet the Etat de l'instruction primaire remarked with some pride that in Morvan (the eastern part of the department), "over two-thirds of the children know French," which even if true means that about one-third did not. In Cantal, of the 1,124 men in the conscript class of 1864,529 were French- speaking, and the other 595 spoke French badly (340) or not at all (255). In cantons like Montsalvy in the southeast, contiguous to the wilder parts of Aveyron, and Laroquebrou to the west, bordering the narrow gorges of the Cere, the proportion of French speakers ranged' between one in five and one in three; yet the survey of 1863 showed French ~n general use in all of Cantal's 259 communes.2 

In several departments some schools were conducted in local speech to teach what none could otherwise understand: Alpes-Maritimes, Ardeche, Bas-Rhin, Basses-Pyrenees, Corsica, COtes-du-Nord, Finistere, Haut-Rhin, Meurthe, Morbihan, Moselle, and Nord. In Basses-Pyrenees, the survey reported that 875 schools taught exclusively in French and only 62 used Basque or Bearnais in whole or part; yet a general inspector's report of 1877 indicated that only around Oloron were classes given in French. In the Pyrenees-Orientales, by the 1863 survey, nearly half the children did not speak French, yet there is no indication that any other tongue competed with the national idiom; 12 years later, in 1875, the truth came out: "Catalan is the only language used through- out the Roussillon." No wonder school inspectors complained that children read their French "like parrots"1 3 

Other questions arise. Several departments included sizable areas where the local speech was alien to French: Flemish in Nord, Germanic dialects in Bas- and Haut-Rhin. But nearby regions were held to be wholly French- speaking, though they had a similar problem. In the Pas-de-Calais, for ex- ample, much of the countryside spoke Flemish, Artesien, or Pi card through the 1890's. Teachers' reports submitted to a school exhibition in 1884 reveal that the department's northwest corner, especially the points between Boulogne and Saint-Omer and extending as far east as the hinterland of Bethune, ac- cepted French slowly and with reluctance. At Bouvelinghem, Dohem, Haut- Loquin, Audincthun, and Alquines, French was "unfamiliar" or "almost un- known." The dialects of Boulogne, Artois, and Picardy reigned there, in some form, as they did at Enguinegatte, Fauquembergues, Aquin, Blequin, Blen- decques, Maisnil, and Argues.4 Far to the south, Tarn-et-Garonne stood out as an island of French speech amid the dark waves of neighboring Oc depart- ments. Perhaps the Protestant influences of Montauban contributed to that. 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

But the Etat de l'instruction primaire suggests otherwise. "Despite all efforts" it noted in 1864, "the French language spreads only with difficulty." One wishes one knew more. Perhaps as in Lozere, where more than a quarter of the schoolchildren knew no French and rather fewer than that knew it well, the situation was that one could hear it everywhere but nowhere was it spoken.5 The Third Republic found a France in which French was a foreign language for half the citizens. 

The French Crown had shown little concern with the linguistic conquest of the regions under its administration. Language was relevant merely as an instrument of rule. The ·Ordinance of Villers-Cotterets in 1539, dealing with legal and judicial processes, was a step in the Crown's long march to establish its authority over a diversity of rivals. Its intent was not to make French the national tongue, but simply to make sure that the language of the King's court would be used in the quarters significant to his power. Yet this functional and limited act had effects beyond its immediate purpose, chiefly arising from its article Ill: "We wish henceforth that all awards, judgments, and all other proceedings whether of our sovereign courts or of other lower and inferior ones, whether registers, inquests, contracts, commissions, sentences, wills and other acts, writs, or processes of justice or related to it, should be pronounced, recorded, and delivered to the parties in the French mother tongue and not otherwise." 

Along with the institution of a register in every parish to record each person's baptism ("to prove the time of majority"), marriage if it occurred, and death, this meant that within the dominions of the King of France, and shortly after in Savoy as well, every public act of life was sometimes transacted and always recorded in French. 

Transacted only sometimes, because of course the King's "langage maternel fran~ois" was not that of the majority of his subjects. The King's speech had precedence over those of his subjects, and all who engaged in public affairs were bound to use it or pay others to use it on their behalf. But linguistic unity hobbled far behind even the incomplete administrative unity of the Ancien Regime; nor does it seem to have been a policy goal. In the Treaty of the Pyrenees (1659), Louis XIV guaranteed his new subjects the right to use "the language they wished, whether French or Spanish, whether Flemish or others." The treaty was in French, Europe's new diplomatic language. But the King's subjects were slow to learn it. Jean Bart of Dunkirk, greatest of seventeenth-century French privateers, wrote his ship's logs in Flemish, and fumbled his rare brief reports to Louis XIV in a language he hardly knew. (But then the monarch himself was to be harangued in Picard during a royal process through the north.) All the same, French was spreading through the areas most accessible to Paris: Champagne, Burgundy, Normandy, the Loire valley. South of the Loire, La Fontaine found that French was not 

A Wealth of Tongues 7I spoken beyond Montmorillon in Poitou; and Racine, at Uzes in darkest Gard, needed "an interpreter as much as a Muscovite would need one in Paris."6 Burghers of the bigger towns, men of law of course, nobles, and clerics became bilingual or multilingual. Universities and colleges continued to teach in Latin through the seventeenth century and, in many cases, to the mid- eighteenth century. So in a fashion did many rural schools, as we shall see in another chapter. It was only in the eighteenth century that the speech of Paris made headway among the rural populations of all and in the Lyonnais. Everywhere else, it remained a preserve of city dwellers, adding still further to the growing gulf between city and village, and, in the city itself, creating a linguistic division between rich and poor. 

Devoted as were the many academies, provincial counterparts of the Aca- demie Francraise, to the propagation of the French language, they functioned in the midst of populations that knew little or no French. In 1726 the Academy of Marseilles held no public sittings because the public did not understand the language in which they were conducted.7 Members of the academies them- selves must have been rather like foreign students of French literature and language: approaching the culture of Paris as something strange to their own everyday speech and practice; they might write in French, but they thought in their own language.· 

Still, the growing prestige of French was winning converts among the middle and upper classes. There was the increasing vogue and availability of theaters and opera houses: an influence comparable to that of twentieth-cen- tury cinema, with everyone eager to adopt the admired accents and turns of phrase used on the stage. There was the spread of educational establishments and their increasing interest in French, especially with respect to seventeenth- century authors. There were learned societies-(socihes de pensee), lodges, clubs, drawing rooms, and reading rooms, along with an endless flood of works of literature and philosophy, fashion bulletins, newspapers, and period- icals-preferably from Paris. The whole notion of comme il faut focused on the capital, for language as for fashions, for manners as for ideas. By 1794 the prelate Henri Gregoire was ready to report to the Convention that three- quarters of the people of France knew some French, though admittedly not all of them could sustain a conversation in it, let alone speak or write it properly.8 

Like the report of 1863, Gregoire's seems to have taken an optimistic view. 

• Auguste Brun, Parlers regionaux, p. 87. And their French was sometimes closer to their every- day speech than to the French of Paris. J. Regne, Situation economique et hospitaliere du Vivarais a la veille de la Revolution (Aubenas, 1914), cited in Annales du Midi, July-Oct. 1916, p. 523, published a memorandum from Blachere, sub-delegate of Aubenas, dated Dec. 10, 1786. It was remarked that Regne "a respecte la syntaxe et I'ortographie de Blachere, homme bien informe et de bon sens, mais qui ecrivait un fran~ais patoisant, pratique dans les cevennes par la bourgeoisie et la noblesse jusqu'au milieu du 1ge siecle, le peuple ne parlant et ne comprenant guere que le patois. Le langage de Blachere parait, a l'Intendant, si different de cdui de Versailles, qu'il pre- scrit de 'mettre en fran~ais' les passages a conserver." 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

Many of the provincial assemblies discussing the cahiers of 1789 had en- countered linguistic problems, and the great survey Gn~goire set on foot re- vealed more areas where French was hardly spoken than places where it was known.9 

This was serious. Linguistic diversity had been irrelevant to administrative unity. But it became significant when it was perceived as a threat to political- that is, ideological-unity. All citizens had to understand what the interests of the Republic were and what the Republic was up to, Barthelemy de Lan- themas told the Convention in December 1792. Otherwise, they could not participate, were not equipped to participate in it. A didactic and integrative regime needed an effective vehicle for information and propaganda; but it could hardly have one if the population did not know French. In November 1792, just a month before Lanthemas's speech, the Minister of Justice had set up an office to translate laws and decrees into the German, Italian, Catalan, Basque, and Lower Breton languages.1o 

This could be no more than an expedient. The ideal of the Revolution lay in uniformity and the extinction of particularisms. "Reaction ... speaks Bas- Breton," insisted the Jacobins. "The unity of the Republic demands the unity of speech .... Speech must be one, like the Republic." Most agreed with Lanthemas that the various tongues "have no kind of distinction and are simply remnants of the barbarism of past ages." Gregoire put it best when he called for the elimination of "the diversity of primitive idioms that extended the infancy of reason and prolonged obsolescent prejudices." The Convention agreed with Gregoire. It acted to abolish dialects, and to replace them with the speech of the Republic, "the language of the Declaration of Rights." It decreed that throughout the Republic children must learn "to speak, read and write in the French language," and that everywhere "instruction should take place only in French."ll All this was easier said than done. The policy foundered. If revolutionary patriotism spoke French, it often spoke it badly. And where the people did not speak French, revolutionaries who wanted to reach the people addressed them in their local tongue. What survived from the shipwreck was the principle. 

A state unconcerned about linguistic diversity, a catholic cultural ideal largely indifferent to the problem, were replaced by an ideology that embraced unity as a positive good and recognized language as a significant factor in achieving it. As the Cahors Committee of Primary Education declared in 1834, "the political and administrative unity of the kingdom urgently requires the unity of language in all its parts."12 In any case, the committee added, the southern dialects were inferior-a view that earlier ages had developed more discreetly, that the revolutionaries had trumpeted, and that didactic propa- ganda henceforth helped to spread. 

Teaching the people French was an important facet in "civilizing" them, 

A Wealth of Tongues 73 in their integration into a superior modern world. F eIix Pecaut, apostle of progressive education under the Third Republic, expressed the Fabian view in 1880 that Basque would soon give way to "a higher level of civilization." And the literary critic Francisque Sarcey had even greater pretensions: the French, all the French, must come to speak the same language, "that of Voltaire and the Napoleonic Code; all must be able to read the same news- paper, published in Paris, which brings the ideas worked out in the great city." There can be no clearer expression of imperialistic sentiment: a white man's burden of Francophony, whose first conquests were to be right at home. That they were seen as conquests can be perceived in Henri Baudrillart's remark that Oc was "giving way to the ascendancy of the victor's speech." The local folk agreed: "French is for us a language imposed by right of con- quest," declared the Marseillais historian Fran<;ois Mazuy. Yet the conquest was slow. Unity was still an aim and a source of concern a century after Gregoire; witness the fears expressed by the Minister of the Interior in 1891 that by continuing to preach in dialect priests "may endanger French unity." The French God has always been a jealous God. He can be worshiped only in French, as Anatole de Monzie made clear in his famous circular of 1925 defending "the one French language whose jealous cult can never have too manyaltars."13 

By that time, if the jealous cult had not stamped out all competitors, it had at least persuaded many that such competitors had never really existed. As early as 1907 a laureate of the Academy had declared that popular speech and literary language developed from the same source: Old French. In 1966 the head of the Education Ministry's Service of Pedagogical Research spoke of the promotion of French over Latin in the schools as an affirmation of "the people's language."14 By 1968, when Antoine Prost published his fine history of French education, L'Enseignement en France, 1800-1967, we look in vain for one whisper about the worst problem plaguing schoolteachers through the whole of the nineteenth century: that so many of their pupils did not speak French or spoke it poorly. 

Perhaps the myth and the striving for linguistic unity stood as a consolation for a persistent diversity.* At any rate, until the First World War the langage maternel franc;ois of Francis I was not that of most French citizens. As Arnold Van Gennep wrote in 19II, "for peasants and workers, the mother tongue is patois, the foreign speech is French."15 The purpose of the following pages is to document this statement, to show where it most readily applied, to indi- cate how patois waned, and to suggest what the side effects of that waning were. 

• "1£ we haven't always the same feelings, the same ideas, the same philosophies, the same opinions, the same faith, alas! let us at least have the same language'" (Ernest Pn!vost in La Vic- toire, quoted in L'Ecla;r, Sept. 28, 1925.)74 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

Documentation is hard to find at best. But beyond that, many documents are deceptive-unintentionally as a rule-because they render in French what actually took place in another language. Even some local scholars sin in this way, reporting a song or phrase of their region in their own French. Par- ticularly troublesome are the reports of priests, police, and gendarmes, where only the occasional hint intimates that the exchanges rendered in (of ten- stilted) French actually took place in a local tongue. The reader has to keep a sharp lookout. "He spoke patois and so did I," observes a Limousin priest, very much in passing. How else, indeed, could he have communicated with a villager in the early years of the Second Empire? A new sub-prefect posted to Saint-Flour in 1867 complained that though he could communicate with the village mayors in French, he could neither understand nor make himself understood by anyone else in his area (but, he added, "at my age I am not about to learn Auvergnat").16 Policemen sometimes admitted they could not understand what they heard. In Gers they often were unable to follow the sermon in the church; and one police superintendent in 1875, reporting on a home search for contraband matches, noted: ''It's true that I have great diffi- culty understanding the local speech." One wonders what Flaubert's police superintendent of Pont-Aven, who needed a translator to deal with his charges, wrote in his reports. The occasional clue appears when an officer of the law quotes some untranslatable local term.17 

There is some indication that many of the accused and the witnesses called before the courts spoke patois-some translating what they could themselves, others having their testimony translated by sworn interpreters. As late as 1890 the Ariege assizes tried a man for homicide who spoke for himself in patois. But the hard evidence on this point is scanty. So are the true facts about what went on during the great crise du Midi in 1907. The copious testimony on events in N arbonne, Beziers, Perpignan, Agde, and other rebellious centers says not a word about the language that the rioters and their leaders used; silence the more revealing when witnesses stressed the social class or garb of their interlocutors or assailants.1s I do not think the silence was deliberate; likely, the information was not ~onsidered pertinent. But it does mean one has to rely on rather restricted sources. 

The reports of officers reconnoitering the French countryside from the Restoration through the Second Empire swarm with references to incompre- hensible local speech. In predictable areas (Brittany, the Limousin, the south- west, the Pyrenees) the soldiers employed or called for interpreters, just as the doctors who were sent to Ariege during the cholera epidemic of 1854 had to do.19 In Lozere and Cantal, remarked a distraught soldier, the speech was unintelligible. "As difficult as it is to make oneself understood, it is even more difficult to understand an answer." But that was in 1844. In 1858 the Virgin who appeared to Bernadette Soubirous needed no interpreter; but she did 

A Wealth of Tongues 75 find it necessary to address the girl, at least in part, in the Pyrenean dialect of Lourdes, where her words are now engraved: "Que soy era immaculada concepcion." By the end of the Second Empire many country people under- stood French even if they did not speak it. But familiarity with French in the countryside was still cause for comment. And there were those like the old Auvergnat who, sent as a prisoner to Hesse, in 1870, had married and stayed on. When Jacques Duclos met him, in 1917, the old man got by in local Hes- sian dialect; after half a century, he still knew neither French nor German.20 This state of affairs did not change significantly until the Third Republic. In 1874 an officer reporting on the area near Azay-Ie-Rideau (Indre-et-Loire) 

Map 4. Documented entrenched areas of patois under the Third Republic. SOURCES: Various documents cited in the text. Note that this map and others of the kind that follow are not to be taken as exhaustive. 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

found it worth mentioning that "all speak French," so that though the people used the patois of Touraine, he was able to make himself understood. In 1877, reporting on the itinerary of a convoy through Hautes-Pyrenees, an officer complained that since most of the inhabitants hardly understood any French, one was often forced to have recourse to an interpreter to get any in- formation at all from them. That same year in Perigord another officer noted that while the residents of Perigueux could speak French, though they pre- ferred patois, "it is almost impossible for the stranger to understand [the peasants] or to make himself understood." In 1879 a folklorist could still pub- lish the parable of the prodigal son in 88 different patois. Walking through Lower Brittany in 1882, Maupassant found the linguistic situation little changed since Flaubert's visit two-score years before. Hospitality was as ready, but information was still hard to get, "for often during a whole week, while roaming through the villages, one does not meet a single person who knows a word of French."21 And at the Paris Exposition of 1889 the operators of one of the attractions, the little narrow-gauge Decauville railroad, thought it worthwhile to print their warning posters in Breton and Provenc;al as well as French. Of course, anyone who could actually read Breton or Provenc;al could probably read French too. 

This is where teachers and school inspectors, whom we shall meet again in a later chapter on education, furnish useful information (or sometimes help- ful hints). The picture that we get from their reports is of shrinking but still significant areas where patois prevailed. In Tarn patois was still heard every- where through the 1870's. This was the case as well throughout the Limousin, one of the most stubborn holdouts. In Haute-Vienne even the teachers used patois for business activities outside the school. There, noted an inspector in 1881, French was not the normal language for most inhabitants, and those that used it mangled it. French continued to be an uncertain thing for the inhabitants of several regions into the twentieth century, as we can see from a police report of 1910 on a union meeting noting that a labor leader from the Tarn addressed his audience "in bad French."22 

In Lot-et-Garonne and Basses-Pyrenees (1880) the children spoke French only during school hours. "Mediocre results," reads Pecaut's report, "because the child, outside school, thinks and speaks in patois." Same song in the 1881 inspection reports, in those departments and in Aveyron and Alpes-Maritimes, where even at the junior high school of Cannes, "the difficulty is to get the students who think in patois talking in French." In Dordogne "the obstinate indifference to French" would probably not be overcome for another genera- tion, in a school inspector's judgment. In Haute-Loire (1882) the child "studies a language that he never uses outside school, and that he finds very difficult to understand."23 There, a tourist guide of 1886 advised travelers that patois was in general use. As it was in Ariege, where in 1887 we find a teacher having real problems with her little charges, who could speak nothing else.24 

A Wealth of Tongues 77 After the 1880'S this kind of negative evidence runs out-which is what we might expect once Jules Ferry's school laws began to work. I shall argue that several factors besides the schools were working for French and against local speech. But that is not the point here; whatever the cause, the progress is evi- dent. Any degree of schooling had always given its beneficiaries a notion of French, a touch of bilingualism, however slight. Bernadette Soubirous had used patois in recounting what the Virgin did and said, but when another little girl translated the account into French for the benefit of Sister Damien, Bernadette was able to "vigorously correct her mistakes." Similarly, when she was interrogated in French by the imperial prosecutor about her vision, she understood him well enough, though she answered in patois.25 

There could be few occasions in the mid-nineteenth century for simple peasant girls like Bernadette to engage in even such primitive exchanges. The 1870's and 1880'S created more of them. In non-French-speaking areas more and more people came to understand the national language, and in due course to speak it. In lower Auvergne the last of the old people who could not under- stand French died around 1880. In parts of upper Auvergne they survived a little longer. Only a few adults spoke French, noted the schoolteacher at Vic- le-Comte, 15 miles from Clermont, in 1899, but it was beginning to be used off and on by the young, who picked the habit up in the schools, "where patois is strictly forbidden." Bilingualism thus became almost general. The difficult schoolchildren of the early 1880'S, raised wholly amid local speech, grew up in the 1890's to mouth only a faltering and literally fractured version of what they had been taught. "A lot of water will flow under the bridges before we get the peasant to speak French," wrote Father Gorse in 1895 of the Correze where he still preached and explained the scriptures in Limousin dialect. "The child uses it as long as the teacher keeps his eye on him; the soldier gets an- other taste of it· in barracks; but once back in the village ... diga li que vingua!"26 The school inspector of Dordogne was right. There had to be an- other generation before French became the mother tongue for Frenchmen such as these. At the very least. More likely this was only generally true of the off- spring born to those who were educated in the late 1880'S and married in the 1890's. That was the generation that manned the trenches in 1914-18. 

This slow, hesitant process, and the way its stages overlapped between different classes and generations (not to speak of regions), explains how travelers could still find themselves unable to communicate in French until the end of the century. "The Caussien-Bas Breton-Morvandial," remarked an English traveler in 1892, "will in these days shake their heads if interro- gated in French." Jean Ajalbert described a more typical situation for that period: a man in Cantal who understood questions put in French but could not answer in the same language and had to fall back on patois. That was Edward Harrison Barker's experience in the Landes about that time, where many (especially the women) could not-or could barely-understand French, 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

and spoke only a few mangled words. In Roussillon, too, Catalan remained the everyday speech, but there French was mostly understood. Barker wrote of another occasion, in 1893, when he asked his way of a shepherd boy in Dordogne and was not understood. But he added that this was a rare occur· rence, especially among the young: "In the Haut-Quercy, where patois is the language of everybody, even in the towns, one soon learns the advantage of asking the young for the information that one may need."27 School and mili· tary service were at work. Only women and the old escaped their influence. Hence the professional travel writer who in 1903 found himself in a village in the Ambazac Mountains, not far from Limoges, where he could neither make himself understood nor understand the women, who spoke only patois. He could not find his way until at last he encountered men who "spoke French pure."· 

In the decade preceding 1914 such blank spots must have become exceptional indeed. As a 1911 survey of rural speech in Savoy indicates, the peasants now made a point of speaking to their children in French, something they had refused to do only a few years before, so that the child had less trouble at school learning the new language. The generation gap stands out: an old peasant addressed by a city man (un monsieur) answered in patois; a young one answered in French. The old peasant spoke patois to priest and teacher; the young one spoke to them in French. In workshops and factories patois was hardly heard at all; because so many of the workers were "foreign"-immi- grants from Bresse and other provinces-French had to be used as a lingua franca. Increased mobility and social exchanges played their part in the spread of the national language, as they had in the spread of the national currency and measures. Industrialization also helped speed the process. In Vosges, for example, the installation of a cotton industry in the 1870's and its expansion after the 1880'S all but wiped out the local dialect when country people moved into small industrial centers where French or an unfamiliar dialect obtained; they also worked alongside Alsatian immigrants, whose speech was different still. As a teacher noted: "The mixture of patois favors a common language."28 The war of 19I4 saw the culmination of the process, though not its end. With vast numbers of refugees set in motion and soldiers from every part of the country serving together, millions were forced to use French on a daily rather than a sometime basis. Jacques Duc1os, mobilized at Pau in 1915, met a Basque soldier who did not know a word of French, "but events would force him to learn it." At the start men were mustered into local units and so could rely on their familiar patois. But as the war went on, new units were set up with the survivors of decimated ones and old units were bolstered with recruits 

• Ardouin-Dumazet, Voyage en Prance, 28: 43 (see also pp. 86, 171). Shortly before the war, as Frances M. Gostling and her husband motored down the Dordogne valley toward Saint-Privat and Argentat (Correze), they tried to ask their way in the villages, but were not always successful, "for the Auvergnat patois still pursues us." Impromptu guides were incomprehensible, their French "but indifferent." (Auvergne and Its People, New York, 19II, p. 264.) 

A Wealth of Tongues 79 from every corner of the country. Men had no choice but to speak French. And they did. Many continued to do so home on leave or after demobilization. It was a giant step. In Isere, Pierre Barral tells us, the old patois was completely abandoned by the young after 1918. In the Vosges it became increasingly rare, rather despised.· The situation in 1920 was just the reverse of what it had been in 1880: bilinguals were more awkward in patois than in French; the majority and, most important, the young were on the side of the national language.29 

The same departments and regions keep coming up in this account, but scattered bits of evidence suggest that patois was spoken in many other areas. In Maconnais, for example, patois was in general use until 1880 or so, and disappeared only after the First World War. The same seems to apply to the Vosges, the Jura, Dauphine, and Franche-Comte. In Marche and Berry, vil- lages continued to use Berrichon or Marchois at least until the turn of the century. Even in Normandy, at least some of the peasants apparently did not speak French as late as 1899, since we are told that in the Manche the school- teachers understood the "rustic patois" of their pupils.sO I am inclined to ascribe the lack of references to problems in these other areas, all of the langue d'O'il, to two things. First, these regions were quicker to adopt French and put up less resistance to what was taught in school than other parts of the country, so that teachers had few grounds for complaint on that score. And second, though the children in these regions too spoke their various patois at home and in the street, the structure and pronunciation of the 011 tongues were fairly compatible with French, so that they had less trouble learning Parisian speech. Three parts of France deserve particular mention because they spoke (or slowly ceased to speak) languages wholly different from French and resisted it the longest. The largest, though by no means the most resistant, was the realm of Oc from Gascony to Provence. "If a traveler through the French countryside wants to understand what is said around him," wrote one such traveler in 1852, "he has to stop [in Bourbonnais] on his progress south. Fur- ther on, he would hear only graceless sounds that would make no sense."Sl By that time, 1852, the graceless sounds reflected less the persistence of Proven~al, which had long since begun to decay, than the efforts of southerners to adjust to French. 

As French speech and culture spread through southern towns and along the highways in the early nineteenth century, the language developed regional forms-mixtures of local terms camouflaged as French and of French words adapted to local usage and pronunciation. Travelers from the outside com- plained that they could not understand this baragouin. Local polemicists 

• Yet Auguste Brun asserts that the war had no influence on the use of Proven~al: "Au contraire, le patois a servi de ralliement entre pays, au regiment, au front ou en captivite" (La Langue franraise en Provence, p. 165). But of course such a development does not necessarily rule out a spreading knowledge and use of French. 

80 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

railed against the renegade Franciots who spoke it. Grammarians and lexi- cographers admonished and advised. Yet increasingly after the late 1820'S the realm of Oc became the home not of two languages but of three: the local idiom, which was Proven~al, Gascon, or some other tongue; French as taught in the schools; and the confused mixture of the two that scholars describe as fran~ais regional. In Auguste Brun's succinct definition, a language is a dialect that has made good, a patois is a debased dialect. By the 1850's Proven~al was a patois: it had ceased to be written; it had become fragmented into local idioms; the upper classes no longer used it except to deal with the man on the street.32 

In 1854 a group of young poets and intellectuals concerned for the preserva- tion of the speech and literature of Qc founded the Felibrige, and in the fol- lowing year they began publication of a yearly almanac, the Armana pro- tJenrau, with an initial printing of 500 copies.ss To revivify their native lan- guage, the Felibres sought to create a literature. But literature needs a reading public, and such a public was hard to find. The country people, when they learned to read, learned to read in French; they thus found reading "patois" difficult-the more so since French orthography is not designed to express the sounds of Oc. Furthermore, people who used forms of speech that were highly localized and in constant evolution found it hard to understand a literary language that was often archaic and incomprehensible, as Petrarch's Ciceron- ian Latin must have been to his contemporaries of the fourteenth century. At Toulon in 1873, according to Fran~ois Beslay, "men of the people hardly un- derstand the poems of Roumanille," the FeIibre of Avignon.S4 Beslay was a prejudiced witness, but he was buttressed to some extent by the experiences related by the Felibres themselves: such as addressing country people in liter- ary Proven~al and being met with uncomprehending stares. 

In fact, the Felibrige seems to have been a political reaction initiated on a plane several removes away from ordinary people, and from their concerns. Its populist ideals had originally been set forth in French, because French stood for liberalism and emancipation and because already in the 1840's fashion and school made French the favorite vehicle for poetic and political expression. In 1848 the eighteen-year-old poet Frederic Mistral had composed an ode to liberty in French. But after 1848 and, even more, after December 2, 1851, he turned to his native Proven~al to express the sentiments that had once seemed best said in French. But the circumstances that had first suggested using French were not changing; and the Felibrige fell between two stools. By the time its masterwork, Mireio, appeared in 1859, the literate upper classes in the south had been Frenchified. Their reaction was reflected in the words of Mon- sieur de Pontmanin: "What a pity that this masterpiece should be written in the language of our servants!" Unfortunately the servants agreed.* Seeing 

• It is worth noting that in the dedication to Mireio, Mistral characterized himself as a peasant, and Lamartine. to whom the work was dedicated, was quick to accept him as such. The claim, 

A Wealth of Tongues 8I 

the rich, the noble, the intellectuals, the city people, businessmen, and civil servants abandoning dialect as a spoken language, the common man accepted their scorn for it even if he did not imitate their practice. He spoke patois at home; but beyond parochial limits patois was despised and useless, an irrele- vant anachronism good perhaps for intellectual games but no use to peasant children. 

Provenpl, Gascon, and the multitude of local dialects continued to be spoken, of course, as they still were in Laurence Wylie's Roussillon. At the turn of the century street vendors from Bayonne and Perigueux to Marseille and the Alps still hawked their wares in the local dialect. But the regionalists could not revive or recreate a common popular speech because they could not deal with the causes of its decline.s5 And the same process was at work in other reglOns. 

Shepherd Clough notes, in his fine History of the Flemish Movement, un- deservedly forgotten today, that Flemish "reigned supreme in the rural sec- tions of French Flanders," north and northeast of Hazebrouck. Though by 1930, when Clough's book was published, the supremacy was dubious, Flem- ish was not easily dethroned. The French Revolution, suspicious of dialects, does not seem to have attacked Flemish. And the survival of Latin in the drawing up of administrative acts, which were executed in French elsewhere, closed one avenue by which French had penetrated other regions.s6 It was mainly in the nineteenth century that the superior attractions of French sapped the cultural and literary activities without which a language cannot survive- except as a patois. The old literary and poetic societies (chambres) decayed, the traditional songwriters (dichter) died away. The chambre of Eecke cele- brated landjuweelen-poetic contests-in 1835, 1861, and 1874- But in 1861, though the theme of the prize competition was given in Flemish, all the poetry entries bore French titles, and only four of the 16 songs submitted had Flemish titles.31 A Belgian contemporary of Mistral, the poet-priest Guido Geselle, sparked a last effort to compete with the French influence, but this was the final flicker of the culture that had been. 

Deprived of an intellectual and literary base, Flemish in France was con- demned. It did not die an easy death, however. Andre Malraux's grandfather, a Dunkirk shipowner who died in 1909, did not speak French but Flemish. The Abbe Lemire, born near Hazebrouck but on the French side of the lin- guistic frontier, had to learn Flemish after 1876 in order to fulfill his pastoral duties. In the middle and late 1880'S primary education was still hampered by 

however, is difficult to take seriously. We may note, too, that though poets and songwriters pro- duced works in Qc throughout the nineteenth century (see Jean Giron, Vie des personnages celebres de l'Aude, Montpellier, 1940), very few of the works represented what could be called popular cul- ture; in the main these writers presented a populist point of view. Significantly enough, when the winegrowers rebelled in 1907, the signs they hoisted (which are to be found in many village town- halls in Aude and Herault) were written in Qc. But their leader, Marcelin Albert, wrote his mys- tical populist texts in French. 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

the general dominion of that tongue. Baudrillart, who visited and observed the region in his usual thorough way, was distressed to find himself speaking a little-understood language to people who answered in a patois he did not understand at all: "a painful feeling to find oneself a stranger in one's own country."38 

The Third Republic, suspicious of regionalism in general, disliked it even more on this sensitive periphery. After 1877 this attitude was reinforced by the government's rigid anticlericalism. Like most linguistic minorities, the Flemish-speaking French had the support of the Catholic clergy. Sermons and catechism in Flemish raised political problems. A ministerial decree in 1890 prohibited religious instruction in the language, but though the prefect sus- pended mayors who failed to enforce the decree, the campaign proved in- effective, and in 1896 the Archbishop of Cambrai had to be asked to intervene. He refused, and the friction did not abate until 1905. After that, with the sepa- ration of church and state, the documents on the conflict peter out, though the practices to which the state objected continued. In the meantime, however, the teaching of the schools had been making itself felt, and so had the cul- turally destructive attractions of nearby industrial centers. Between the turn of the century and the First World War, this seems to have produced a genera· tion of children who did not really know their mother tongue-which was no longer taught in any structured way-and who had an even poorer grasp of French.39 The growing pains of modernity. 

Last but not least, Lower Brittany. "The Breton people," wrote an agricul- turalist in 1863, "forms, in the middle of the nation ... ,a population apart." Visiting Frenchmen felt this strongly. What one of them called the Chinese wall of Breton speech made communication hopeless, and strange things stranger still. Several times in 1846 the young Flaubert and his traveling com- panion, Maxime du Camp, found themselves lost and could not raise help. Thus between Audierne and Plogoff, "We lose our way. Deserted village; barking dogs; no one speaks French."40 

All the same, French marched through the Breton peninsula, moving slowly but surely along the highways, then the railways, from Rennes and Nantes to Brest. It spread outward in growing circles from ports and naval installations like Brest, frqm administrative centers like Vannes, and generally inland from the coast. On the eve of the Revolution, Breton or Gallo was spoken in all but two of Brittany's seven dioceses.*' By Ferry's time only two still held out. Everywhere else the situation had been reversed. The rivulets or inlets of French had become an advancing tide that nibbled at and washed over the still- resistant reefs. But on the tip of the peninsula over a million people clung to the Breton speech. In Finistere in 1881 four out of five women, one out of two 

• The Dukes of Brittany had tried to colonize their gallo lands with lords and settlers from Lower Brittany, but the only result was to create small Breton-speaking islands, which shrank to practically nothing after 1870 (see Marie Drouart, L'Etat actuel du folklore, pp. 4-5). 

A Wealth of Tongues 

conscripts, neither spoke nor understood the national language; further, there, as in great parts of Morbihan and COtes-du-Nord, priests still preached in Breton. And even as the Revue pedagogique carried encouraging bulletins, it had to admit in 1894 that teachers appointed to posts in Brittany who did not speak Breton had to be given dictionaries.41 

Just how much progress French really made, on its march through the Breton countryside, is hard to determine. Peasant girls came to town knowing no word of French, to work as maids. They took a little time to learn enough to communicate with their mistress and talk "enough for the needs of [their] service." Soon they could go to the market alone, and deal with the baker, the butcher, and the grocer, as Spanish and Portuguese maids would learn to do in Paris a century later. Peasant lads, primarily the sons of wealthier farmers, attended school in town for a year or two and picked up enough French to use in the market later.42 Most young recruits, it was said, in two months "acquired a number of words sufficient to understand and make themselves understood."· Back in the village, though, those using French ("young men," revealingly) were mercilessly kidded back into line-even in Upper Brittany- and children knew that French, "good when one is at school," was better dropped outside where "on repreche comme tout le monde."4s 

So even when French was taught, it was not spoken. In 1906 a couple of English travelers had repeated difficulties in making themselves understood in Lower Brittany: young people proved to have "some knowledge of French," or had "French that [was] not easy to understand." Was it as one commenta- tor suggested, a question of the "stubbornness of the Cornouaillais, who though he knew the language of the rest of France, made it a point of honor" to speak only his own? Or was it that he spoke French so badly? A few months of winter schooling could not compete with a world where one heard only Breton, so even "if at one time he knew how to translate a few words of French, he's forgotten them quickly." What was left of the French vocabulary was often limited to "Donne-moi un p'tit sou, M'sieu!"U 

Here, too, one must take a hard look at the statistics, especially when one comes across something like the following. To be registered as a sailor, a man had to know how to read and write. Here is the way the examination for the inscription maritime was administered at Audierne in the early twentieth century . "We show them a page of a book, they spell without understanding: they can read. We dictate a sentence, they cannot write it; we show them the 

• Revue pedagogique, March 15, 1894, p. 218. Rigorous methods were used to achieve this. The commanding general of the 11th Army Corps once canceled all leaves for the entire 118th Infantry Regiment at Quimper because men had been found speaking Breton in barracks. Remarks Jean Choleau: "Le conscrit se trouve au milieu d'anciens qu'on a tout d'abord 'debretonnises,' com- mande par des sous-officiers qui ont re~u l'ordre de ne pas parler breton a leurs compatriotes, sous la coupe de jeunes officiers venus en Bretagne pour y faire des etudes de moeurs et qui, las de ne rien corn prendre a notre race, passent sur le dos des soldats leur mauvaise humeur" ("La consom- mation de l'a1cool et la natalite en Bretagne," Relorme sodale, June 16, 1908).THE WAY THINGS WERE 

book and they painfully copy a line or two: they can write." Their French was like the village precentor's Latin: a song without meaning. As late as 19r6 a soldier from M~llionnec (C8tes-du-Nord), Franc;ois Laurent, was executed as a spy because he could not make himself understood in French.45 

But Baudrillart, that excellent chronicler of French's imperial progress, had noted the Chinese wall beginning to crumble in 1885. Those who could not speak French, he said, felt ashamed. Perhaps not yet. More important, he noted that literary Breton was becoming the purview of the learned.46 The gulf between literary language and everyday speech, in which the cultural revival of the south had f~mndered, was opening up in Brittany as well. 

One has only to read the desperate plaints of local traditionalists against the shift to French speech, dress, and manners,47 and browse through the Breton newspapers, especially the Catholic ones in r894 and 1895, to realize that more and more parents and children were becoming committed to integration, to Frenchification, which stood for mobility, advancement, economic and social promotion, and escape from the restrictive bonds of home. One can sympathize with the fears of what this commitment implied, but also with the needs and yearnings it reflected. In any case, not sympathy but elucidation is the scholar's business. And so we turn to the question: what made patois recede? 

We have already accepted that the schools and schoolteachers played a crucial role. None thinks to gainsay it. As Auguste Brun well put it, the inkwell and the pen worked for French.48 He might have added, and worked only in French. Arithmetic, for example, was taught in French. Thus, even those who normally spoke in some other tongue could reckon sums only in French, the language in which they had learned the skill. And if the catechism was often a bastion of local dialect, Protestantism, which was an active movement in the countryside through the first two-thirds of the nineteenth century, and whose propaganda I have found from Y onne down to the Pyrenees, was a powerful instrument of Frenchification, spreading Calvin's language along with his heresy. We shall consider two other significant influences in due course: mili- tary service and the printed word. In the meantime, we may note what the veteran linguist Albert Dauzat had to say about his own Auvergnat village, Vinzelles, near the Dore: that French came in after the French Revolution and spread during the Second Empire "by newspaper and barracks even more than school."49 

French could, and did, enter through 'such channels where the local language was relatively close to French. The teachers knew the difference this made. In places like the Doubs (r864), where the local tongue was used everywhere but French co-existed with it, the extirpation of the competing language was deemed less necessary "than in certain departments where the traveler who speaks only French cannot make himself understood in many villages."5o 

Even the wild Morvan, whose denizens in the eighteenth century were like "people of another continent," speaking a jargon that in the last years of 

A Wealth of Tongues 85 

the Empire remained unintelligible even to their neighbors-even the wild Morvan accepted French before the lands of the southwest. By the 1860'S the lo- cal idiom had retreated to the fastnesses of the forests east of Chateau-Chinon: Planchez, Arleuf, Villapour~on. In the Morvan, as in more open country, the speech of the countryside did not wait upon the schools to give in to French: the patois of Burgundy, of Champagne, of Poitou, of Beauce and Perche were already fading in the r860's and r870's. Indeed, the success or failure of the schools simply reRected their linguistic environment, either predisposed to French or alien to it. This is quite clear on the linguistic frontier between Oc and Oil, where Marche (north Creuse and northern Haute-Vienne) proved more open to French than the true Limousin only a few miles away. Even in poor regions like Perche the proportion of literate conscripts was far higher than in comparable areas of, say, the southwest. However backward, Oll regions raised no particular obstacles to the advance of official culture. Thus French was being spoken "reasonably well" in the Moulins area in r908, where- as Limousin speech held on in the Cher valley to the west.51 

But above all, what worked first for and then against patois was the way of life in many rural quarters. It was in r889 that Ernest Renan insisted that no work of science, philosophy, or political economy could be produced in patois. One hears a confirming echo of this at that very time from a village teacher in Lozere: of course everyone spoke patois, he wrote, but when a peasant wanted to discourse on politics or current events he was likely to try to impress his hearers by turning to (terrible) French. Politics (as opposed to village business) was done in French, and we shall see that national politics, which entered the unintegrated countryside just about this time, accompanied the national language. Official business was done in French too. Flemish and Corsican had begun to give way after the legislation that ordered people's everyday life was translated into the national language during the Second Empire. And Wylie has shown how, at Roussillon, a dispute over a bowling game caused men to shift from Proven~al to French: another result of legis- lation, in this case requiring associations to submit for official use a copy of their statutes, naturally in the national language. Rules, regulations, and con- sequently litigation all were exclusively in the domain of French.52 

So were dealings with officialdom. That had not always been the case before r870' Indeed, as late as r867 we find the new sub-prefect of Saint-Flour com- plaining to his superior, the prefect of Cantal, that all the officials in his juris- diction were local men, which meant, among other things, that the villagers and peasants there, "always sure of being understood by them in their impos- sible gibberish," did their business in patois, and made no effort to learn or retain French, "quickly losing what the schools have taught them."53 This free-:md-easy exchange between citizen and officials ended after the Third Republic made the certificat d' ecole a prerequisite for even minor civil service jobs. The minor public servant became a man who had learned French, often 

86 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

with much pain, in the midst of populations who had not. The consequent sense of superiority on the part of such petty bureaucrats and its effects on relations between officials and the public can still be felt today. 

One of the greatest enemies of patois was simply its own parochialism. The factors that worked against French in the old isolated world, self-sufficient in far more realms than mere subsistence, turned against local idioms as that world changed. Breton was useless beyond a certain area that had once seemed vast but that became increasingly limited in the perspective of the modern world. Nor was Breton one tongue, or Limousin, or the so-called langue d'Oc. Vannetais was incomprehensible to most other Bretons; men from Leon found it hard to understand those from Guingamp. The old dialectical world was fragmented in the extreme. Dialect might change from one valley to an- other, from high ground to low, from one riverbank to the next, if physical barriers made communications difficult.- In 1816 a man held up by thieves near Avallon in Y onne had been able to place their origin in a particular pays of Nievre, by their speech and manner of dress. In 1844 an officer in Lot noted that "the natives found it very difficult to make themselves understood out- side their own village." One of the arguments in a famous impersonation trial of the 1850's was that the accused, who came from Saint-Marcellin in Isere, could not have known the patois of Corps that she was said to have used be- cause, though Corps was also in Isere, its patois was different from her own. And when, at the end of the century, pork butchers from southern Creuse went north for the fairs in the Creuse districts close to Berry, no one could easily understand their speech. "0 y at pas d'besoin de feire trotter in chretien," declared the Charentais, "pour queneutre de la voure i sort." If the wisdom of Saintonge said that you did not need to make a man trot around (like a horse at a fair) in order to know where he was from, it was because his speech would tell yoU.'I4t 

As time went on, and especially as more and more people moved about, the advantages of knowing French became increasingly obvious. Recognition of the fact spurred the decay of local speech. As we have noted, industrial de- velopment worked for the linguistic unification of the polyglot labor force that migrated to the cities. Market changes worked more slowly but to similar effect in the countryside. "Le frans:ais rapporte, le patois ne rapporte rien," was Arnold Van Gennep's response to a Savoy linguist who deplored the trend. Even children, especially children perhaps, had come to despise patois. When, on the eve of the First World War, the schools became somewhat more friend- ly to local dialects, it was the country people's turn to reject them.1I5 

• This was the case in Ariege, where Massat and its valley spoke a Languedocien similar to that of Foix, and the rest of the Couserans spoke Gascon (T.-M. Servat, Histoire de Massat, pp. 50- 51). As a long-suffering Picard philologist remarks: "Le patois, on le sait, varie parfois d'un village a l'autre, d'une famille a la voisine et, dans la m1:me famille, d'une generation a la suivante" (Gaston Vasseur, Lexique serrurier, p. 17). 

A Wealth of Tongues 

Knowing French had become a matter of pride for them, just as one's dialect had once been a matter of pride. For people who lived in coherent communi- ties with their own life, patois retained its earliest sense of a language one did not understand. It was not they who spoke patois; it was everyone else, the strangers. And the language strangers spoke was part of their strangeness and their ridiculousness, something that was likely to be derided rather than imitated, let alone admired. Basque peasant farces, as we have seen, often used strange jargon for the Blacks, always with satirical intent: Latin or French for lawmen, Bearnais and Spanish for barbers, tinkers, vainglorious odd- bodies or giants to be bested.66 And later, when the prestige of French began to be recognized, most peasant communities still felt that its use was inap- propriate in their midst and acted to discourage--chiefly by ridicule-those who tried to use it (clumsily as a rule) when a particular function or situation did not call for it. 

French was a "langage de parure et de ceremonie"; and country people knew quite well the difference between exalted speech and their own usage. As a basketmaker recently explained to a folklorist to whom he told his tales: ull y a bien des mots en grandeur, il ya bien des mots en mayonnais aussi."57 One used French forms, which were considered more noble, to show respect.:tI= A Gascon peasant speaking to a bourgeois would not use the homely pay and may in referring to the man's parents, but would say boste pero, bosto mero. The use of French could also emphasize quality. Gascon for hat is capet; but for a gentleman's top hat or a lady's bonnet one preferred chapeau. In lower Armagnac the shepherds called the strawberries that were theirs for the picking arragne; but in Auch and upper Armagnac, where strawberries did not grow wild but were cultivated as delicacies for a rich man's table, they were known as fresos.68 Aime Giron's novel of 1884, La Beate, about life in Vel ay, opens with a peasant couple visiting a convent. The man addresses the mother su- perior in French, a mark of respect. His wife would do so if she could, but she has no French. The mother superior, "a very distinguished woman," naturally speaks French. In the Loire country, where patois was still used in general conversation down to the Second World War, polite usage called for French. At a dance, for instance, a lad invited a girl to dance in French, and they preserved that formality through their early exchanges.59 

The pulpit, too, so often represented as a fortress of patois, was often the chief stage for recitals in the honored language-as it was expected to be. There was nothing a popular audience liked so much, remarked a priest at the end of the century, as to be addressed in a tongue that was not its own but 

• Or, on occasion, to try to gain a little respect, as when a peasant gave his children French names, taking his cue from the local squire. In that connection Albert Dauzat relates this anecdote. Around 1820 a priest espied a little girl at Vic-Ie-Comte and asked her for her name. "Mary," she answered. "Maryl But that is a young lady's name, not a name for a peasant. You must be called Miyette or Mayon." To which the little girl responded: "I'm as entitled to bear the Holy Virgin's name as any lady!" (Glossaire hymologique, pp. 18-19.) 

88 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

was understood. For that matter, understanding was not always requlSlte. As early as the 1820'S, we are told, the villagers of Moriere near Avignon, who spoke no French, were resentful when the priest chose patois for the sermon at a first communion ceremony. "It struck us as common, trivial, grotesque, unworthy of so great a solemnity," Agricol Perdiguier remembered many years later.6o 

What language to use in church was a thorny problem for the clergy, though perhaps no thornier than the authorities' problem of what to do about a re- calcitrant priest. True, political orientation, as well as sympathy, may have been a factor in some cases, but my own impression is that in general the priest's resistance to calls for him to use the national language reflected rather than led local resistance. Priests, after all, were trained in French. They too thought French superior to the debased idioms of their charges. Many might have preferred it. Beyond mere suppositions, one finds cases-in Ardeche, Allier, the Limousin-where a priest simply declared that he had to preach in patois if he wanted his parishioners to understand him. Some priests had trouble mastering the local tongue but were forced to use it. Oblates sent out on preach- ing missions seem to have run up against that problem, too. Even the Ministere des Cultes recognized that there were parts of France where a priest might be forced to use local dialect. Father Lemire, we recall, had to learn Flemish in order to do his job. He might well have preferred to save himself the trouble. In any case, where there was a public for French it was catered to: people were given a choice of masses, with the sermon in French or patois as suited them.61 

This practice fell off sharply at the turn of the century, in part under gov- ernment pressure, but mostly because this period witnessed the triumph of French. In 1901 La Semaine religieuse of Auch lamented the passing, in Armagnac, of the Gascon-Ianguage catechism and of homilies and sermons in Gascon, which had far outnumbered those in French through the whole of the nineteenth century. Thereafter, sermons in French, "which used to mark par- ticularly solemn occasions," became increasingly routine in that region.62 In Brittany, by contrast, many priests refused to observe the government's ban in 1902 on Breton-Ianguage sermons and catechism; in Finistere alone SI priests saw their salaries suspended.'*' It was only when-and where-French had ad- vanced sufficiently that the clergy turned to it. The Church reflected regional conditions; it did not create them.s3 

Once patois came to be widely scorned, its fate was sealed. It was increasingly rejected after the 1890's by the young and especially by girls and women, who to M. Dumesnil, Des manifestations des ministres des cultes a l'encontre des autorites politiques (Paris, 1903), p. 16. In 1903 or thereabouts the term coucou became a Breton slang word for a seminarian or priest who was born in Lower Brittany but did not know Breton; such men were often assigned to a gallo parish, yet were still "foreigners," like a cuckoo in a wren's nest. By extension: any Breton born in a Breton-speaking region "who is ignorant of his native tongue" (Gaston Esnault, L'lmagination populaire, p. 117). 

A Wealth of Tongues 

were to become strong carriers of a language that was seen as a badge of re- finement and of emancipation. A similar scorn of patois grew among those who had improved their condition or were eager to do so. A perceptive officer of the Restoration had predicted: "Le discredit du patois est l'effet naturel du progres du luxe et de la civilisation des capitales ... , qui s'etendent peu a peu jusqu'a leurs extremites.,,64 The little by little was slower than some expected. At Lantenne (Doubs), an agricultural village 21 kilometers from Besan~on, we are told that in 1896, 177 of 195 men and 163 of 197 women still spoke patois; during the 1914 war all the Lantenne boys at the front spoke only patois. Still, a century after the officer quoted, Auguste Brun could note: "One dresses as in town, one will speak as in town. New way of life, new way of speech."65 

What did all this mean, what did it do, to the people involved? Local tongues had not endured unchanged until the nineteenth century. They had evolved under the influence of fashion or need, or both, however isolated the regions where they were spoken. When, after the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, local ruling classes ceased to treat the speech of Oc as a literary language, when the cities, lost for Oc but not yet won for France, ceased to act as unifying centers for rural speech, particularism took over. The more self-sufficient a region, the more likely it was to develop its own dialect. Relative wealth could work this way as easily as poverty and isolation. The rich Limagne, where every village was virtually self-sufficient, kept its own speech and ways longer than some poor mountain areas whose people were wont to move from place to place, and carried in the culture of the outside world.66 

By 1848 many erstwhile languages had been let loose from all the disciplines that maintain a language, to become what the Revolutionaries called jargons: unfixed by writing, ignored by literature, without formal structure or gram- mar. That was when they caught the eye of intellectuals, poets, and linguists, who sought to regulate and revive them. But by then it was too late: conditions worked against the dialects, just as the official campaigns against them could succeed only when conditions were right. 

The social function of language is to permit members of a society to under- stand each other. When the national society became more significant than the various local societies, national language was able at last to override its local rivals, and other particularisms as well. Yet what developed was not always truly national. Notably in the center and the south there developed a whole series of compromises between official or school French on one hand and the local speech on the other: buffers between patois and French, drawing on both, applying the structures and the accent of patois to French, changing the meaning of terms in order to use them in vernaculars that ran from Frenchified patois to patoisant French, a hodgepodge that its users accurately described as 

90 THE WAY THINGS WERE carroun (maslin), the mixture of wheat and rye the French call mheil. This regional or local French contained expressions that disconcerted strangers, but that all natives used naturally and considered to be French.6T It characteristi- cally included patois terms referring to activities and objects peculiar to the area-measures, games, and trades, and their articles of equipment. It per- formed, in a word, the crucial service of all vernaculars, which is to represent the local reality. 68 

The very aspect that made local French opaque to strangers made it lumi- nous to those familiar with the experience it reflected, and placed it in a broad context of related meanings. In Forez, for instance, where nail-making was an important industry, the bellows (la mantcha, from the early models made in the shape of a haft or helve) appeared in locutions that made sense only to those familiar with their broader meaning. Sickness, for example, became "the haft is not doing well." Since bellows were made of leather and rats were their worst enemies, rat infestations were particularly dreaded, and rats play a greater part in Forez sayings and folklore than they do in that of other rat- infested regions."" 

Other regions, other conditions. In the Morvan :69 

South-southeast and west winds Are two good lads; Dry and cold north winds Are two bad gendarmes 

Souler e dn!van Son deu bon anfan; La biz e galarm Deu move jandarm. 

Where, as in much of the southwest, nuts were both eaten and made into oil (used not only for cooking but more important, for lighting), nuts on the tree that were to be picked for oil had one name, those that fell or were knocked off to be used for food had another.70 Terms such as these would fall into disuse, along with the practices they mirrored, as did the vocabulary of pastoral life in the Pyrenees, very rich and old, expressing the detailed care lavished on sheep when wool brought good returns. When the poor-quality Pyrenean wool could no longer compete on the market with wool from other regions, and especially with imports, sheep came to be bred primarily for slaughter and the shepherd's vocabulary was lost along with his now-un- necessary skills.l1 

Because local vocabulary was firmly rooted in local practice, there were many blanks that had to be supplemented as the need arose, by borrowing from elsewhere. Thus, at Vinzelles in lower Auvergne, where cows drank their fill at the local brook, the village had no drinking trough and village speech no name for one. At need, the villagers used the term current in a neighboring town. This situation offered plenty of opportunities for the penetration of French as life-styles changed. Thus in Franche-Comte, where garden flowers 

• Albert Boissier, "Essai sur I'histoire et I'industrie du clou forge," pp. 71-72. Thus: "Go, go, miserable Iou rats a la clod, mantcha / You've cast a rat-spell de moun pairel) 

on my father's haftl" (Filo, 610, traino-malheu, / L'a trai 

A Wealth of Tongues 

were no doubt rare, as they were in many rural areas, most ornamentals carried French names. Similarly, horses, which were not in much use there, had most of their anatomy described in French.* Often a new word was adopted for a new form of a familiar object, as when lampo (the oil lamp and its offspring) edged out the old caleu. Sometimes the adoption of new words in French rele- gated old terms to an inferior function, as when Savoy's pare and mare, bend- ing to pere and mere, came to be used exclusively for animals.72 

Of course, words related to agricultural and technical innovations, to changes in furniture, dress, and dwelling, to administration, and to newly identified maladies were borrowed from French. As were all the many terms related to moral and intellectual life. The patois of Auvergne had no words for poet, musician, painter, or artist. It had functional terms, to be sure, for men who made music with certain types of instrument or who made up songs, but it had no way~r need-to deal with art in the abstract. French supplied such words when the need arose, but those who found them relevant used French anyway. Some abstractions, though, were very relevant indeed; and so, little J aned of the Breton song, who is tired of service and wants her freedom, sings: "Me zo skuiz 0 servicha, La me houl va libertel" Altogether, the evolution of local speech looks less like decadence than like adaptation. All language is connected to the needs and interests of its speakers. As these changed language changed, more slowly, of course, but revealingly, and in good part responsively. Necessity created the expression. Waning need laid it away.73 

This does not mean, however, that mentalities were quite unaffected in the meantime. On the contrary, the simple shift from a spoken language to one based on writing alone was an immense change. The stilted sty le of official reports bears witness to the awkwardness of the adjustments involved. The music of discourse, once spare or lyrical, became coldly didactic, swollen with the terminology' of administrative French. The very notion of language, like the term, refers to speech not writing;74 and oral style has little in common with its literate neighbor. The rhythm of the phrase in the spoken language models the idea and its nuances-repetitive, melodic structures frame the fleet- ing thought, punctuated with sonorities, with striking images, with inflec- tions of sound that convey inflections of meaning. 

When, in September 1846, the Virgin appeared to two young shepherds at La Salette, she addressed them first in what sounds like the formal French they could have heard in church, and dealt with themes they might well have heard in a sermon, complaining that people swore and worked on Sundays. 

• Albert Dauzat, Glossaire hymologique, p. 4; Abbe Jean Garneret, Un Village comto;s, p. 74. Even the word bouquet was borrowed from French. On the other hand, parasites, weeds, and wild herbs, like the trees in the farm orchard, bore local names. In Auvergne, too, weeds and a few local flowers had their own names, whereas potted geraniums and chrysanthemums bore French names. Likewise, the horse, more expensive (hence nobler) than other animals, was ad- dressed in French (M.-A. Meraville, Contes populaires de l'Auvergne, Paris, 1970, pp. 26Cr67, 272 ). 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

When she turned to patois, however, predicting retribution and famine, the language became more lyrically rich, more "biblical" in a recognizably popu- lar vein: . 

Let him who has wheat not sow it; the cattle shall eat it, and, if any should sprout, it will fall to dust in the threshing. There will come a great famine; before the famine comes, the little children under seven will be taken atrembling, will die in the arms of those who hold them, and the grownups will do penance by hunger. The grapes will rot and the nuts turn bad. If they reform their ways, the stones, the rocks will turn to wheat; and the potatoes will be restored by the earth itself. 

Simple, concise ideas full of images, specific and based on local experience. That was the nature of rural speech, poor in abstract terms, rich in concrete ones, and in pejoratives.TII 

And then, of course, it was local. The way of life affects speech in its purely physical aspects. The breathing of people operating in different terrain affects the rhythm of their speech and their pronunciation. A doctor traveling through Ardeche in the 1870's noted the sonorous endings of the local patois, which made the voice carry further. A Correzien today has similarly pointed to the preponderance of consonants in his native Occitan, which helped to make speech more audible so that it carried further in difficult natural circumstances. Audibility was also served by the hard "r" of the old pronunciation, abandoned in school and in Paris French but retained by actors whose voices must carry a long way. Modern French falls lightly on the ear. Popular speech is harsher, more abrupt, more perceptibly rhythmic. French, meant to be spoken in a relaxed manner with a relaxed body, has more open vowels and fewer diph- thongs. The phonetic evolution from a. wealth of rude diphthongs to more delicate sounds is clearly related to changing conditions; or, at least, to the triumph of values related to such conditions.T6 

Modern students of rural language have stressed how important body lan- guage-gestures and posture-is for the peasant. This, too, reflects a society where all share in a common fund of knowledge that makes much explana- tion superfluous. As Henri Mendras says, the peasant shows what he does or is about to do in forms of behavior that are wholly familiar to his fellows and so are easily interpreted by all of them. If one sees a man in such a place, at such and such a time, one can generally tell what he is up to. Deduction based on concrete observation is what counts, and speech adds little to this. It is used more often to conceal the true sense of an act or gesture than to express an attitude.l1 

Writing sets up a screen between practice and our inner selves, and so does the mentality that is based on it. This is perhaps why patois clung on longest where practice and thought were closest: "Quand il s'agit de la terre," wrote Emmanuel Labat in 1912, "on pense en patois.m6 

It would take time before one ceased to think in patois. The patoisant child 

A Wealth of Tongues 93 knew birds, trees, and watercourses under their local names. The French names he learned at school were never attached to familiar things but remained detached, evoking a distant realm and abstract images. This tended to two results. In the first stage, newly bilingual people had difficulty understanding ideas conveyed or developed in French. A little girl of above-average intelli- gence and able to read well, might follow every turn of stories in Oc but stumble over French stories with language that departed from the patterns taught at school. French stories called for great effort: the individual words might be understood but not the sense of a phrase. Older persons, similarly limited to a schoolbook French, would mostly have the same problems inter- preting, say, a news item. Intelligence is not enough to ensure mastering ideas in an alien medium. All the signs we read, whether they are letters, words, or simple images, are symbols whose reference is more or less familiar, hence more or less easily registered and comprehended. The peasant reader had to master not only the elusive French alphabet, orthography, and grammar, but also the references that these were meant to serve-that is, the symbols of an alien culture. 

A word calls up an image, or a whole covey of images, and there can be serious problems of adjustment when a word familiar in one's own speech carries quite different connotations in another-as was the case, among others, with the word rentier, which in the south denoted not a man who drew a rent and lived on it, but a man who paid it. Even on the level of sheer practicality, difficulties of mental adjustment may arise when an object endowed with a particular gender or personality in one frame of mind has to be given another in translation. Gaston Bonheur cites a striking illustration of this problem involving the river Aude. In the local patois the river was treated, not as an object, but as a person. The article was accordingly never employed in re- ferring to it: one went to Aude, or said that Aude was high, that Aude growls, and so forth. A whole mentality had to be bent for a small article to be added. Small wonder children and adults both had difficulty in coping with a lan- guage that was not only alien in itself but also represented an alien vision. A schoolteacher writing about teaching French in his rural school of Ariege remarked that people tended to think city children were cleverer or quicker on the uptake than rural children, when it was just that the city child heard French spoken all the time, and the country child heard it not at all. One might add that the entire frame of reference was also different. 79 

In the second stage, when French had become more fully assimilated, the effect could be more alienating still, because the novice passed from a point where words were close to the things they stood for, to one where they were far apart. French, which prizes abstract terms over concrete ones, abandons pointed reference and analogy for tenuousness. It refines language by elimi- nating the details that count so much in popular speech and the great variety of specific and descriptive terms that flourished in patois. It prefers to interpret94 THE WAY THINGS WERE rather than describe reality, to express ideas, not just to relate facts. Accord- ingly, it tends to lead its user to attribute less importance to the what of things, acts, or events and more importance to the why. A cultural equipment that makes words triumph over things may be appropriate to a society in which necessity and immediate experience play a secondary role, or which has learned to adjust its ideas to that way of thinking.so For simpler minds operating in a harsh, concrete world, such implicit values can only be confusing if not totally alienating. • Language is one technique for mastering reality. Local dialects had mastered the everyday world of the peasants' experience, personified it in its details, coped with it. As urban speech edged those dialects out, the familiar became alien. New speech, new words, new forms did not permit the same easy, im- mediate participation in situations that time and habit had made familiar and that words had, so to speak, domesticated too. The new words were more abstract. The values and ideas they reflected were more distant. Intellectual effort was required to reestablish contact with objects and experiences. This need to readjust made for a certain timidity-the savagery that we hear about- not only in public expression but in the private acceptance of a new world that was very different from the old. 

"Right now," said Father Gorse of his fin-de-siecle Correze, "the peasant has no language to serve him. Patois he has unlearned; he even lacks the words to express his thought. And when he uses them it is absurdly. He does not know what they stand for. The French into which he is brutally thrown ... makes him forget his Limousin language, but does not get through to him."sl Not all French peasants lived through such painful transitions, to be sure. And if, in certain parts of France, the transition did cause pain, it did so only for limited periods-though longer than in a land like the United States, where the adjustment was less long-drawn-out, more forcibly sudden. But the experience marked the minds of generations. Its high-water mark, around the end of the nineteenth century, was also a high point of political and social tor- ment. And its products, like the daughters and sons of the American immi- grants, would face the great challenge of the First World War with a resig- nation born of their condition, but also with the firm certitude of neophytes. 

• Speaking of the alienation involved in the peasant's conversion to a new tongue that reflected none of his feelings or experience, Father Gorse wrote, "The peasant cannot say what he sees, what he feels. French lacks words for many of his implements, etc. How does one translate: rilha, fulhas, pica-prat, pouda . .. ? How does one say: estranu;ar, essirbar, foueirer, afournelar, abar;ar, acounelar? What does one call: la fourna, Iou rueul, Iou palhaJSou, la palhasseta, Iou tinau, Iou pelau, la sesta, . . . la coudieira, la bar;a, Iou counoul, la bourouda, Iou zalou?" The problem would be settled only when the acts or objects described disappeared. (Au bas pays de Limosin, pp. 9-11.) 
