+++
title = "07 FRANCE, ONE AND INDIVISIBLE"

+++

Le grand precepte qu'il faut donner aux historiens, c'est de dis~ tinguer au lieu de confondre; car, a moins d'~tre varie, I'on n'est point vrai. Mais malheureusement les esprits mediocres ont le gout de l'uniformite. 

-AUGUSTIN THIERR Y 

WHEN DID FRANCE become one? Surely we know that. Forty kings worked hard at the task, but it was the Revolution that finished the work in the end: abolished local particularisms, perfected a national unity stronger and more compact than any other nation ever knew. By 1808, as Hippolyte Taine assert- ed in his preface to The Origins of the Revolution in France, "all of France's traits" were "set and definitive."l This is pretty much what the schoolbooks of the Third Republic taught: one people, one country, one government, one nation, one fatherland.2 This is what historical studies expounded and still expound, an axiom most recently repeated by Albert Soboul: "The French Revolution completed the nation which became one and indivisible."3 

This national unity is perceived as the expression of a general will-the gen- eral will of the French to be French, to achieve a state that was somehow his- torically foreordained (as expressed in the use of the term reunite when speak- ing of the annexation of various territories, which "realized unbeknownst to them their true aspiration"). Long before the Revolution formulated and per- fected the terms of the social contract, the inhabitants of the land called France had achieved the spiritual unity that is the necessary precondition of nation~ hood: the "community of feelings and ideas concerning certain fundamental problems, a certain identity in the way of conceiving the external world, of classifying its objects, of ordering its values, in short a certain unity of spiri- tual orientation, a certain common spirit."4 Few could put in words better than Julien Benda this notion of nationhood and its abstract quality. We are talk- ing about more than political or administrative structures; we are talking about a unity of mind and feeling, implicit or explicit. The nation, in the last resort and the most fundamental, is a cultural unit. It is in this respect that it must be considered. 

But the nation, as Alphonse Dupront has perceptively remarked, is "a sol- emn public power of little intimacy."5 The French nation, like the kingdom, 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

had to become a patrie, a fatherland; the larger abstraction had to replace the immediate experience of a man's pays. The concept of the patrie, land of one's father, can mediate between private society (the family) and official society (the nation). And the concept was extended as the father's realm itself was extended beyond the natural limits of the pays or petite patrie to a broader, much more mobile world. The question is, how long did this pro- cess of extension take? How fast was a coincidence established, then per- ceived, acknowledged, assimilated, between pays, patrie, and France? 

When, in 1860, an officer noted that the people of Puy-de-D8me "possedent a un tres haut degf(~ l'amour deleur pays," his concept of the pays was as limit- ed as theirs. Some of these men, he reported, were forced to expatriate them- selves to other parts of France and to seek "on foreign soil" the food their fatherland (patrie) denied them. Clearly pays and patrie were one, and every- thing beyond was still foreign soil. If, as Benda (and others) insist, being French is not a mere abstract acknowledgment, but rather a consciousness and an everyday experience, then these people who lived in the middle of France in 1860 were scarcely French.6 

This is something one seldom finds acknowledged, and then only discreetly, in an undertone. Carlton Hayes, who described France as a nation of patriots, perceptively noted the survival of "centrifugal forces" in the 1920's-localism, provincialism-then explained, "The history of the development of national spirit in France [the spirit that he describes as a supreme national loyalty] has been the history of the overcoming of centrifugal forces in the life of the nation by centripetal forces."1 The image "centrifugal," whether he intended it to or not, suggests a preordained unity. It assumes an existing "center" that is more than a base for conquests of opportunity; and it obscures the existence of societies for which the "center" remained largely unknown and irrelevant until it subjugated them-let alone assimilated them.* Traveling in the French Alps in 1846 Adolphe Blanqui had found "populations further from French influence than those of the Marquis Islands." Some 20 years 

• The reigning myth is clearly accepted or asserted by Beatrice Hyslop (French Nationalism, p. 23), Hans Kohn (The Idea of Nationalism, New York, 1944, pp. 16-17), Franz Boas (Na- tionalism in Europe, New York, 1915, pp. 3-4, 8-9, and especially II), Karl Deutsch (Nation- alism and Social Communication, I9S3 ed., p. 93), and Alphonse Dupront ("Du sentiment na- tional," in Michel Franr;:ois, ed., La France et les fran(ais, p. 146S). As Augustin Thierry re- marked a long, long time ago, since theory said that the nation was one, French history (and historical theory) must be one too (Considerations sur l' histoire de France, Paris, 1840, chap. 4). Yet he never ceased to insist that "c'est par des conquetes successives qu'elle [France] a recule ses frontieres. Ces conquetes ... avaient pour objet ... le gouvernement des pays subjugues" (Lettres sur thistoire de la France, Paris, 1827, pp. 207-8). And then, "Partout ou ils [the French] porterent la conquete, sous un pretexte ou sous un autre, ils rencontrerent une opposition nationale, I'opposition des souvenirs, des habitudes, et des moeurs" (ibid., p. 209). Hayes appar- ently had not read Thierry, or at least had not heeded him (see France, A Nation of Patriots, pp. 3-S, IS). Note that in his chapter II, devoted to regionalism, he speaks of its "influential counter-teachings" (ibid., p. 2(3), testifying to the equally artificial and didactic nature of na- tionalism itself. As we have seen, regionalism was not a "survival" of something old, but a form of the new. 

France, One and Indivisible 97 later, an English voyager at the other end of the country expressed very simi- lar feelings. The people of the Landes, he wrote, "live on French soil, but cannot be called Frenchmen. They speak a language as unintelligible to a Frenchman as an Englishman; they have none of the national characteristics -little, perhaps, of the national blood." But holdouts and mere "superficial counter currents" are as nothing next to the transcendent reality of France's being molded into a nation. What matters, in Ernest Renan's words, is "the general line, the great facts that stem from it and that remain true even if all the details were to be wrong."8 

There is a level on which this may be true. But it discounts detail and covers the intricate pattern of things as they were with a general mantle of things as they should be, as if a France become one and indivisible had thereby become uniform as wel1.9 We might do better by following the pre- cept of the old romantic Thierry, and distinguish rather than confuse the conditions under which national consciousness developed. We shall find that the process was more varied than is generally conceived, far slower and more complex than most historians would have it. 

To begin with what is least disputed, but at the same time is little acknowl- edged, the state astride the revolutionary watershed-the kingdoms, Republic, and Empire called France-was at best loosely integrated. In 1751 Charles Pinot Duclos, permanent secretary to the French Academy and a former mayor of Dinan, published certain astute Considerations sur les moeurs in which he compared the difference between Paris and the provinces to that between separate peoples: those who lived a 'scant one hundred leagues from the capital were a hundred years removed from it in their manner of thought and action. This equation of time and space is one we should retain, for it can as appropriately be applied to nineteenth-century France as it can be applied to different continents today. It appealed to one of Duclos's Limousin readers, who found it just as relevant to conditions some 60 years later. It might have appealed to Arthur Young as well, who, on the eve of the Revo- lution, found that "that universal circulation of intelligence which in En- gland transmits the least vibration of feeling or alarm, with electric sensibil- ity, from one end of the kingdom to another ... has no existence in France."lo When a new edition of Duclos appeared in 1828, it carried as a preface a l10tice by the critic La Harpe, written in 1799. In it La Harpe contended that in the period between 1760 and 1780 the difference Duclos had perceived had "become almost unnoticeable so far as concerns the large cities, which are here the only objects of comparison." This judgment, if we accept it, emphasizes less the growing cultural integration of the land than the deepening gulf between a few great urban centers and the rest of the country. The Revolu- tion stressed the same fact. Separatist tendencies asserted themselves even before the Estates had met in 1789, and several regions might have echoed the contention of the Bearnais that their region was bound to France much as 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

Ireland was bound to England. Gregoire's correspondents noted sadly that "there is no patriotism in the countryside." Only "the more enlightened" could conceive the notion. Patriotism was an urban thought, a handle for an urban conquest of the rural world that looked at times like colonial exploi- tation.ll 

Certainly the Revolution and revolutionary agitation carried national poli- tics and the national language into quarters they had not touched before. Clubs, appeals, speeches, gazettes, and broadsheets, propaganda of every sort, news eagerly awaited and discussed with passion by groups once oblivious to anything but their immediate world, a new terminology that had no coun- terpart in native speech, war, military service, troop movements, the political promotion of men of ever-lower status when their superiors had been elimi- nated by Terror and Counter-Terror, the pride of simple people bent on show- ing that they could handle their betters' tools-all these created a situation that invites comparison with the China of the 1960's, breaking down the peasants' isolation and crumbling traditional societies. In the ten years of Revolution, in the words of Auguste Brun, "a crack appeared in the block of peasant habits." But only a crack. Much of the block held fast.12 

A school inspector tells us how Franche-Comte, whose character had re- sisted change as strongly as Brittany's, was "Frenchified" after 1833 and turned into "a natural frontier of solid military populations." A witness like Maurice Barres testifies to Lorraine's attachment "to the memories of independence, glorious and not long past" in the 1840's. And Les Olivettes de Lorraine sings of the French as if they were unfriendly aliens :13 

Lou, Iou, la, laissez-Ies passer, Les Fran~ais dans la Lorraine, Lou, Iou, la, laissez-Ies passer, lIs auront du mal assez! 

The France of local songs and speech was not the patrie but somewhere else, as in the Limousin soldiers' song "Soudart ve de la guerra," where the soldier has a French girlfriend, described as such over and over-mia Francesa .. . la tua Francesa-until the last strophe: 

Adiou, adiou, mia Francesa, Que jamais pus nous reveiren. 

If one's home happened to be in the south, then one could get to France by traveling toward Loire and Seine. Near Marmande in Lot-et-Garonne the road toward Virazeil (then north to Bergerac) was still remembered in the 1930's as "la cote-de-France"; and other lieux-dits of the same kind abound elsewhere. What is of interest here is not the particular names used, but the deep-seated sense of difference that gave rise to them. When the Dominican Emmanuel Labat passed through Marseille in 1706, he was struck by the resi- 

France, One and Indivisible 99 dents' refusal to admit that they were French. Some IS0 years later a historian from that city still spoke of "the Frenchman" and "the French" as if they were a race apart (and not a very nice one). The same at Toulon, where true na· tives seldom mixed with regnicoles, "whom they don't yet consider their corn· patriots, and whom they always designate as Franciaux."14 

"Great love of their pays ... , great scorn for the foreigners from the north," reported an officer from Tarascon in 1859. "The old hatreds are not completely dead," wrote another from the Marseille area in 1862.15 And as late as 1875 a staff captain warned of the hazards of an army corps formed exclusively of Proven~aux, or the presence of too many of them in anyone unit.* 

We have little information on unpatriotic attitudes in this period, not only because some took them for granted in certain circles and made no remark, and others (teachers, for example) preferred to ignore what they deplored, but also because such views became socially unacceptable and their holders chose to conceal them. Thus at Cog ne near the Italian border the great local saint, Saint Besse, had the power to exempt lads from military service and was in fact invoked to that end for many a decade. But on the eve of the First World War, though people still sought his intercession, a visiting folklorist found few who were willing to admit that the practice continued, and some who flatly denied it.16 Accordingly, one's sources are bound to be patchy and impressionistic, and one's argument simply tentative. 

No one in the nineteenth century undertook any sort of broad survey of national consciousness and patriotism. And discussions of the subject in the early years of the twentieth century focused spottily on urban-mostly student -groups. Later ones, for that matter, do not seem all that thorough. The rather thin evidence I am able to marshal should suggest the need for more systematic study. Yet, as it stands, it shows a very incompletely integrated nation. Again, the center, the southwest, and the west were the notable hold· outs. The Basques were said to have not one sympathy in common with the rest of France. "Closed to outside influences," deplored FeIix Pecaut in 1880, they had so far been hardly touched by "the emancipating action of French genius." At the other end of the Pyrenees, where in 1844 the French were referred to as dogs, "French blood is still lightly grafted on the Spanish stock." It was quite clear, during the 1907 crisis, that the French conquest was readily 

• Archives de la Guerre, MR 2269 (Marseille, Nov. 15, 1875). The good captain no doubt would have prided himself on his percipience if he could have foreseen that the Fifteenth Corps, recruited in Provence, would be accused of cowardice before the enemy at Morhange during the difficult days of August 1914. The charge and the ensuing scandal bore hard on southern soldiers; they were a little less French than other Frenchmen, a little less aggressive or reliable, it was said, exactly as the traditional Tartarin image made them out to be. (See Le Matin, Aug. 24, 1914; J. Bellendy, La Legende du XVe Corps: L'Afjaire de Dieuze, Avignon, 1916; and Maurice Agul- hon in Edouard Baratier, ed., Histoire de la Provence, pp. 519-21.) For all that, numerous streets in southern towns bear the name of the maligned Fifteenth. 

100 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

recalled by many in the areas most affected-Gard, Herault, and Aude, as well as Pyrenees-Orientales. The winegrowers, echoing the Bearnais charge, compared the south's position to that of exploited Ireland and denounced the "victorious barbarians who treated them as slaves." It was not the reality that counted, but the rival myths.17 

Even where no local myths survived, the national myth did not have easy going. La patrie, noted Father Roux in his Correze parish, a "fine word ... that thrills everyone except the peasant." In Velay, wrote a novelist quite inci- dentally in 1884, "the word patrie signifies nothing and stirs nothing. It exists no more in local speech than in local hearts." A few years later, when Gen- eral Georges Boulanger stood for election at Dunkirk, his bilingual posters ended: "Vive la patrie. Leve het Vaterland!" This led to strife between Bou- langer's Republican opponents and his irredentist Flemish supporters, who proceeded to put up a poster that boldly declared: "Flemish, that's what we are, not French. We have no other fatherland than Flanders; France is not our fatherland, it is the pump that has been sucking up our sweat for over 300 years."18 

Expectably, it was Brittany that held out longest. In 1870 when, alone of all French provinces, Brittany organized a levee en masse, the news of the action gave rise to fears of separatist intentions. Leon Gambetta himself wrote to De Keratry, leader of the Breton forces, before the bloody battle of Le Mans: "I beg you to forget that you are Bretons, and to remember only that you are French." Other political factors were at work, of course, but Gambetta obviously thought that this point was worth emphasizing. So did the author of an important report on the Breton departments written ten years later, who placed the issue in historical perspective: "Brittany, which was not willingly joined to France [again the term used is reunited], which never wholeheart- edly accepted its annexation, which still protests," had yet to be merged into the nation: "Frenchify Brittany as promptly as possible ... ; integrate western Brittany with the rest of France." This, said the writer, the rector of the Academy of Rennes, Baudoin, would be accomplished only through school- ing. That was how Franche-Comte was conquered half a century earlier. And that was how Prussia set out to Germanize "our poor Alsace-Lorraine," and there, at least, the people knew colloquial German. The parallel with Alsace- Lorraine is revealing. But despite the spread of the schools in which Baudoin put his trust, we still find a Breton delegation in 1919 pleading with Presi- dent Woodrow Wilson for "the right of national self-determination."19 

Even the war of 1870 had not evoked a universally patriotic reaction, asser- tions to the contrary notwithstanding. Reaction to wars in France had always varied with their impact on local affairs-the further off the better-and with their success. The nineteenth century saw no great change in this respect. A good war aroused enthusiasm as long as it went well, made few demands in terms of taxes and recruitment, and furnished occasions for excitement and 

France, One and Indivisible 101 

celebration. Thus the Crimean War was greeted, in the beginning at least, with a "military spirit," "warlike songs," "enthusiasm," and "a festive air," according to a newspaper in Franche-Comte.* But the newspapers of the period are uncertain sources, first because they expressed the kind of emo- tional response of!e would expect in the circumstances, and second because they tended to reflect urban attitudes-which in this case were somewhat am- bivalent. The cities had their own way of seeing things, as can be seen from an editorial of La Franche-Comte: "Better get it over. Business has not been the same since 1866." And though, in the Doubs, for instance, all local papers of every imaginable tendency were unwavering through July 1870 in their warlike enthusiasm and national indignation, they also continued to publish the advertisements of companies that provided substitutes for reluctant recruits Such scenes as were reported in July and August 1870 almost certainly took place, suggesting that a "remarkable patriotic excitement" probably could be found in the little towns, where the local band often played the recruits out of town, old men, women, and girls escorted them to the next village, and people readily drank to La Patrie.20 But, first of all, how many scenes to the contrary would have gotten into print? And second, how far beyond urban limits did such sentiments extend, even at the height of the war fever? 

Arthur de Gobineau's iconoclastic views on the events of the period reflect strong prejudices, but also his personal experience of what he saw around him. By his account, the government tried hard to convince everyone that the French people as a whole were burning to drive back the invaders, but "the masses persisted in believing that it was not their business." George Sand in her country retreat recorded the contrast in July 1870 between Paris, "braying with enthusiasm," and the provinces, in which the overwhelming feelings were consternation and fear. In Ardeche: "little enthusiasm," "poor reception for conscripts," "general negative attitude." In the Limousin, though the bour- geoisie and the city workers were for the war, the peasants quickly turned against it, against recruitment and taxes. Riots broke out when the war con- tinued: "Down with the Republic! Long live the Emperor! Long live Prus- sia!" By September, in the center, what people wanted was an end to war: "peace at any price." In more exposed regions, Soissonnais, Beauvaisis, Vexin, the villagers had stubbornly refused to join the local national guard. If Gobi- neau is to be believed, everyone in the 37 communes of his rural canton of 

• "Everywhere local songs whose naivety betrays their authorship attest to the courage that animates these conscripts," wrote the prefect of Jura on May 23, 1854. "The people are infused with a wholly French spirit," observed the prefect of the Doubs on March 1, 1854. (See Roger Marlin, L'Opinion !ranc-comtoiJe, pp. 27-38.) On the other hand, around Largenticre, the con- scripts of Ardeche were singing quite different songs: "0 petit roi de Prusse, / Viens done me secourir, / Le general de France / Y veut me faire mourir; / rai cing cent mille pieces / En bombes et canons / Je t'en ferai present / A toi et a ta Nation." (Pierre Charrie, Folklore du Bas-VivaraiJ, p. 45.) It is not clear quite where the Prussians came in in a song of the 1850's, but Russia and Piussia could have been confused either in the locals' mind or in rendering the patois original into French. In any event, there is little doubt about the spirit of the words. 

102 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

Chaumont-en-Vexin insisted that under no circumstances would they go to fight the Prussians. Indeed, French villagers even were known to refuse food to the French trQOps and to give it to the Germans, of whom they were more afraid. The peasants resented anyone and anything that threatened their secur- ity and homes, and perhaps most of all the francs-tireurs recruited in the towns, whose depredations they feared and whose foolhardy threats to resist the enemy provoked ever more hostile reactions. By September villagers fearful of German reprisals were denouncing the guerrillas to the enemy, leading enemy troops to their hideouts and places of ambush, or arresting them them- selves and handing them over. Even if Gobineau stretched the truth for his own purposes, a recent doctoral dissertation supports the general impression of his account; and the officers who reconnoitered the countryside through the 1870's clearly despaired at the thought of what the army might expect in case of conflict.21 

As Leonce de Vogue made his way to Versailles after the preliminary peace settlement at Bordeaux, he noted the relief and happiness of the peasants in Perigord and the Limousin. It would take some time to teach the peasantry that Alsace and Lorraine mattered to them. Perhaps, as an Englishman sug- gested in the 1880's, the patriotic reaction was in direct proportion to the German presence, feeble where the Germans were far away, strong where they came close. It is certainly true that in some regions the German threat had virtually no effect on the tempo of life. From an Ain village, for example, we have a family journal that carefully noted the year's events, crops, prices, and conditions, yet made no mention of the war. Neither did the diary of a re- tired magistrate, who simply noted: "They say that the Republic has been proclaimed in Paris."· 

But what of the evidence of out-and-out anti-patriotism ? We find some cases that fit the bill, or come perilously close to it. Madame de Gobineau in Oise seemed more in fear of French looters than of the Prussians. And her husband did not hold too bad a memory of the German occupation. In Nor- mandy Flaubert noted with disgust "the bourgeois' universal cry: 'Thank Godl the Prussians are here!'" At Nancy it was the laborers who, when the town surrendered, cried: "Down with the French! Long live Prussial" And when German troops were quartered in a girls' school at Bar-sur-Seine (Aube), they received constant visits from the children, who taught them the "Mar- seillaise" and even bought a German-French dictionary the better to com- municate with the soldiers. Apathy, collaboration, or simple human nature 

• Loonce de VogUe, cited in Louis A.-M. de VogUe, Une Famille vivaroise, p. 142; Philip G. Hamerton, F,'ance and England, pp. 75-76; Rene Dumont, Voyages en France, p. 183. Martin Nadaud, who was the prefect of Creuse in 1870-71, remarked of the general lack of enthusiasm: "One might have thought the country wasn't threatened ..•. No, France did not feel that tremor of patriotic wrath that carried our fathers to the borders in 1792; it didn't rise as one against the invader .•.. What apathy'" (Discours et conferences, 2: 27.) The general prosecutor at Rennes found the popular mood no better in his area: "apathie, insouciance, absence d'esprit public ... du patriotisme ••. grande lassitude" (Archives Nationales, BB 30 390, Mar. 23, 1871). 

France, One and Indivisible 103 uncomplicated by abstract considerations-in the end we have a mixed bag of evidence, and probably other instances can be adduced to show deep patri- otic grief or, at least, shock, particularly among urban populations. Yet there is one impressive clue to how little impact the war had on the popular mind in the countryside, a Holmesian one of the negative dog's-not-barking vari- ety: practically no folk songs have survived to preserve the memory of the annee terrible, and no episode of 1870-71 seems to have so caught the popular imagination as to b~ preserved in legend.22 

It was only human that time and a change of the political winds should per- suade many in retrospect that conditions had been worse than they had in fact been, and that their patriotism had been of the deepest order; that being led to school as an eight-year-old by a Bavarian soldier had been a real humili- ation; that one had done, seen, and felt things as the new national orthodoxy now demanded. In the event, most people seem to have seen war as a nuisance, to have greeted its end with relief. 

What is more surprising is how quickly separatist movements grew in newly annexed territories. Savoy, which had voted to join France in the 1860's, had hardly been assimilated by 187o-as soldiers and officials, treated as carpet- baggers and smarting under the Savoyards' "unjust hatred for all that bears the French name," well knew. Men of Savoy fought bravely in 1870-]1, but "apart from the departure of a few soldiers" the unexpected war, the rapid and still less expected defeat, had little effect on local life: "Everything took place as if in a far-off dream." When the dream turned to nightmare and a German occupation loomed, some Savoyard groups urged drastic measures: an occupation by Swiss troops, a separation from France, a declaration of neutral autonomy. At Bonneville in February 1871 the local Republican com- mittee discussed the possibility of annexation to Switzerland. The historian Jacques Lovie has charted Gambetta's difficult struggle to persuade his own Republican supporters that the notion of France overbore anyone regime, and so, though they might dislike a given regime, they could not just reject it and go their own way. Gambetta's efforts to instill this notion of a perma- nent fatherland that would be more than a target of opportunity may have succeeded in educating some; they left others untouched. Like the radical of Saint-Julien who was heard to shout in 1873: "Down with France! Down with the French! ... We hate the French. We have to make a revolution to get rid of them." Brought to court for insulting a gendarme ("I don't give a damn about you, you are French, I hate the French, I've never been French and never will ber'), the man was merely fined by sympathetic local judges. No hope for patriotism in this department, complained the prefect in 1874.23 A subordinate saw things more clearly: it was too soon to expect the Savoy- ards to feel French.'*' We have seen that this could apply with equal justice 

• The sub-prefect of Thonon wrote on June 2, 1873: "Somme toute, ces populations de DOS campagnes, qui ne sont fran~aises que de date recente, et dont l'esprit s'est peu nourri des tradi- tions qui font le patriotisme, demandent avant tout la tranquillite et se soumettent sans effort aTHE WAY THINGS WERE 

to regions beyond Savoy. There too, as the authors of a recent study of rural change in Maurienne perceived: "These people had not yet reached a national consciousness .... Submission to the state does not mean that they share in the common traditions and the common enterprise that define a nation."24 De- pendence without participation: here is an idea and a state of affairs that we shall encounter again. 

The most reliable evidence I have found on patriotic sentiments is fur- nished by military authorities, either indirectly through conscription records or directly in the reconnaissance reports of officers. E. Le Roy Ladurie and a team of scholars have thoroughly explored the first source with the aid of computers. But their work only covers the period 1819-26, too early for my purpose. Just how closely their findings coincide with my more spotty ones, however, can be seen from Map 5, showing the departments where the Ladu- rie team found the greatest incidence of draft evasion and self-mutilation to avoid military service, e.g., cutting or biting off a finger, knocking out the front teeth (which were needed to bite the bullet). Le Roy Ladurie remarks that these departments tend to be grouped in Occitan France, where tax resis- tance was also greatest. He wonders whether this reflects "a certain lack of national integration of the Midi at this time," especially when compared with the departments of the northeast, which "present strong evidence of national integration." This is borne out by his map of volunteers for military service, which shows a fertile crescent of martial commitment running from Nord to the Doubs, very close to the results recorded in my Map 8.25 It is further borne out by a map taken from Adolphe d'Angeville's statistical survey of France in the early 1830's (Map 6), which shows those departments where government agents encountered the greatest difficulties in collecting taxes. If patriotism and a sense of civil obligations go together, reluctance or refusal to discharge the latter testify to a slight sense of the former (and to the state's inability to impose both). 

The evidence recorded in my own maps is drawn from the War Ministry's files of the military reconnaissances carried out between the Restoration and the fall of President MacMahon. It is of quite a different order from the ex- haustive work of Le Roy Ladurie. For one thing, it is based on the subjective impressions of men, and men who were moreover often strange to the locality they were reporting on. For another, it depends on the luck of assignments and on what was preserved in the files. All available files have been read, but their contents by no means cover the country, far from it; and it is well to remember that the army made most of its reconnaissances in areas around gar- rison centers, along highways, and so on. But even thus limited, the results are suggestive. 

tout gouvernernent qui pourra la leur assurer" (quoted by Jacques Lovie, La Savoie dam la vie tranraise, p. 555). 

France, One and Indivisible 

I have noted every statement that refers clearly to the local population's indifference to the interests of the army, open hostility to troops, or active avoidance of military service (Map 7); and likewise every reference to its patriotism or lack of patriotism (Map 8). All dubious or equivocal remarks have been set aside; and we shall see presently that the statements whose mean- ing could not be questioned reflect something more than "a certain lack of national integration." In the meantime,. what emerges clearly is a sizable pocket of patriotism along the northern and northeastern borders; its con- trary at the opposite, southwestern end of the country; and a disparate but important jumble south of a line running roughly from Saint-Malo to the Italian border, where negative attitudes to one's patriotic duties encounter negati ve attitudes to the patrie itself. 

The army had a very matter-of-fact attitude to the population: were the people friendly, could one expect aid, could one expect trouble, what was the best way to handle them? Since the reports were not for publication, the offi- cers could speak frankly, and their assessments generally reflected few illu- sions. The local population would feel no moral or patriotic grief about the loss of territory to Spain, wrote an officer in the Pyrenees: "J e ne les crois pas, en dfet, assez fran~ais par le coeur" (1853). From another, at Ponts-de-Ce in Maine-et-Loire, where one could find good fighting men provided they could stay near home: "They are still Angevin, not French" (1859). The Corsican, of course, "has always borne the foreign yoke impatiently; it is not [our] con- quest that binds him to France forever" (1860). In Herault "the population is not very patriotic in general" and "little inclined to make sacrifices" (1862). "Like all the populations of central France," Allier's "has little patriotism" (1864) .26 

One did not need to trouble overmuch about such things, but should be prepared to take appropriate action. "There is no reason to apprehend the inhabitants ... easy to hold down by fear" (Loiret, 1828). "The peasants of Brie are timorous and have little guile, and all resistance on their part would be easily put down" (Seine-et-Marne, 1860). Southerners possessed "a memory of their past liberties that makes them awkward," hard to handle, unwilling to take orders; "the deployment of force will nevertheless suffice to break these resistances" (Herault, 1862). Double-check any information furnished by the natives because "most of them have kept wholly Italian sympathies. One shouldn't fear 2t need to assert oneself" (Nice, 1869). They did not mind soldiers in most parts of Auvergne, but "you can't expect help except by pay- ment, requisition, or threats" (Puy-de-Dome, 1873). The inhabitants would not refuse aid, "but rather out of fear than out of true patriotism" (Gironde, 1873)' Same note a few months later at the very gates of Bordeaux: guides and informers should be tempted by gain or threatened with guns (Gironde, 1873) .27 

Defeat had made military men bitter. "Limoges people are both aggressive 

~ draft evaders 

• self-mutilation (loss of fingers) to avoid service 

EH] draft evaders and self-mutilation 

Map 5. Lack of patriotism as reflected in attempts to avoid military service, 1819-1826. SOURCE: E. Le Roy Ladurie, Anthropologie des conscrits franfais (Paris, 1972), pp. 80-81, 138-39. 

• 4.0-4.9 francs per 1,000 collected 

~ 5.2-6.9 francs per 1,000 collected 

mmml 7.0-9.0 francs per 1,000 collected 

Map 6. Lack of patriotism as reflected in the cost of collecting taxes, 1834. SOURCE: Adolphe d'Angeville, Essai sur la statistique de la pop- ulation franfaise (Paris, 1969), p. 342 • 

~ hostility to troops and/or military service 

1:=:=::::1 indifference to military interests ........ 

Map 7. Lack of patriotism as reflected in indifference or open hostility to the military, 1820's-1870's. SOURCE: Archives de la Guerre, Me- moires et reconnaissances, as cited in the text. NOTE: In every case the latest report has been shown. 

~ active patriotism 

ImmHl no patriotism or markedly antipatriotic sentiment 

Map 8. Areas of patriotic and non patriotic sentiment as observed by military officers, 1820·s-1870·s. SOUltCE: See Map 7. NOTE: For re- ports on patriotic feeling I have used the earliest date; for those on antipatriotic sentiment, I show the latest. 

108 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

and cowardly. All in town and country have very underdeveloped patriotic feelings." In case of combat in the region, one should count on no help from the population (Haute-Vienne, 1873). In the Indre valley, unfortunately, "mil- itary spirit and patriotism are little developed" (Indre-et-Loire, 1873). Further south, the spirit was still worse. The population "completely lacks patriotism": not only would it accept no sacrifice, it would not hesitate to make trouble (Herault, 1874). Generally quite hostile to the army; troops could expect diffi- culties (Gard and Vaucluse, 1877).28 Things had not changed radically since the days when conscription had been resisted with pitchforks or by flight to the hills. True, conditions now made such reactions difficult, but there had been little change in the mentalities that j ustined them. 

There is a story told in a Peruvian novel about Indian peasants who thought that a war with Chile was being waged against a general of that name, and were nonplussed when told that Chile was one country and Peru another to which they belonged. To be sure, few French peasants could have been that uninformed, but one may still wonder what their image of their country was, how much they knew about the country to which they belonged. 

For a start, their historical notions were usually vague and personalized. In Vivarais the stories told of evenings recognized four legendary periods: that of the giants, imps and elves; that of the Camisards; that of the Revolution; and finally, that of the "ferocious beast," probably a wolf, which scourged the countryside around 1812-16.29 Fantasies based on fact coexisted with fantasies based on pure fancy, the whole jumbled and telescoped in time, food for enter- tainment or admonishment. The Breton peasants said that all the red monks' castles fell down in one night, and in truth, Philip the Fair had ordered all Templars arrested on the same day. The wars of the Catholic League took place, not in the sixteenth century, but simply in a time beyond the recall of the oldest grandfathers in the parish. So far as the Ermenonvillois knew, Henry IV, the best remembered of French Kings, was a contemporary of Jean- Jacques Rousseau. In Brittany, where most peasants had not heard of their own countryman Bertrand Du Guesclin, grand constable of France in the fourteenth century, one thought he might have been a Revolutionary gen- eral who beat the English. The historical memory of illiterate societies, brief and selective, grants personalities and events the accolade of remembrance only by attaching them to saws and common sayings. Thus, Henry IV survived in the Lower Limousin as a Henric-quatre-an old worn thing. Charette, the only Vendean leader remembered in Upper Brittany and along the Lower Loire until the schools revived to memory his anti-Revolutionary fellows, lived in such locutions as "Chouan like Charette," "brave like Charette," "patriot like Charette" (this last ironic). The Swedes, who ravaged Franche- Comte during the Thirty Years' War, survived in the Doubs as synonyms 

France, One and Indivisible 

for brigands or symbols of wickedness (chvede); around Belfort, in the mid~ nineteenth century, all ruins and destruction were still attributed to them.30 About the only historical event that served as a chronological milestone for all French people of the fin~de~siecle was the Revolution, the great dividing point that separated the present from the past. In Upper Brittany storytellers placed the departure of fairies at the time of the Revolution. But they were not quite sure when these events happened, and reference to them seems to have meant simply "a long time ago"-hence the placing of Du Guesclin about the time of the Revolution. Stories often begin with reference to a time when things were utterly different from the present; the Revolution sets the limits of that time. 

Like all cataclysmic events, the legendary Revolution seems to have been portended by wondrous sights: great battles between cats, chasses fantastiques in the sky, statues that shed tears. Similar wonders were sometimes attached to Napoleon's name. But Napoleon's legend was one that he himself largely fostered after I804, in history books, in army communiques, and in the arts. A favorite medium was the popular engraving, designed in some cases to indicate that he possessed almost supernatural powers (Napoleon crossing the bridge at Arcole, Napoleon touching the men stricken by the plague at Jaffa), in others to depict him as the pluperfect democrat, simple and good (Napo~ leon and the grenadier's mother, Napoleon and the sleeping sentinel). 

Fed by the Memorial de Sainte~Hezh1e (I823), stirred by the policy of Louis Philippe (who ordered Napoleon's statue repositioned atop the Ven~ dome column, had the Arc de Triomphe completed and opened, and en~ shrined Napoleon's ashes in the Invalides), and fanned by the songs of Be- ranger, the image of Napoleon~heir-of~the-Revolution inspired semipopular stories born of publicity rather than oral spontaneousness. Naturally, that image flourished in the 1860'S under Napoleon Ill. But its popular vogue, such as it was, had waned by the end of the century; and what survived, sig- nificantly, was a strong memory of the great butcheries over which the Em- peror had presided. In Champagne, Franche-Comte, and Upper and Lower Brittany the Te Deums that celebrated his victories turned into tue-hommes in peasant language, or tud-eom (Lower Brittany: "need men").31 

Te Deum, n faut des hommes, Laudamus te, C'est pour les tuer. 

We can be sure, at any rate, that not everybody in France at the end of the century knew Napoleon. J. E. M. Bodley, putting up at an inn by the Durance, close to the spot where Napoleon crossed the river on his way from Elba, asked an old woman if she had known elders who might have seen him there. 

110 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

"Napoleon," she replied in her broad Provens:al accent, "connais pas ce nom-la. Peut-~tre bien c'est un voyageur de commerce."· 

I am inclined to think that the "awareness of great things done together," or suffered together, may well have been less widespread than we believe. In 1864 a school inspector in Lozere was incensed to find that at one school he visited not a single child could answer questions like "Are you English or Russian?" or "What country is the department of Lozere in?" Among most of these children, the inspector added bitterly, "thought doesn't go beyond the radius of the poor parish in which they live."t Every year, reported Bodley shortly before 1914, "there are recruits who had never heard of the Franco- German war" of 1870. He quoted a 1901 survey in which an average of six out of every ten recruits in a cavalry squadron had never heard of the war. A similar inquiry among recruits of 1906 revealed that 36 percent "were una- ware that France was vanquished in 1870 and barely half knew of the annex- ation of Alsace-Lorraine." Indeed, only one man in four could explain why July 14 was a national holiday. A military novel of that period confirmed his findings: many privates did not know about the war of 1870 either, to say nothing of the Franco~Russian alliance closer to their day.82 On the other hand, we may safely assume that when a Correze farmer whose barn was requisitioned in 1909 to billet an artillery troop on maneuvers asked if the soldiers were French or Prussians, he knew about the war, if only vaguely.t "The idea of the fatherland," wrote Joseph Fleurent in a revealing but un~ convincing discussion of Alsatian patriotism, "is above all the love of one's country as state, then as a legal and economic structure." This is far from the idea most advocates of patrie had of the nation, or wanted others to have of it. But it is not far removed from the way the alien notion struck the peas- ant. As with the Indians of Peru, the only figures that represented national authority in their eyes were the recruiting sergeant, the tax collector, and the judge. A variety of evidence shows that Fleurent came closer to the truth 

• Cardinal Manning and Other Essays, p. 184. See also Bodley, France, 2: 364, on villagers in Haute-Savoie who, in 1894, believed Napoleon III was still Emperor. In 1885 Hamerton noted that the French peasants had no sentiments for Alsace-Lorraine and were indifferent to its loss. They did not "really know what the word France means .... Why should they make sacrifices for the people of Alsatia, who were always as foreigners to them?" (Round My House, pp. 230-3 1.) t Instruct;on primaire, 2: 71. The point was well taken-and was still valid around 1900, when peasants near Burg (Correze), nine or ten miles from Brive, did not know the names of villages less than two miles away, even those they could see on nearby slopes (Andre A. Meynier, "Deux hameaux limousins," pp. 369ff). Another writer, another area: "L'Etat c'etait quelque chose de vague. On ne pen sa it guere plus loin que Villebon et certainement pas plus loin que Macon" (V. Dupont, Quand Eve filait, p. II8). 

~ Ernest Lavisse deplored the fact that at every examination session (session de hac) examiners found young men who knew nothing of the defeats of 1870 or of the new eastern borders of France, who forgot that Metz was in German hands or placed Nancy in German territory ("L'En- seignement de l'histoire," p. xxvi). So perhaps we should not insist on such ignorance as peculiar to the common people. 

France, One and Indivisible 111 

than, say, Julien Benda. And it is worth remembering that until the Second Empire some communes, too poor to buy a flag, lacked even that basic sym- bol of the nation-state. "No one has ever found the secret of forging a patrie without common ideas," insisted Pecaut in 1879. Before that mutuality could be achieved there would have to be more flags; and there would have to be more teachers. And teachers would have to inculcate. (for it was not there) what Dupront's paean to France calls its religion: that (in Gambetta's words) "there is a moral entity to which [a man] must give all, sacrifice all, his life, his future, and that this entity ... is France."33 

We shall examine in detail, in the chapter devoted to schools and what they taught, how the teacher carried out this injunction. Certainly he was not allowed to forget it. Indeed, he was regularly reminded by circulars and by assigned essay subjects in courses for teachers, such as this one in 1880: "On the teaching of national history and on the way it has been used to develop patriotic feelings."· Moreover, he seems to have put it to good use. Young Franc;ois J affrenou, the future Breton patriot, born at Carnouet (COtes-du- Nord) in 1879, was sent to school at Guingamp in 1889. In 1892, at the age of thirteen, he wrote a poem called "Long Live Our France!" bidding proud Frenchmen to march where the bugle called :34 

Ravagez cette fihe Allemagne, Devastez-lui ses campagnes, Exterminez jusqu'au dernier Ces Allemands, soldats de papier. Crachez mitrailleuses, tonnez canons, Et marchez au son des clairons. 

Exactly what Rector Baudoin had hoped for in 1880. 

The cult of Joan of Arc spread too. In 1876 a third-year student teacher at the Limoges Normal School could not say two words about Joan. The case would surely not occur ten years later. The visitors' book at Joan's house in Domremy shows 1,342 signatures in 1872, 2,128 in 1877. At this time the visi- tors came mostly from nearby departments (Vosges, Aude, Somme, Doubs, Marne, and Meurthe) and from Paris. There were many soldiers, but other- wise nobles and Parisians predominated. Travel was a luxury; Domremy not yet a popular shrine. By 1893 things had changed: the numbers had increased, noms a particule had become of less account, there were more visitors from distant places-Sarthe, Deux-Sevres, Nievre. One cannot tell who they were, 

• Archives Departementa!es, Gers, Rapports d'inspection generale, 1881. All the same, patri- otism had its limits. In 1886, when the War Minister put forward a plan to make teachers sub- ject to three years' military service like everyone else, the action drew heavy fire. During the ensuing parliamentary debates, one argument frequently heard against ending their exemption was that it would dry up the recruitment of teachers. In the end the law as passed in 1889 per- mitted them to serve only one year. 

112 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

but the Petit Lavisse and its fellows may have had something to do with the new interest in Joan.35 

What do I dare conclude from all this information? There is many a weary step, said Edmund Burke, before "a number of vague, loose individuals" form themselves into a mass that has a true political personality: people, nation. 

In a lecture in 1882, Renan criticized the German concept of nationhood, as worked out by Herder, Fichte, and Humboldt, which contended that there were four basic elements of nationhood: language, tradition, race, and state. Renan proposed his own list instead: present consent, the desire to live to· gether, common possession of a rich heritage of memories, and the will to exploit the inheritance one has received in joint tenancy. One can understand why Renan would reject the German principles of nationhood. It would be hard for a Breton to ignore the absence of common language; tradition might well be taken in a political sense where division, not community, was the rule; race was a dubious concept; and only state remained, but as an expres· sion of power, not of organic growth. Still, Renan's own desiderata served no better. In 1882 consent might be assumed from indifference, but there could be little desire to live together with people who might as well have come from another world. The heritage of memories was not held in common, but dif· fered according to region and to social stock-witness Renan's own assump- tions. And there was no inheritance in joint tenancy. The Republic under which Renan formulated his idea had inherited a territorial unit but a cuI· tural jigsaw. It was up to the Republic to turn the legal formulas into actual practice. 

What Renan reflects is the assumptions and the serene conscience of his kind. But it matters little really if he is right or wrong. His France, like that of Barres's Professor Bouteiller, is an ensemble d'idees. One is French, says Bouteiller, if one assimilates certain ideas, an abstract approach to something very concrete: being, feeling, however elusive these may be.s6 

There is something strange about the talk that swelled in the late nine· teenth century, and that continues to this day, about being French. If the French were (are?) as French as we have been led to believe, why so much fuss? The fact is, the French fuss so much about the nation because it is a living problem, became one when they set the nation up as an ideal, remained one because they found they could not realize the ideal. The more abstractly the concept of France-as-nation is presented, the less one notes discrepancies between theory and practice. When one gets down to facts, things become awkward. Take, for example, Carlton Hayes's naive definition of nationality: "a group of people who speak either the same language or closely related dialects, who cherish common historical traditions, and who constitute or think they constitute a distinct cultural society."37 This would never do for the France we have been talking about, because it simply does not fit French 

France, One and Indivisible 113 

conditions. A lot of Frenchmen did not know that they belonged together until the long didactic campaigns of the later nineteenth century told them they did, and their own experience as conditions changed told them that this made sense. 

Finally there was force. Finally, but also originally and throughout. In the end it was a republican of Toulouse, albeit a Gaullist, who told the truth in the clearest and bluntest terms: it was centralization, said Alexandre Sangui~ netti, "which permitted the making of France despite the French, or in the midst of their indifference .... France is a deliberate political construction for whose creation the central power has never ceased to fight."s8 Commonplaces perhaps. But too often forgotten. E. J. Hobsbawm recently asked whether the "nation" might be "an attempt to fill the void left by the dismantling of earlier community and social struc~ tures."39 This actually reverses the order of events, at least in regard to France. In France the political nation of the Ancien Regime functioned side by side with traditional community and social structures. The ideological nation of the Revolution had to compete with these. It was not invented upon their dismantling; its invention implied their dismantling. It is interesting in this context to read the reflections of the sociologist Marcel Mauss on the injustice of cultural imperialism, of a Pan-German or Pan-Slav movement that attempts to impose a "dominant civilization on a composite society." It never occurs to Mauss, a humane and learned man, that his criticism could apply to France as well.· 

All these difficulties arise, it seems to me, because the theory of nation and patrie is too rigid, hence too brittle. In other words, its generalizations are particularly liable to collapse under the weight of exceptions, which in this case do not prove the rule but crack it. All the familiar imagery of patriotism and nationhood is based on unity. To question the assumption of unity is like Psyche's holding a light over sleeping Amor. Amor has to go away. Unity vanishes. Perhaps salvation lies in an alternative formula, suggested appro- priately enough by a folklorist, Arnold Van Gennep. In Van Gennep's view the nation is a complex of collective bodies) all in process of perpetual change and in a constantly varying relationship with one another.40 The static view of the nation as a precise entity that having once been forged is thereafter stable or threatened by corruption is thus replaced by a Bergsonian model of continual interaction much closer to what actually went on. 

• "La Nation," especially p. 40. Mauss shows the same blindness in a later passage when he refers to the linguistic attitudes and expansionism of others (pp. 62-66). We may note also his own understanding of the nation: "a materially and morally integrated society, with a stable per- manent central power, with fixed frontiers, with inhabitants relatively at one morally, mentally, and culturally who consciously adhere to the State and to its laws." He clearly thinks that na- tional integration involves the disappearance of every kind of subgroup: nation and citizen coming to face each other with no intermediaries between them (pp. 20, 24).THE WAY THINGS WERE 

The purpose of my argument in this chapter is not to prove that the French were unpatriotic, but to demonstrate that they had no uniform conception of patriotism at the Revolution or at any other time in our period, and that patriotic feelings on the national level, far from instinctive, had to be learned. They were learned at different speeds in different places, mostly through the latter part of the nineteenth century. When, in 1881, the teacher of Castelnau (Lot) claimed that France was moving toward unity, he was right, of course. When he concluded from this that local history must be abolished, merged, lost in the history of the nation, of the one French people, he was premature. And wrong. But he was doing what he conceived to be his job. He and his fellows did their job so conscientiously, in fact, that until quite recently there has been little hint of anything else. And yet, within the nation, Castelnau and its like had, have, a history too. 
