+++
title = "08 THE WORKING OF THE LAND"

+++

11 ne faut pas regretter les choses, m~me les plus jolies. quand un peu de misere et de fatigue humaine dispara1t avec cHes. -RENE BAZIN 

ALL THROUGH THE nineteenth century and into the first decades of the twentieth the rural and agricultural populations were a majority in France. On that everyone agrees. But the figures vary depending on how such popu- lations are defined. The data most often cited are also the least enlightening. Official definition classes as urban any locality with 2,000 or more inhabitants, and on this standard, estimates that in 1851 three-quarters of the French popu- lation lived in rural areas, that by 1901 the proportion of rural to urban inhabi- tants had shifted to about 3 to 2, and that between 1921 and 1929 the urban population gained a slight edge over the ruraP The difficulty, of course, is that some localities with fewer than 2,000 inhabitants were essentially small towns, and some with more than 2,000 remained largely rural. A bourg of Provence or Languedoc, for example, would have had more urban characteristics than a bourg of the same size in Lorraine. For this reason, such figures are useful only in indicating and to some extent charting a general trend. 

The same applies to more precise statistics. First, because they also vary; witness the recent works of Theodore Zeldin and ].-M. Mayeur, who though they agree that the agricultural sector of the French economy employed the largest proportion of the population in the late nineteenth century, differ on what the exact proportion was.2 But no one disputes, at least, that in absolute numbers the active agricultural population continued to grow through the end of the century. As Table I shows, there were more people earning their living in agriculture, fishing, and forestry in 1896 than in 1856 or 1876 (or in fact ever before).8 According to the table, they no longer constituted a ma- jority of the working population, as they had during the Crimean War, but taking into account the people catering to them in the small towns dotting the countryside, the French population would still have been a predominantly rural one. 

All this is by way of saying, if it needs to be said, that we are talking about 

116 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

TABLE I Working Population of France by Sector, 1856, 1876,1896, 1906 

1856 1876 1896 1906 

Pet. of Pet. of Pet. of Pet. of No. of working No. of working No. of working No. of working workers popula- workers popula- workers popula- workers popula- Sector (millions) tion (millions) tion (millions) tion (millions) tion 

Primary: agricul- ture, forestry, and fishing 7.305 51.4% 7.995 49.3% 8.463 45.3% 8.845 43.2% Secondary: manu- 

factures and industry 4.418 31.1 4.469 27.6 5.452 29.2 5.936 29.0 Tertiary: services 2.493 17.5 3.754 23.1 4.749 25.5 5.701 26.1 Hard to categorize 

or unemployed .239 1.7 

TOTAL 14.216 100% 16.218 100% 18.664 100% 20.721 100% 

SOURCE: Jean Bouvier in Georges Duby, ed., Histoire de la France, vol. 3: us Temps nouveaux de 1852 a nos iours (1972), p. 17. 

a great many souls; and even if this discussion focuses on only certain parts of the agricultural population, in the most truly rural and the least advanced areas, it nevertheless bears on the lives of a lot of French men and women. What concerns me here is the way in which their work and their methods of working changed, and what this portended for their way of life and their way of thinking. 

I shall use statistics from time to time, but it is well to remember that the statistics of the period are at best suggestive indicators. As the prefect of Creuse declared in 1873, the statistical-gathering process was still being per- fected and not very reliable. The coverage tended to be patchy. Productivity figures were not to be trusted because of incomplete returns and the unwill- ingness of the peasants to furnish precise data.' Even in great official enter- prises like the censuses the benchmarks were shifted so frequently that their results are hard to use for comparative purposes over a number of years. Only studies in depth focused on particular localities, like those now available to historians of the early modern period, will provide the detailed information that we require. Until then-and even then, for there was infinite local vari- ation-any conclusions are perforce speculative. A situation where information is clearly incomplete forces us to acknowledge what in other circumstances we might seek to avoid. 

Nothing would ever be the same again after 1789, claims Ernest Labrousse in a 1970 collection on the economic history of pre-Revolutionary France. Yet what strikes one most forcibly about agriculture in the early half of the nine- teenth century is how little anything actually changed: stubborn survival and 

The Working of the Land 117 

indifference to the accidents occurring in the political sphere. Pace Labrousse, there seems to be general agreement that the rural economy changed little with the Revolution, that there was no radical modification of land structure or work techniques or productivity before the middle of the century. The farming methods of the July Monarchy, wrote an agronomist of the period, were comparable to those of the Algerian Arabs: "a little better than those of the lroquois and the Tartars." About the same time (1836) an officer recon- noitering the area between Oloron and Navarrenx, in Bearn, simply copied out the report of an intendant of 1698, noting that nothing had changed, and that agriculture "seems to have been in its present state since a very ancient age."5 Perhaps the Physiocratic ideas of the eighteenth century persisted so far into the nineteenth because they remained relevant to an enduring reality.· The sociologist Robert Redfield makes a distinction between the peasant, for whom agriculture is a way of life, not a profit-making enterprise, and the farmer, who carries on agriculture as a business, looking on land as capital and commodity. In those terms, through much of the century, most French- men who worked the land and many who owned it were peasants, main- taining the old ways, producing without worrying much about the market, relying above all on the natural productiveness of the land. It would be late in the century before a significant proportion of them tied their production to the needs of the market, because it would be late in the century before the market became significant and accessible to them. Thus, the weight of live animals slaughtered in the departments of the Limousin-Correze, Creuse, and Haute-Vienne--changed very little between 1840 and 1852; the number of cattle specially fattened for the market appears to have been negligible indeed.6 The end of labor was to feed the laborer and his family, not to obtain cash. We observe, for example, that meat, the chief source of cash profits, was hardly exploited to that end. The network of trade and the mentality of the producer remained, in economic terms, at the archaic stage. 

There is some argument about when all this changed. One view sees the 

'" Speaking of the economy of Vergigny (Yonne) after the Revolution, Georges Lizerand has noted: "La consistance generale de la propriete n'a pas change .... Quant a I'economie rurale, aucune revolution ne s'est produite. < •• La structure fonciere et meme sociale de Vergigny n'a pas ete modifiee radicalement." (Un Siecle d'histoire d'une commune rurale, pp. 20-21.) This is not to suggest that there had been no change at all, but only to draw attention to how rela- tively slight it was. Peasants as a whole did not own much more of the French soil under Charles X than they had owned under Louis XVI. But more of them owned some, and their numbers probably increased with time. In 1862, according to the Agricultural Survey, there were 1,812,000 peasant landowners who worked their own lands; 1,987,000 smallholders who supple- mented their holdings by working another's lands as tenants, sharecroppers, or simply laborers; 588,000 tenant farmers or sharecroppers who owned no land; and nearly three million (2,965,000) landless farm servants and hired hands. Twenty years later, the situation was "slowly changing." For one thing, the first category, peasant landowners, had risen to 2,150,696, largely at the expense of the second. For another, landless and land-poor laborers were beginning to leave the land in increasing numbers. (Marcel Faure, Les Paysans dans la societe franraise, Paris, 1966, pp. 15-17.) 

lIB THE WAY THINGS WERE 

1840's as one turning point, a period in which the areas of predominantly large-scale farming experienced their agricultural revolution. Such areas, how- ever, as we know them, lie mainly in the north; and good portions of, say, Marne and Aisne only abandoned mixed farming and self-sufficiency for cash crops in the 1870's. But even if we were to accept the 1840's theory, it applies to only a limited portion of the country. Virtually all of the center, the south, and the west are excluded; and there the great survey of 1848 suggests that eighteenth-century advances accounted for whatever progress there was, and that methods of work on the whole remained those of the Ancien Regime. Michel Auge-Laribe, a man wholly knowledgeable about agricultural condi- tions in his country, insisted that between 1860 and 1880 peasants in poor re- gions, which were "more widespread than is usually recognized," were still close, in their life and methods, to the late Stone Age. It is a potent state- ment-and one that should give pause to anyone envisioning a rural France in the throes of modernization during the Second Empire.7 

Progress there was. But, as in every other realm, it was slow, patchy, and only substantial enough to be apparent in very limited areas. Until about 1880 the peasant's life was little affected by it. In 1882, says Alain Corbin, the Limousin was little touched by agricultural changes, except those that affected cattle raising. The conditions of labor had not changed, productivity had hardly increased, most of the improvements in crops and fertilizer were still unknown, and most peasants still practiced a mixed farming designed to sat- isfy their own needs.s 

The real changes in the rural economy came only in subsequent decades. This is confirmed by evidence from Lower Brittany, Lozere, Auvergne, and the Landes, in all of which the watershed between the old agriculture and the new (for the mass of peasants) seems to lie in the 20-odd years before 1914. This is when wooden plows were replaced by improved models, when manure and artificial fertilizers appeared in significant quantities, when tools and methods "so primitive that they deserve to figure in a museum of prehistory" gave way. In Dordogne the ancient symbiosis between the poor, birch-covered highlands and the more prosperous chestnut country below endured until 1900, VI:ith tribes of hill people coming down to work for the valley farmers, gathering chestnuts on a So-so basis. But by that time the closed economy had broken down. Easier communications and imports of foreign grain had turned poor mountain regions to dairy farming. And greater access to fer- tilizer was carrying others, like the area around Valensole, above the old sub- sistence levels.9 

Rouergue and Quercy had traditionally been divided between the pays fro- mental of the Causse, the calcareous tableland where roads were good and dry and wheat grew in abundance, and the Segala plateau, where every shower made roads impassable and only rye (seigle) could be grown. Roads came to the Segala in the 1880'S and 1890's, and with them there came liming, 

The Working of the Land 119 

then chemical fertilizers, to drive back rye, the poor man's fare, for the nobler wheat. By 1910 the Segala was only a place~name, and its people like the Caussiens ate white bread. In Bourbonnais poor holdings on barren lands with no roads had names like Brame~faim (Bellow hunger) and, in several places, Tout~y~faut (All's wanting). "Today," wrote a local folklorist in 1908, "as a result of agricultural improvements, two such domains have changed their character, and their name, to Rien n'y manque [Naught's wanting]!" A parallel evolution can be traced in Saintonge, rich in lieuxdits with similar implications: Poussepenilles (Rags and tatters), Brusse~misere (Wretched brush), Les Chiches (The niggards), Pain~perdu (Lost bread), Petit~gain (Little gain), Porte~fache (Troublemaker), and a host of Tout-y-fauts and Toutlifauts, some of which, at a later date, received more innocuous names like Tour-Garnier and Beaumanoir.10 

Any attempt to systematize the process or for that matter to provide a systematic account of it is bound to obscure how immensely varied was the reality. Any attempt at theoretical order turns genuine confusion, coexistence, interpenettation, into a picture more artificial and clearer than it really was. The reader is well advised who keeps this point in mind. Yet if we do not divide the organic jumble into (some of) its component parts, we may also miss what happened. 

Daniel Faucher, in a discussion of such changes, has divided the "agricul- tural revolution" into four stages: the first is that of fallow or, rather, of its abolition, which he dates back to the eighteenth century. The second, the biological revolution, took place in the nineteenth century, with advances in root crops and the growing of fodder. Next, in the mid-nineteenth century, came the chemical revolution bringing improved soils, changes of crops (e.g., from rye to wheat) and increased yields. Then, finally, there followed in the late nineteenth century the machine revolution, which completed the process of modernization.ll These categories are as good as any for those who want to see what actually took place. But the first thing one encounters is that, in general, Faucher's periodization anticipates events, presenting first steps, how- ever significant, as if they had been the norm. Perhaps the exceptions to them were closer to the norm. 

Certainly, population growth and land hunger in the eighteenth century led many to turn to less and less productive parts of mountain, moor, or for- est, and even to encroach on rural roads. We hear about it in the Pyrenees; and in the Argonne under Napoleon I a man was brought to court for plow- ing up and planting a local road.12 But in many parts the clearing of land for cultivation awaited the division of common lands in the late nineteenth century; and in any case did not become truly "revolutionary" until the an- cient practice of letting fields lie fallow (every other year in the south, one year in three in the north) was abandoned, and the plots used as cropland. Commons, which played a crucial role in the village economy as pasturage 

120 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

and as a fallback and resource for the poorer inhabitants, were slow to be abandoned. Burnbeating as a means of improving the soil was long used on moors and in forest clearings in Dauphine, the Ardennes, the Breton interior, the Limousin. In Allier, until the 1880'S, many fields (the worst, according to our informant, but a lot were in this category) were left uncultivated for two or three years to become covered with broom, which was torn out before clear- ing and used for domestic heating, family bread-ovens, and, of course, balais. In Upper Correze, until around 1880, when the commons at last began to be divided, landless peasants set fire to the briar heath, cleared a few acres, worked them for three or four years without any manure, then moved to another place. In Ardennes, almost to the present day, such lands were put through a 20-year cycle: burned off at the end of summer, to be planted in rye for two years; used next for two years for a vigorous growth of broom, which was cut for stable litter; and then left to revert to forest brush for 15 years or so, when the whole process was repeated. In 1835 attempts to sup- press such practices provoked a popular outcry against proposals that "con- demned the working population to hunger," which when ignored gave rise to the sarteux riots of 1837. As late as 1897, this sartage was still practiced in half the common forests (about 6,000 hectares) of the arrondissement of Ro- croi.13 

Clearly, this was not the most productive way of using land. But here, as in other instances, resistance to change was not a mere stubborn blindness, but rather a clinging to ways without which the economy of household and community fell apart. Thus in the Limousin, where land clearing for regular cultivation got going only at the turn of the century, the peasant continued to rely on the gorse and broom that grew on uncleared lands for stable litter as long as straw was used in paper manufacture and was more profitably sold for that purpose. Nor was private initiative easy even off the commons when it went contrary to custom, as in the Limousin, where fallow roads (chemins de jachere) were sowed over every other year so cereals could be grown. Tra- dition imposed a biennial rotation that all were forced to respect-whether they wanted to or not.14 

Moreover, abandoning fallow required finding some other means of nour- ishing the soil. But what Faucher calls the chemical revolution came late in many regions. For a long time natural fertilizers played (or at least could have played) the most important role. In places where cattle were few or absent, such as the Moyenne Garonne, dovecotes were maintained to provide pigeon droppings (colombine), without which cash crops like hemp and tobacco could simply not be grown.'*' But through most of the country manure was 

• Pierre Deffontaines, Les Hommes et leurs trQtJQUX, p. 54. The expense of this important item (even in 1830, 20 liters of colombine, or something over five gallons, cost five francs) goes a long way toward explaining why the lord's exclusive right to build and keep a dovecote particu- larly angered the peasants. But it was a burden they had to shoulder for years; only chemical fertilizers would kill the pigeonnier. 

The Working of the Land 121 

simply dung, and there, as a contemporary chorus deplored, its potential was largely overlooked. Some regions seem scarcely to have used manure before 1830 (Haute-Garonne). At that, they were 40 years ahead of the Limousin, where the use of dung and liquid manure to enrich the fields spread only after 1870. Equally important, when dungheaps were kept for this purpose they were generally ill-managed, their riches allowed to wash away and go to waste. Indifference and ignorance, combined with lack of means, lasted well into the Third Republic. It would be the greater number and weight of cattle that placed more manure at the peasant's fork. In most places this development, too, began in the 1880'S.15 

As the proverb puts it, "Who has hay has bread." Hay feeds cattle, cattle give manure, manure makes crops grow. But cattle continued to be small and scrawny, underbred, underfed, and overworked, their contribution to the dungheap not nearly as impressive as their numbers might suggest. Horses were no better. As an army officer reported in 1838: "There are plenty of horses, but one could not use them; they are almost all blind in one eye or in both, small, and sapless." Army officers cared less about livestock, but as we have noted, the existing figures paint a lean picture for the Limousin, today a major source of France's meat supply.16 Similarly in the Morvan, the white Charolais breed appeared only after 1.840. Chroniclers of the mid-century west agree on its chhifs bestiaux. In 1858 the peasants of Mayenne called on each other to help get enfeebled beasts to their feet so they could be led to drink. There was even a routine method of doing this, with the strongest man hauling on the animal's tail.17 It would be a decade before specialization and select breeding would show results at the grass-roots level in these parts."" 

True, urban meat consumption rose through the Restoration and the July Monarchy, and meat prices rose accordingly. This, along with a government policy that was designed to keep grain prices low, turned some farmers to cattle. However, many others remained outside the commercial network, oblivious to market conditions. More immediate considerations had to sug- gest new possibilities. 

The first of these was, again, the need for more and richer manure. And that meant more fodder, the increased production of which depended on other forms of fertilizer, above all lime. Improving acid soils with lime was not a new method, but it was one that was limited to limestone regions or areas within easy range of limekilns. Elsewhere, lime was rare and was re- served for the building of churches and manors. When, for political reasons, the Vendee got highways in the 1840's, well before they would normally have been built, fields in the bocage could be limed and sowed with wheat "for the rich." But even then carted lime was still too high for many. Canals, then railways, brought cheap lime to the peasants along their paths. But beyond 

.. And even longer (after 1870) before the local nags would be replaced by biack draft-horses capable of going to a trot. 

122 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

their radius and that of the coastal ports, there were vast areas where the price of lime continued to be prohibitive until branch lines were constructed in the last third of the century.1B Peasants consoled themselves with the thought that, as the proverb claimed, lime enriched the father but impover- ished the son. =If: Nevertheless, a map of lime consumption in Creuse and Haute- Vienne at the turn of the century (indicating, as one might expect, highest consumption along railway lines and around railway stations) shows a clear coincidence between the use of lime and intensive and prosperous farming, often on land that had been barren shortly before.19 

Communications were crucial in the history of fertilizer, which took its time to travel: like the slag that only began to be used in Bresse in 1890 and the guano that was first imported in 1840 but only reached Dordogne around 1870' Guano and the chemical fertilizers, when they were introduced, were bought with reluctance, partly because of scandals over the adulteration, cheating, and extortionate prices that had marked the trade of these products, partly because of their cost, and the cost of transport. Even in regions like Normandy they did not really spread until just before the First World War, and more generally, only after it.20 

Change in equipment was also slow and halting. Traditional farm imple- ments had changed little if at all since ancient days. The sixteenth-century agronomist Olivier de Serres, who recommended crop rotation, nevertheless felt Cato's warning worth repeating: "Do not change your plowshare, for every change carries with it the danger of loss." As long as subsistence re- mained marginal, the danger of loss ensured that his warning would be heeded. Wooden swing plows of the most ancient model were in general use south and west of the heavy northern soils at least into mid-century, and survived in some places even longer. The improved dombasle plow was adopted generally in Dordogne between 1840 and 1890, in Morbihan between 1850 and 1860, in Livradois in the 1860'S, in Savoy in the 1870's. But coexis- tence was more typical. In the Alps the dombasle had settled into the alpine valleys by the late 1860'S, but the medieval swing plow was preferred in moun- tain areas, where roads were few and bad, because it was light and could be easily carried. In A veyron, where the dombasle also spread through the 1860'S, and in Ariege, where the first dombasle appeared in 1837, the old araire sur- vived through the century. In Correze the most widely used plow through most of the century was a form of the old wooden one, homemade of birch, with a metal-tipped share of beech or oak. Around 1885 this plow acquired an iron moldboard; around 1890 it was replaced by the dombasle. Finally, in 1920, there came the heavy brabant, named after the Belgian province where 

,. This had reference to the fact that by the 1870's some lands had been overlimed, almost to their ruination. Musset, who cites the proverb (Le Ras-Maine, pp. 331-32), notes the efforts in that area in the 1880'S to break down the peasants' resistance routin;ere and get them to use less lime. Routine catches on quickly! 

The Working of the Land 123 it had been developed, a metal plow with a forecarriage and, as a rule, a pair of plowshares. 

There was a world of difference between Correze and Aisne, where the brabant was in general use as early as 1860. The conditions in Correze and other regions slow to make the transition simply did not encourage change. There was the quality of the soil: the lighter the soil, the lighter the plow that could work it. There were the physical features of the land: certain mountainous patches could not accommodate larger, heavier gear. As long as such land was worked for crops, the old portable plows were more appro- priate. Indeed, in parts of the Midi, on steep slopes, for instance, where plow- ing was awkward, the hoe, la charrue du pauvre, reigned supreme. There, as the rustic said, Iou bigot [hoe] vau mal que l'araire, and farmland was tradi- tionally evaluated in terms of hoeing days (journals de fossure). There was, finally, the search-the need-for self-sufficiency. The peasants' tools were homemade. Passage from wooden plows to plows with iron parts meant rely- ing on others. The peasant who had once made his gear at home had to turn to the village smith for a metal tip for his wooden share, then for much more with the dombasle. The brabant lay beyond even the smithy. Bought in the market, it meant a substantial investment of capital, not only for the equip- ment itself but for the animals to pull it, passage to a different stage of pro- ductivity. 

No wonder accommodation to new gear was slow. In Savoy, where in the 1860'S Tarentaise and Maurienne still used wooden Roman araires and other cantons medieval plows with a double moldboard, newer models were resisted for a time because they seemed so fragile and village artisans could not re- place damaged parts, making repair costly. In some villages of Comminges in the mid-1880'S the plow had only just appeared to ease the peasant's work, heretofore carried out with hand tools: a shovel equipped with moldboard (for stubble plowing), a spade and hoe for corn, and a wooden mallet to break up the clods. The plows came in, and then animal traction, so that where hardly half the peasants of Comminges had had a yoke of oxen in the 1850's by the late 1880'S everyone had his pair.21 

Comminges was poor; Touraine relatively wealthy. Yet there, too, improve- ments in equipment came late, beginning in the 1890's. This was true even beyond the poor terres fro ides of the plateaus, because the best lands had been so divided up that plows could not turn in the narrow strips. In the Varennes region, whose alluvial soil produced the best hemp in France, an old proverb indicates that the horse stayed in the stable, the plow stayed in the shed, and one worked with the spade. The rule continued to apply in this prosperous region as late as 1900 or so, when farmers still used a rake for harrowing.22 

Humbler tools showed the same persistence as the plow, notably the sickle. Scythe and sickle coexisted in many regions, the scythe used for haymaking,124 THE WAY THINGS WERE 

the sickle for harvesting. The scythe was vastly more efficient: one could work much more quickly, two or three times as fast as with a sickle, and could crop close to the ground, thus saving straw and a lot of labor. Agricultural societies did all they could to boost scythes, both by featuring them in the shows and contests they organized and by sending harvesters out to resistant areas to show what the scythe could do. But the farm laborers, especially, opposed the scythe for excellent reasons: because their women, following after the harvest~ ers, gleaned less straw and fewer fallen ears of corn, especially when rakes came in to supplement the scythe. So not only did the sickle continue in use into the twentieth century in the highlands and other places where the ter~ rain made scything difficult, the struggle over its displacement lasted longer in the plains than mere considerations of efficiency would have decreed: until the 1870's in the plains of Gard; through the third quarter of the century in Indre~t~Loire and Indre, and even in the poorer regions of Champagne, like Brenne and Borschaut; to about 1890 in the canton of Foix, even though the scythe had been introduced there half a century earlier, around 1840.23 

Moreover, certain varieties of grain, like the red wheat of Limagne, were easier to harvest using sickles. Though the scythe could cut faster, the sickle permitted a more uniform cut, with ears at the same level, so there was less loss of grain in threshing. With machines the peasant was able to harvest grain at its peak of ripeness, as he likes to do, without chancing the losses he faced with the scythe, but there were places where machines would not work well or where the peasant could not afford them. Hence in the Correze hills, until the First World War, meadows were cleared with scythes, but rye, oats, and buckwheat were harvested with sickles. "With a scythe," observed a Correzien, "one would have lost grain, and it would have been difficult to gather the small conical sheaves that one set up to dry." Observe that the prac~ tical reason, here, rested on a traditional base. Sheaves were set up in a par~ ticular way, and it was hard to learn to do things otherwise. Above all, per~ haps, the abundance of labor into the 1850's and in some places in the 1860's prolonged the life of the sickle: it may have meant hiring more harvesters and working them for far more days, but harvesters were plentiful and cheap. Furthermore, sickles demanded no great skill or strength, whereas it took a strong, fit man to wield the scythe. So, for example, we learn that in Gers women did the harvesting, with sickles, until 1885, and after that the work was done, with scythes, by men.24 

In a way, the progress of the scythe was coterminous with ,that of machin~ ery; both were appreciated as a way of saving labor or replacing it when the supply of farm workers dried up. In certain areas, that is to say, the Loire val~ ley, for example, sickles gave way only to mechanical mowers. The machine was a device to replace scarce labor, not to increase production. Mowers, reapers, harvesters, and combines made little sense to most farmers as long as local hands or gangs from poorer regions could do the work as well or 

The Working of the LAnd 125 more cheaply. The scarcity of labor, higher wages, and better working con- ditions, all relative of course, but clustering at the end of the century, help explain why harvesting machines were generally adopted before improved plows were-or seed drills. Thus in Aveyron, reported the Agricultural Sur- vey, it was after 1900 and especially 1905, "when depopulation began to be seriously felt," that machines came in and "notions of productivity and of the importance of time penetrated the peasant's soul." And it was then, too, that "the mediocrity of life [was] replaced by a certain comfort."25 

Still, one must be careful not to confuse appearance with use, let alone general use.* In 1867, J. A. Barral tells us, the owner of a prize-winning farm in Nord had bought a harvester but hardly used it. It was less satisfactory than the Flemish short-handled scythe with which his wheat was cut, but he kept it there "as a sort of warning for the workers who, this way, under- stand that one can do without them if one has to; and this sort of warning is very necessary these days." Conversely, as a teacher reported in 1886 from Salerm (Haute-Garonne), sharecroppers took the owner's plow into the fields along with their own wooden ones, but used it only if there was a chance of his turning up. Under the circumstances, it is not surprising that when the first reaper-binders appeared in Lower Dauphine during the 10 to 15 years before 1914, they provoked the ire of the harvesters.26 

It was not only their wages that machines affected, it was their way of life. Implements made at home, often individualized to fit the owner's needs and circumstances (for example, to accommodate a left-handed man)/7 had been replaced by village-crafted products, then by standardized gear brought from far away. The long accumulation of details discretely borrowed as suited the local situation had been precipitated into radical change, and no facet of fam- ily or village life was left unmarked by it. With reaper-binders came com- pressed bales of hay and straw too heavy for women to handle; so women, already nudged out by scythes, stayed more than ever out of the fields.t When haying, harvesting, and threshing had been done by hand, involving several weeks of backbreaking work each day from before sunrise past dark, it was natural to greet their flagging end with feasts and rejoicing. With machines, however, these tasks were no longer memorable trials, their completion less of an event. We shall see how, with machines, with production no longer regulated by custom, a mass of popular traditions and feasts were either abandoned altogether or became hollow rituals.28 

• In the Jura, for example, the temporary meadows that altered the crop-rotation pattern of the mountainside dated back to the introduction of sainfoin in 1786. but they only became a general part of the Jura landscape in the 1880'S ("Enquete sur .•. l'agriculture," Jura, Musee des Arts et Traditions Populaires archives). t Women's roles also altered in regions that shifted from crops to cattle. With the men spend- ing a good part of their time travding to markets and fairs, women became dominant in the operation of the farm. (See "Enquete sur ... l'agriculture," Calvados, Musee des Arts et Tradi- tions Populaires archives.) 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

For all this, the grounds for the peasants' resistance to new methods were more often practical than social or psychological. For example, over a period of perhaps IS years, from the 1880'S to 1895, the people of Roger Thabault's Mazieres fought hard against the introduction of new plows and persisted in using the sickle. Why? Sickles were appropriate to raftered fields, in which two plo wed furrows formed a ridge that would be a nuisance for the scythe. The introduction of the dombasle or brabant would have eliminated the ridges and allowed the use of scythes. But their adoption involved profound changes all along the line, affecting not only equipment, but the drainage of the land. It was not traditions that prevented change; it was conditions and circumstances that had imposed traditional methods, and that would main~ tain them until they themselves could be changed.29 

As Jean Cuisenier tells us, attached though the Tunisian peasants of Ansa~ rine were to traditional methods, many passed without difficulty from their primitive araire to the improved charrue vigneronne. The tool was new, but they could use it with the same team (oxen or mules) as their older plow. It called for no additional investment in draft animals, hence necessitated no increase in land for their upkeep. Like the harrow, adopted with equal ease, the innovation fitted into tradition and made no demands for change on the existing order of things. In contrast, from charrue vigneronne to the all~metal brabant the distance was immense, and for most Ansarine fellahs insurmount~ able. To work a brabant in the djebel, one needed at least five pair of oxen, which had to be fed, cared for, and replaced. This supposed a much vaster farm, and more important, the knowhow to run it, a training and experi~ ence that few could have acquired on their limited holdings.30 

In the end, then, which implements were used and how new ones were adopted depended on the possibilities of the land: the living standard it afforded and its potential for supporting improvements; the nature of indi~ vidual plots and the demands they made (we have seen that in some cases novelties were inappropriate and no improvement); the structural charac~ teristics of fields and the communal servitudes these may have imposed;31 even the kind of crop, for corn was more labor-intensive than wheat, and root crops when they came cut not only into the pool of local labor but into the time the peasant had to make his own pitchforks and harrows.32 And so on. 

Land-tenure patterns were important too. Where sharecropping, itself testi~ mony to poverty, was widespread-in the southwest, the center, and the south~ east-its effects on agriculture were generally negative. The tenant, who most often held the land on verbal lease (or on a short-term written lease for as little as one year), was unsure of his tenure and unwilling to make improve~ ments. The owner, equally unsure of his tenant and drawing little profit from his property, was not eager to invest in it either. Sheer poverty made share- croppers conservative. At Saint-Germain-Ies-Belles (Haute~Vienne), where 

The Working of the Land 

the average grain yield in mid-century was only five times the quantity of seed sowed, "implements are wretched, because they cannot buy good ones. Cattle are poor, because there are no studs." The sharecroppers farmed largely for their own consumption, not for the market. And "since they generally have to furnish the gear and keep it up, they avoid expense, keep that of their fathers, and endlessly repair it." In the Pyrenees we find references, in 1895~6, to delays in sowing due to old, ineffective tools, used because the landowners were unwilling to spend anything on new equipment. Hence "farmers stag- nate in the old routines."33 Altogether, sharecropping was typically where the old survivals resisted longest and in greatest numbers."" It was also the form of farming that diminished most rapidly between 1882 and 1929 in all depart- ments where it had been a notable feature. 

Mutatis mutandis, what has been said about sharecropping applies to ten- ant farms as well. In parts of Brittany a form of holding called domaine con- geable went counter to any improvement, especially of buildings. It required that every building be repaired or reconstructed exactly as it had stood, which meant that even in 1907 thatched, mud-walled cabins were being rebuilt as they had always been; and new ones were mostly built on the old model. But even straightforward leases seem to have discouraged tenants from making improvements lest the owners be moved to raise their rent. Jean Vidalenc mentions that the great agricultural reformer Mathieu de Dombasle himself only got an ironclad 20-year lease at Roville thanks to the intervention of Charles X. The tenants' situation was no less precarious nearly a century later. The best they could do, wrote Paul Mayer, was to buy machinery and quality cattle. And indeed, cattle breeding could bring high returns, incomparably higher than those to be gained from cereals. But then this required real capi- tal, as did developing and improving land. J. A. Barral's studies reveal the costs involved in building access roads, draining, clearing, and fertilizing new acres, buying equipment, and quite simply acquiring the economic and scien- tific knowledge necessary to do all this. The task was quite beyond the aver- age peasant, let alone the poor one.34 

"Today," said Barral in 1870, "to farm with profit, one has to know a lot."35 Few did, even in the prosperous north.t And those tempted to innovate were 

• On the other side, though, Musset saw sharecropping in Lower Maine not as a source of backwardness but, on the contrary, as the starting point of all improvements: "instrument of progress," "alliance of capital and labor." The resident owners (especially after 1852) initiated improvements in all fields, and their sharecroppers slowly followed their example; it was the tenant farmers and smallholders who stubbornly resisted, presumably for lack of capital to follow suit. (Le Bas-Maine, p. 327.) See also Comte de Tourdonnet, Situation du metayage en France (Paris, 1879-80), p. 99. t Most significant, in this respect, is the absence of accounting or even of the sense of the need of it. For a few examples among many: HIes cultivateurs de notre region ne se rendent compte qu'en gros et dans l'ensemble de l'etat de leurs affairs" (Xavier Thiriat, La ValUe de Cleurie, p. 278); few keep accounts, even fewer figure their own labor as a production cost (M. F. Pariset, Montagne Noire, p. 168); of 250 households in the commune of Miremont, in Combrailles, only two or three were known to keep accounts (Archives Departementales, Puy- 

THE WAY THINGS WERE 

often held back by social pressure. Landowners could not favor good incum~ bents because they were expected to treat their tenants just as neighboring landowners did. Ordinary villagers came under pressure from their fellows. This ranged from loud and repeated predictions of ruin and sterility to more forceful forms of disapproval.* In addition, material conditions bolstered natu~ ral conservatism, and preconceived ideas of the immutability of things worked against the possibilities of innovation and held off change effectively enough to make negative judgments self~fulfilling-at least for a while. As might be expected, those improvements that took place were suggested or imposed from the outside, and tended to catch on best where outsiders (by dint of proximity, residence, or economic control) were most numerous, most influential, and least isolated. Where this was not the case, and where the cohesion of peasant groups was greatest, resistance to innovation was greatest toO.S6 

It is clear that such resistance reflected a correct estimate on the part of the peasants of their true situation. The modern improvements extolled by out~ siders made perfectly good sense on the outsider's terms. For the peasants they could not be accepted freely, except as part of a broader complex of change that would replace the existing working complex. As Father Serge Bonnet noted, before the peasant of Lorraine had access to insurance for his crops and cattle, the parceling out of land, the common pasture, and the three-yearly crop rotation were forms of agricultural insurance. This is where the com- mons played an important role, as factors and indicators of local change. This is why the commons survived when dominant economic thought would have liked to see them abolished. Then, as private improvements increased, common lands came to mean less, and to matter to fewer people. In Lorraine the number of applicants seeking permission to clear and plant them shrank. In the Limousin advances in cattle-breeding similarly resulted in a decrease in the number of those interested in using common pastures. More impor- tant, the cost (but also the common interest now) of building local roads, then schools and other municipal installations, could be met only by selling off the commons.57 The rich farmers (the term is relative) who sat on munici~ pal councils wanted to sell or rent common lands, especially common forests, and use their revenue profitably. They could afford to buy their own coal. The poor peasants, whose budget depended on the right to cut or gather fire- wood, could not heat or feed themselves adequately without the proceeds of 

de-Dome F 0274, schoolteacher's report, 1899). Compare J. A. Barral, Agriculture du Nord, I: 10, speaking of a sugarbeet factory at Masuy (Nord), where the head bookkeeper got 3,500 francs a year against 60 francs a month for la borers, 75 for overseers, and 110 for chief over- seers: "Tl faut savoir payer \cs bans employes, et la dc:pense faite pour la comptabilite est une des mieux placees ... productive par les enseignements qu'dle fournit." 

• Around I 835 a city man farming in Vendee planted rape-seed instead of the usual spring barley, food of the poor. His neighbors vented their anger at this by cutting down both his crop and his newly planted st:md of walnut trees (Jules Michdet, Journal, Paris, 1959, I: 165, quoted by J. J. Hemardinquer, POflr une histoire de l'alimcntatioll, p. 2(9). 

The Working of the Land 129 gleaning.· Deprived of these marginal resources, they migrated more will- ingly. 

So the developments (schools, roads, economic advances) that facilitated emigration also created the situation that precipitated it, by eliminating the traditional means the peasant had used to make ends meet. Land not used to capacity was developed, and with development there came depopulation and a sort of social fallow. Soon, the innovative rich farmers would sorely miss the squeezed-out farmworkers at harvest and spring sowing, and would have to restrict their operations or invest in machinery. Soon, too, the last survivals would be put to rest without great opposition: a law of 1891 estab- lished total liberty for all to grow what they pleased in whatever way they pleased; parcours and common grazing lands were legally abolished in 1899; gleaning rights after harvest, even for the poor, lapsed around 1914. 

At the turn of the century, there were fewer poor, the margin of subsis- tence was broader, poverty counted less heavily in the way resources were shared out. Fallow had shrunk by more than one-third between 1862 and 1882, by well over half in wild country like Haute-Loire. Meadows and grass- lands devoted to fodder had nearly tripled in size. More fodder, more cattle; more cattle, more manure; more manure, more productive fields. Tillage was deeper, chemical fertilizer more abundant. The peasant grew more of every- thing, but where in the 1880'S the rise in productivity had most affected poorer crops like rye, by 1912 rye had leveled off and the more noble wheat had forged ahead.ss Quality improved along with quantity: tokens of prosperity and of a change in diet. 

• The decay of gleaning, a practice most farmers and winegrowers had always resented, is a complex story, best followed in the pages of Paul Degrully, Le Droit de gianage, grapiUage, rate- lage, chaumage et sare/age: Patrimoine des pauvres (Paris, 1912), especially pp. 138-40. In the 1860'S and 1870'S the practice still yielded profits sufficient to provide girls with Sunday dresses and to prompt employers' complaints that journeymen's wives refused to be hired at harvest time, preferring to glean in the fields of the farmers for whom they would not work (see "En- quete sur ... I 'agricu Iture," Marne, Musee des Arts et Traditions Populaires archives), or that servant-girls left their regular jobs, preferring the pickings of glanage or grapillage to the "dur labeur du metier." By 1910 or so, in Berry at least, Degrully found only a few old women picking up some grain for their chickens. 

Various factors contributed to the waning of the practice. The growing number of small- holders tended to harvest their crops with great care, and cut down much of what a hired har- vester would have left; the increased use of scythes and rakes, then of machines more efficient than human hands, had similar effects; the gradual disappearance of local mills, easily accessible to the local poor, made it more difficult to dispose of gleanings or turn them into flour. Besides, quite simply, gleaning was hard work and when alternatives offered they were seized. Degrully tells us that peasant women preferred to sew at home for Paris stores, earning as much as 60 centimes for 12 or 14 hours' work. "As for the men, they have better things to do!" 
