+++
title = "13 KEEPING UP WITH YESTERDAY"

+++

Before the cherry orchard was sold everybody was worried and upset, but as soon as it was all settled finally and once and for all, everybody calmed down, and felt quite cheerful in fact. 

-ANTON CHEKOV 

THE STORY OF France's entry into the industrial age has generally been told in terms of the numbers of engines moved by steam.* As a practical matter, the spread of roads and railroads would be a sounder indicator, for it was they, particularly the local roads and lines of the late century, that created a truly national market in which the wares that the machines turned out could be sold and bought. More, they were crucial in spreading the relative prosperity that sustained that market. Until this happened, or rather until the effects of a wide-reaching communication network made themselves felt, "industry" for most Frenchmen was home and local. Its representative was the artisan. There were more people engaged in artisanal production than in large-scale industry. This was true in the 1860'S, when they outnumbered all those engaged in in- dustry, workers, managers, and proprietors alike, by almost three to one. It remained true ten years later, when their number was still double that of industrial workers. 

Statistically, the artisanal enterprises of France consisted of small workshops in which employee and master were practically balanced: about 1 : 1 in 1865, about 1.5 : 1 in 1876, quite a long way from a modern situation.1 France was and continued to be a country of men and sometimes women who were their own masters: un pays de patrons. Sometimes, in the countryside especially, 

• One village in Nivernais was actually called La Machine, so great a sensation did the installa- tion of a simple engine create in this distant countryside in 1836. However, though steam engines multiplied through the first half of the century, they do not seem to have gotten bigger. As J. H. Clapham first pointed out, the relationship between their number and the horsepower produced suggests a great multiplication of small machines between 1830, when the average horsepower per machine was 16, and 1848, when the figure was only 12.5 (The Economic Development 0/ France and Germany, 1815-1914, Cambridge, Eng., 1948, p. 62). Significantly, the average con- tinued to fall: in 1870, it stood at 12.25. Then the trend began to reverse: 13 in 1880, 14.69 in 1890, 24 in 1900, nearly 35.5 by 1910. (Based on figures in J.-A. Lesourd and Claude Gerard, Histoire economique, 2: 345.) Once again, the shift from small-scale industrial enterprise to a "modern" model seems to have taken place in the ten to fifteen years before 1900. 

222 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

they were no more than their own masters: small, independent artisans, own· ing their instruments of production and employing no help at all. It was these men and their skilled helpers, or compagnons, who formed an interested pub· lie for political debate in towns and cities; and it was their like who both sus· tained the autarky of the village and helped to carry villagers out of it. 

More literate than their fellows, better informed and also better able to earn a decent living, the artisans were important carriers-capillary vessels through which the national interest and national culture reached into the rural world.2 The police knew this; they had seen blacksmiths, shoemakers, hostelers, and tavern.keepers furnish a fair share of the opponents to the various ruling regimes. At the same time, the very existence of a rural artisan ate was evi· dence of and support for self-sufficiency, however relative. The more numer· ous the rural artisans, the less thorough the national economic integration, hence the less concern with national politics, which, acted out in an urban world, had little obvious relation to self-contained rural life. The less the im- pact of national politics, the less chance there would be of organized opposi- tion to urban interests and, hence, to the government. 

The role of the rural artisan was thus highly ambiguous. His presence helped keep his community apart from the national traffic. But it also helped clarify-that is, teach the community-how it was linked to the nation, slowly developing the formulas of political, that is adversary, relationships. An adver· sary relationship in politics requires the existence of a perceived connection, like that between capital and labor in industry. There, interdependence soon created tensions whose very acuteness testifies that the degree of integration was advanced. At the rural level this sort of friction, with all its integrative undertones, did not develop until around the First World War, contemporary with a significant decline in the use and numbers of artisans. By then, their job was done. 

We shall attend to the political evolution before very long. My purpose now is to see the artisans at work in their rural setting, and to trace how their functions shrank as modern market goods replaced what they turned out. 

Artisans were numerous in traditianal society. In 1836, by Henri Polge's count, Gers had 18,833 artisans (plus 3,591 apprentices) in a population of 312,882 (see Table 3). Even supposing that each person so categorized spent some time working the land if at all possible, how many of these were full· time jobs? Presumably, the categorization is based on the person's principal source of income. But blacksmiths apart, few village artisans could earn a living from the practice of one trade.S The butcher probably also kept a tavern or did something else on the side. The miller or the smith might well have done some barbering; indeed, any man with enough confidence and enough capital to buy a razor was able to serve, or maim, his fellows that way. And oil-pressing was clearly seasonal work. Strikingly, six trades accounted for over half of Gers's artisans (and people making cloth and turning it to clothes 

Keeping Up with Yesterday 223 

TABLE 3 Artisan Population of Gers, 1836 

Occupation No. Occupation No. Occupation No. 

Weavers 3,300 Carpenters Blacksmiths 216 Building and con- (menuisiers) 654 Locksmiths 183 struction workers Bakers 591 Saddlers 173 ( c harpentier s) 2,128 Sabotiers 371 Sawyers 150 Shoemakers 1,672 Tilemakers 366 Wagonners Dressmakers 1,586 Butchers 270 (rouliers) 148 Masons 1,561 Wool carders 256 Oil-pressers 132 Smiths Lathe workers Hatters 124 (forgerons) 1,151 (tourneurs) 244 Tanners 118 Millers 1,012 Stonecutters Carriers Cartwrights %5 (trasseurs) 244 (voituriers) 111 Coopers 761 Quarrymen 243 Barbers 103 

SOURCE: Henri Polge, "L'Arrisanat dans le Gers sous le regne de Louis-Philippe," Bulletin de la Societe Archeologique du Gers, 1969, pp. 217-18. 

for over half of these), nine trades for over two-thirds, and 12 for over three- fourths. There were remarkably few butchers, and even if one includes the more numerous bakers, there was only one person employed in the food trade for every 363 inhabitants. As for barbers, they must have been mostly concen- trated in the market towns: 103 of them for 466 communes is not very many. What we have here is a picture of an economy in which only a few products needed special skills, namely, clothes, footwear, houses, carts, metalwork, casks, grain meal. 

One thing that scintillates by its absence is the store. What passed for the village store was, as a rule, merely some private home where a couple, perhaps only the wife, more or less informally sold this or that. The artisan acted as his own distributor. But he went in for trade, too; and most often this was selling refreshments, like Thomas Rouge, a cartwright and coffeehouse-keeper at Ceret (Pyrenees-Orientales) who was denounced in 1861 for speaking dis- respectfully of the Emperor; or Edouard Lejeune, a cabinetmaker from near Laon who set himself up to sell drink.4 In trade an artisan could hope for greater gain, whether he sold just his own products or dealt in those of others as well. For trade was associated with gain that somehow went beyond the price charged for work done-and making money was an unusual skill, at once admired and resented. In the patois of Franche-Comte, the term com- merce is used to describe complicated affairs, even disorder, an intricate con- fusion. And one presumes that the widespread association of trade with ex- ceptional knowledge, ability, and intelligence was based on fact. Sayings re- flected this general prejudice, along with the peasant's resentment of the sell- er's superior shrewdness. "A trader and a pig: you only know their worth when they are dead." "A hundred millers, a hundred weavers, a hundred224 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

tailors make three hundred thieves." "Seven tailors, seven shoemakers, seven millers, and seven students make twenty-one thieves and seven gluttons."li 

Y et such men, though suspect because they took advantage or were sup- posed to do so, were also envied. They were men of affairs-they had a calling and a station. Girls preferred them. In Loire they were "highly regarded": "A girl feels that she rises in the world when instead of a humble peasant, she gets a cartwright. It is often the men of station (les hommes d'Ctat) who matter in the village. They have the time to read the paper, and they know every new arrival in the place."6 

As economic activity increased-more roads, more trade, more circulation, more consumption-and peasants found less time for making some of the things they used to make at home, the local artisans seemed to benefit. The number of artisans began to grow and so did the number of shopkeepers. At Mazieres-en-Gatine, the bare minimum of artisans (cartwright, mason, tile- maker, sabotier, blacksmith, baker, carpenter, sawyer) grew between 1841 and 1881, by which time the single sabotier had proliferated to two, supplemented by a shoemaker who also played the fiddle at village dances: proof that more people used more footwear, and even shoes. In 1841 the mason had employed three journeymen. In 1881 there were five masons and three journeymen. More roads, more carts: the single blacksmith had turned to three, one of whom employed three helpers, among them a locksmith. Cartwrights and a harness-maker appeared in 1886; so did three carpenters, indicating that house- hold furnishings began to receive attention. There was more money to spend: six coffeehouses or inns now thrived where at mid-century there had been but two. Even on the shopkeeping front, the two "merchants" of 1841 had now become three grocers and haberdashers, two of whom had begun to stock ready-made work clothes around 1878-80. Even the labor costs of time seem finally to have become a common consideration, so that old Ragotte, in Nievre, and her like began to realize it was not worth knitting woolen stock- ings, because wool cost 30 sous and the same pair bought in a store only 39.7 Down in Vivarais, another village in the 1880'S had two blacksmiths, two harness-makers (this was mule country), three shoemakers, two tailors, one dyer (there was one at Mazieres as well, newly established to dye the local cloth), four carpenters, and ten masons. The market economy that condemned artisans to decline and death in the long run began by increasing their num- bers. Whether in Nord near Dunkirk, in the east near Langres, or in Com- minges in the southwest, one family in every three or four drew some of its revenue from small-scale industry or shopkeeping. Even the small village in Bigorre where Jacques Duclos was born in 1896 had three mills, two taverns, one blacksmith, one wheelwright-smith, one nail-maker, who sold his nails to peasants in the mountains, and one housebuilder (Duclos's father), who doubled as an innkeeper while his wife worked as a seamstress.s 

There were communities, it seems, where even the 1890's did not increase 

·Keeping Up with Yesterday 225 

the very limited number of local artisans or see the appearance of stores. Such communities still depended on itinerant shoemakers, tinkers, tinmen, and other tradesmen, who, as in part of Maconnais, supplemented the services of the local blacksmith, weaver, and nail-maker. Even there, however, each vil- lage had those lesser specialties that gave the poor a share in parish life and a means of subsistence: molecatchers, snake finders, and hemp-carders; rebil- hous, who during the night cried out the hours and at midnight went to the cemetery to tell the time to the dead; matai'res, who killed the pig on your own premises; cendrousos, literally cinderellas, who collected ashes and sold them in the market for laundry use; porters who carried bastards by night to the nearest almshouse; reciters of the psalms of penitence (a bit feared as sorcerers); and professional mourners. And then there were those curious breeds to be found at least from the Limousin to Languedoc-the ditzamon- dai"re, who sucked the overfull breasts of mothers who had lost or weaned their babies; and the tetai'res, or milk-drawing men, who sucked on the nipple of a newly delivered woman to start the flow of milk when she had difficulty nursing, and left the house only when she had successfully suckled her child (they would be lodged, fed, and paid a handsome five-franc fee). These ways of integrating indigents into the community, by giving them a social function to fulfill, would fade along with more honorable crafts. In 1922 Refl(~ Fage noted, of his own Limoges: "These little trades have disappeared."9 

Much else had disappeared by then. The crude local earthenware that in- spired the Gascon saying, "Stupid as an earthenware jug," had gone the way of most hand-potted kitchen items. At Bas (Haute-Loire), where pottery had been turned out at least since Roman times, the last local potter died in 1912. By 1929 the last potter in Loire closed shop at Pont-de-Vabres. The Breton tailors-marriage brokers, news carriers, story-tellers, the police gazette of Lower Brittany-began to disappear after 1875, as ready-mades spread and bourg shopkeepers began to sell fabrics and sewing articles. This also hap- pened slowly, with ups before the downs. Growing prosperity meant richer costumes, and the late nineteenth century was Brittany's gaudiest age. But more of the latest stitches were the work of seamstresses, who resisted or adapted better than the male tailors, whose many social functions were being gnawed away. The sewing machine, first noted in Brittany in 1892, became a part of standard farm equipment after 1900. Another gift of the new regime: the women knew it well who listened as Jules Renard, running for mayor in his Nievre village, soared into praise of the nineteenth century and of the Third Republic that had given them sewing machines.tO 

Two important institutions now entered their decline: the smithy and the village mill. Just as the public wash-house was the social center for village women, so was the smithy the meeting-place for village men, especially on rainy days, Indeed, Lucien Febvre has called it le lavoir des hommes, and has noted that the two decayed as village institutions more or less together. The 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

smith was a notable figure. He had quite often done his tour de France as a compagnon. He was at the dead center of all comings and goings. Something of a magician, he was healer, dentist, and veterinarian, and often sold wine or a few groceries on the side. Interestingly, when a witness from the inner west spoke of the decay of smiths in the 1930's, he had reference not so much to their trade (for many had adjusted as tractors and automobiles replaced the horse) as to their other functions, and the sheer prestige they had enjoyed in consequence.l1 

If the smithy was the village social center, the mill was the social center of the countryside-a rustic, floury salon, as a Breton put it-and the miller the peasants' newspaper, because like smiths he saw so many people. In wine country, people would gather at the mill even when they had no business "to chat at the barrel's end" (au cul des barriques) as they sipped the year's wine, dropping in to learn how their neighbors' crops fared, to ask the hour of a train, or simply to hear the latest gossip. There and elsewhere, the miller's wife kept a kind of cafe and restaurant for her clients, and the son might do some barbering on the side.12 

Windmills first, then water mills would die out gradually, leaving the coun- try scattered with picturesque homes for summer visitors indifferent to mos- quitoes. Sabots too were condemned to become tourist souvenirs. When shoes were a luxury, villagers lived in sabots-that is, when they wore them. A youth got his first pair at first communion. The importance of sabots in every- day routine is reflected in proverbs and locutions: sabot and strap go together; so do old sabots and embers; Carnival arrives with an unstrapped sabot; a prattler has a mouth like a sabot (wide-open).13 Greater prosperity meant more sabots for all, then gradual evolution as the graceless heavy sabots came to be painted and elegantly shaped, "trying to look like shoes." The competi- tion of shoes and even boots was driving back sabots, used ever less for any but dirty jobs. At Mazieres five men made sabots in 1886, only two 20 years later, and these two also sold ready-made shoes, slippers, and hats. Meanwhile, the single shoemaker had turned to three, and two of them even employed workmen. They were soon to retreat in turn before the manufactured shoes, which by the eve of the war were bought by all-or almost a11.14 

By then, shops had gone far from their timid beginnings. Between 1836 and 1936 the proportion of shopkeepers in the total population in three rural can- tons of Picardy doubled-which is not very much-but most of the change took place after mid-century and before the war: I : 62 inhabitants in 1836; I : 42 in 1872; I : 37 in 1911; I : 34 in 1936. The greatest increase was in the food trade: the ratio of grocers, butchers, and bakers was I : 138 in 1836; I : 73 in J 872; I : 53 in 1911; I : 51 in 1936. It is clear that by 191 I the great change was over. There was little left to alter in the following years. In Vendee, too, the money economy was altering the life-style: Thabault reported a dry goods dealer in Mazieres in 1896; one, then two, hardware stores after 1898; in 19II even a milliner. But, as in Picardy, the greatest change came in the food trades. 

Keeping Up with Yesterday 227 

The town had one baker in 1886, five in 1906. The local railroad station, which received 9.4 tons of grocery and foodstuff shipments in 1885, had 99.9 tons in 1890 and ISO tons in 1900.15 

The shops were selling crockery-first only for holidays and Sundays, then for everyday use-and tableware, so that by 1900 in many Mazieres houses people began to use table knives and even to change plates for separate courses. The shops also sold wine, at first an exceptional luxury, like coffee, sugar, chocolate, and macaroni. They sold umbrellas, once evidence of solid com~ fort, which were now the right of all and were even a feature of some public demonstrations.· They sold tobacco-for a long time in the form of snuff, a luxury incorporated into the "matrimonial rites of our countryside," where brides-to-be came to expect the gift of a silver snuffbox. This suggests that, like all market goods, tobacco was rare. As late as 1893 it was still a "recent custom" in C8tes-du-Nord to sacrifice a few packages of tobacco in laying the founda~ tion stone of a farmhouse. Joseph Cressot remembered very little smoking in his village of Haute~Marne in the 1880'S. "Who would be so crazy as to turn sous into smoke?" The Upper Breton peasants called a free pinch of snuff tabac de diot-fool's tobacco. It was the soldiers who, after seven or five or three years of service, returned to their villages won over to the rolled cigarette. Cressot's father, a twenty~year~old recruit in 1870, lit his first cigarette as a counter to typhus and went on smoking for the remainder of his life. The war of 1870, which brought a far greater number of men into the ranks than ever stood regular duty before or after until 1889, must have been important in spreading the smoking habit.16 And indeed Caporal, sold in army canteens, soon became a synonym for tobacco itself.t 

Above all, perhaps, the shop sold clothes, and more and more people bought them. Jules Michelet has celebrated the calico revolution, when cheap cotton prints permitted working-class women to shift from drab, dark garments worn for ten years or more to "a dress of flowers." This sort of thing took time to percolate down to the rural level, where poverty, local materials, and local craftsmen favored old modes of dress. In 1845, as Michelet was writing of The People, meaning almost entirely the city people he saw around him, peasants were still wearing knee~breeches and cocked hats inherited from the upper- class fashions of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.t 

The very notion of dressing up was alien to everyday experience, the term 

• Roger Thabault, Man village, p. 173. In Allier, where Socialist propaganda had made headway in the 1890's, the conscripts of C.ommentry, Marcillat, Montmarault, and thereabouts carried red ribbons arid red banners. When these were banned by the prefect in 1895, large red umbrellas were used instead (Georges Rougeron, Le Departement de l'Allier, p. 84). t Caporal got its name because it was supposed to be superior to the ordinary issue that army privates could buy "a deux sous la brouettc." This alleged superiority did not prevent the term from becoming a synonym for bad, cheap tobacco (Paul Sebillot, Le Tabac, Paris, 1893, pp. 3, 4). t Le Peuple, p. 73. And even then, for all his sympathy for the common man, Michelet found contact with the man on the street difficult: "Je suis ne peuple, j'avais le peuple dans le coeur ..• mais sa langue, sa langue, elle m'etait inaccessible. Je n'ai pu le faire parler." 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

(in Franche~Comte) also used to mean a disguise-to put on Sunday clothes, something out of the ordinary and, somehow, ornate. Linen and clothes that were not homemade, or handed down, or bought secondhand, and not worn and patched and worn until they fell to pieces, were strange and wonderful things.l1 The crowds that filled the Boulevard du Temple-dubbed the Boule~ vard du Crime, not because of its whores and pickpockets, but because of the kind of shows its theaters put on-seem to have been fascinated by costumes, and the actors' dress received special mention in the barkers' puffs. "Mr. Pom~ pey will play tonight with all his wardrobe .... See the apparel of the first act. ... Come in, come in, hurry to get your tickets, Mr. Pompey will change costume 12 times. He will carry off the Commander's daughter dressed in a frogged jacket, and will be struck down in a spangled suit." If the public admired gaudy costumes, it was because they were so rare. 

Everyone who could manage it owned a dress or a suit for the great occa~ sions, or to be buried in. A friend of Charles Peguy remarked that the fine clothes of the women of the people were always mourning clothes.ls He might better have added, or their wedding dresses. (Men were nearly always buried in their wedding suits.) Urban influence is most clearly seen in the evolution of women's wedding dress. For a long time, girls got married in bright~colored dresses, the color sometimes being set by local custom: green, color of hope, trimmed with silver, in Bresse and Languedoc; blue adorned with stars, color of the Virgin; or, as in the Morvan, any vivid color. In more economically minded regions the bride wore a black dress with a multicolored scarf draped over her shoulders and (in Ariege) a coronet of flowers and gilded leaves or (in Chatillonais, COte~d'Or) a marriage shawl, reflecting her family's riches, which would be used as a table carpet or bedspread until it fell apart.l9 White dresses and white veils came in from the cities. The veils arrived first (for example, in the mountains of Ariege about 1890), since they were rela~ tively cheap and could be worn conveniently with any dress. White wedding gowns, impossible to make out of local stuffs and more ostensible marks of conspicuous consumption than other ceremonial garb, took their time-as a thorough survey carried out in the northwest corner of Loire, in the area around Roanne, shows. White dresses are mentioned first in 1890, at Saint~ Germain-l'Espinasse, an important crossroad on the main road from Roanne to Moulins. But at Saint~Forgeux~l'Espinasse, a little way off, the first white dress did not appear until five years later, and the fashion was only generalized there after the First World War. At Villerest, beside the Loire, not far from Roanne, many girls had worn white since 1900. But at Sail-les-Bains, an iso~ lated village in the far northwest, white was "very rare in 1899." The same is true at Saint~Haon and at Saint-Alban, on the edge of the Allier forests, where white was said to have appeared "mostly since the war," and to have been little known before the war, when "Bismarck brown" had been very popular. Dark, serviceable colors-blue or black-as at Mably, quite near Roanne but rather isolated, where families sometimes splurged on a white 

Keeping Up with Yesterday 229 

veil for their daughters, but never Oil a dress until after 1914, and notably after 1922, when white gowns, which could now be bought ready-made, be- came the norm; or at Villerest, where until 1890-1900 the dresses were of black cashmere or satin and could later be worn on all appropriate occasions-mar- riages, communions, processions, and into one's own grave.20 

Presumably the first step in the change was ready money, the second ready- mades. Yet even in distant A veyron, by one account, the countryside had been invaded by ready-made clothing in the 1880'S (a suitable delay, though a short one after Mazieres) ; and we hear that by 1909 a milliner could do quite well in a modest village, and that, at least on Sundays, the young country girl dressed like her working sisters of the cities: feathered hat, corset, bright- colored dress, frilly underpants, black hose, yellow boots, and parasol. Peasants were beginning to look like everybody else.21 

We know that for a long time they had looked different-even from each other. They had worn their coarse, rough-cut outfits with a difference, dyed in traditional dyes that varied from one district to another, cut in traditional cuts that reflected some local tailor's petrified fantasy, the image of a variegated society illustrated in garb and headgear, stressing the peasant's perception of geographical differences.22 Pays had their uniforms-in different dress for great occasions, and different hats and bonnets. So had the crafts, with millers dressed all in white, even to the hat. Even road and construction workers could be identified by their corduroy or moleskin trousers, colored flannel belts, surcoats, and felt hats. Then, around the 1850's and 1860'S, came one of the first articles of wear that men bought in the market, the blouse, worn at first only on days of rest. And with it came the first murmurings about the growing uniformity of dress. But under the smock the home made cloth, scratchy and stiff as cardboard, soldiered on.23 

In the late 1880'S, when Dieudonne Dergny published his Book of Curious Things, he opened the work with the remark that modern fashions, which had been penetrating the countryside since mid-century, had crushed local costume and headgear out of existence. But Dergny lived in Eure, and the lower Seine valley was more easily penetrated by city fashions than other parts of France. In Lauragais, Maconnais, and Bourbonnais the old local cos- tume persisted through the Second Empire, traditional headgear until the 1880's.* In Auvergne clothing was locally made until the end of the century, a suit lasting for 20 or 30 years. The father often carved the family's sabots, the women knit hempen stockings that never wore out but did not keep one warm. Only the blouse was bought in town. The situation remained essentially unchanged until the war, when ready-made shoes and clothes completely dis- placed home products. Yet an 1886 guidebook boasted that current fashions 

• Dieudonne Dergny, Images, I: i; M. F. Pariset, Economie rurale . .. Lauragais, p. 104; Emile Violet, Cleue, p. 1l2; Francis Pe rot, Folklore bourbonnais, pp. 49-50. Pariset noted in passing that the tailor and shoemaker used to come to the farm and work by the day so as to get their meals there; but now (1867), "se procurant facilement leur vivre," they did their work at home. 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

were to be found everywhere, and that the ways and manners of Auvergne were "now those of all our beautiful France." Whatever some might say, the Auvergnats "are got up, speak and act like the generality of French people." There was evidently some need to reassure or warn a potential visitor.U. 

We must not cry too much over the passing of these bucolic ways. Martin Nadaud remembered his homemade clothes with little love, the coarse, stifl cloth that made the wearer "awkward and heavy, stirring clumsily, turning with difficulty." The best testimony to the exactness of his memory is that those clothes were abandoned at the first opportunity. Both the Felibre Fre- deric Mistral and the Breton poet Theodore Botrel insisted that their wives wear local costume. As soon as the men died, in 1914 and 1925, respectively, the widows abandoned what they seem to have regarded as an imposition/I! By then, local costume had become costume tout court. But if this happened, it was because everywhere the young had turned to modern city clothes. 

In every place where local clothes persisted toward the end of the century- the Limousin, Auvergne, Velay, Brittany-the young were trying to escape from them. Lads wore the smock at least, or broadcloth jackets, or suits of tweed or twill; the girls wore store-bought dresses and carried "flashy sun- shades that make them look a perfect fright."26 Even hats with flowers and feathers were making headway. And so-great novelty-was the jewelry of the city. Traditionally, women had carried their wealth upon them, in chains, trinkets, earrings; the more backward the region (for example, Velay), the longer this practice would last.· After 1885 or 1890, after 1900 and 1914, heavy gold chains went out. On the other hand, engagement rings came in, like those of the middle classes, especially after the war, when one could get to town more easily by car or bus to buy one. As an informant in Poncins (Loire) said, in 1936: "In the past, one had a watch and a chain [to mark an engage- ment]. Today people do what they do in town, they buy an engagement ring."21 

To do things the way they were done in town, to dress the same way especially, was clearly to move up in the world. Peasant costume was often despised as the mark of an inferior condition, not least because so many bourgeois forc"ed their servants to wear it. Looking like Becassine was not conducive to self-respect. But traditional costume was also ill-adapted to mod- ern life: high coifles, long, heavy, voluminous skirts, rough materials less in- teresting than what could be bought and finally too long wearing, when even cheap ready-mades now began to go out of style relatively quickly. In any case, 

• One imagines this was connected with the equation of beauty, wealth, and luxury. Peasant speech reflected the identification when it called a woman beautiful to say that she was wearing her best attire (see Charles Peguy, Victor-Mane, Comte Hugo, in Oeuvres en Prose, 19°9-1914, Paris, 1968, p. 694). In the same way, quantity could stand for quality. Robert Jalby explains that Languedoc peasants normally wore few clothes except on feastdays when, however warm the weather, they donned their winter finery over their summer hest, provided both could ~ seen, "for on such occasions luxury consists in wearing a great deal" (Folklore, p. 194). 

Keeping Up with Yesterday 231 

peasant costume like the clothes of city folk had always evolved and continued to do so through much of the nineteenth century. As local industries declined and national fashions penetrated the last bastions of isolation and of poverty, costume lost contact with people's lives. It did not make sense any more. And the competition was too strong. In a paper delivered to a Proven<ral congress in 1906, the writer pointed out that ArIesian costume dated back less than a century, and that its current form was only 10 or 15 years old. True costume for ceremonies and dances, it settled ever more within narrow rules, stiff, heavily ornamented, and clumsy. The unfortunate upshot was that "French dress," so convenient by contrast, so easily slipped on, was gaining ground. "In some villages, even on Sundays, they wear this [French] rig to a dance or promenade. The bodice is so convenient to put on I Only the hat is missing to make the costume that of a lady: the step is easy to take." It was all con- nected, as the speaker said, to "a more active way of life, more casual relations, all the protocol of the old life of Aries that disappears."2's 

eoiffes and costumes disappeared, finally, because they were too costly. The local bonnet- and lace-making industries serving them decayed; tailors closed shop one after the other; so did the embroiderers; local touches on blouses disappeared as a unique Paris pattern came to provide the model for all provincial buyers; sabots, especially the luxury sort, went out, as did the locally made leather shoes that came in their wake, unwanted now that manu- factured Paris wear could be obtained. A fair-minded observer remarked that the changes made dress "more banal no doubt, but also pleasanter, lighter, often stylish." This is worth remembering when expressing regret at the dis- appearance of traditional costumes.29 

Innovations, an accumulation of disparate novelties, a gradual process, more or less perceived: the ready-made replacing the homemade; rolled cigarettes replacing snuff, with the change of gestures and of terminology all this in- volved; rings replacing chains; and a wardrobe and mirror that had to be bought in a store replacing the wooden wardrobe that a local man could make. All this strained the cat's cradle of communal relationships and con- straints, strained and modified it. For the old structure did not in fact break; it stretched, it twisted new turns into the old shapes, incorporating the new- fangled and the up-to-date into familiar patterns. So it was with bicycles, which permitted farm laborers who had generally eaten in the fields to cycle back home for meals, and thus increased the similarity between life on the farm and life in the city-though mostly after the First World War. And so it was with photography, which was enlisted very soon to accompany the great cere- monies and feasts of life, to fix them for eternity, and to add to the solemnity of the occasion.so First for marriage, the major family feast, eventually (though a good deal later ) for christening and first communion, the photograph, formal and stately, entered the circuit of ritual gifts and gestures: a new rite, like a new costume or locution, adjoined to the old ones or replacing them. 
