+++
title = "15 PEASANTS AND POLITICS"

+++

Ce qui est grave pour ce regime et pour sa gloire, c'est qu'it risque fort de n'etre raconte que d'apres les publications du !ournal Officiel. 

-LOUIS CHEVALIER 

THE POLITICIZATION of the French peasantry has been variously assigned to the French Revolution and its aftermath or to the feverish days of 1848 and the bustling propaganda of the years that culminated in the rising of December 1851. Maurice Agulhon has written a seminal work showing how the rural and small-town population of up-country Var awoke to national politics, how the politics of the bourgeoisie became the politics of the peasants; and Philippe Vigier has traced similar developments a little to the north, in the Alpine regions. Despite Agulhon's warning that the prehistory of modern democracy in France runs well into the 1860's/ it is still commonly assumed that, some- how, political tendencies that were suspended during the imperial interlude revived and expressed themselves when they were freed at last after 1871 and 1877. Stabilities in political orientation, which Fran~ois Goguel and his fol- lowers have carefully plotted on maps, as well as evolutions explained by Andre Siegfried and others, appear to confirm such views. 

My purpose here, as throughout this book, is to suggest that over great parts of France the process of politicization was slower than we think; that, though many regions did indeed move at the pace historians indicate, others took more time. To be sure, some building blocks of political attitudes were laid out to some extent in these regions by the Revolution, the Terror, 1848, and Louis Napoleon's coup of December 2, but these fitted into earlier structures founded on other memories, like the Reformation, and served other interests, above all, local ones. Politics in those parts of rural France that I have looked at remained in an archaic stage-local and personal-into at least the 1880'S. In these areas evolution toward modernity, that is, to an awareness of and con- cern with issues on a national or international plane, seems to begin after the 1870's. It came as part of the integration of these areas into France-as part of the same slow, complex process that we have watched so far, of city ways and values flowing into countryside, of the country's colonization by the town. 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

The question is not whether politics existed in the countryside. Every com- munity was, in some sense, a polis. The question is whether the local, sui generis interests there thrashed out can be interpreted in the familiar terms of national politics. It is not a question that would have troubled many French- men of the time. Jules Valles, who knew something of underdeveloped France for having been born at Le Puy, in Velay, reflected the dominant view-one that was at best the view from the country town. In the summer of 1880 he published an account that we might call historical fiction of a grain riot that shook the important market town of Buzan\=ais in Indre in 1847, the starvation year.2 In this story Vam:s complicates what amounted to a small-scale jacquerie by introducing the paraphernalia of contemporary politics: revolutionary ideas, secret societies, policemen, all the stage properties of the urban political scene, the backdrop against which the countryside was inevitably viewed, even by sympathetic observers. 

But peasant politics were not like the politics of Le Puy or Nantes or Caen that Valles knew, let alone like those of Clemenceau's La Justice in which Valles's story appeared. And if it is difficult to say just what peasant politics were, it is not so difficult to show what they were not. This I shall try to do. The transition from traditional local politics to modern national politics took place when individuals and groups shifted from indifference to participa- tion because they perceived that they were involved in the nation. This did not mean only intellectual evolution-learning that one was part of a wider entity. It meant that men and women, as private persons and as members of particular groups, had to be convinced that what went on in that wider entity mattered to them and had to be taken into consideration. In other words, national politics became relevant when national affairs were seen to affect the persons and localities involved. Before this could be seen, it had in effect to happen. Until it happened, that is, until roads, markets, goods, and jobs became part of the national whole and dependent on national developments, archaic politics, as we might well call them, made perfectly good sense. And we shall see that such politics did effectively survive as long as the conditions they reflected and served survived; and that, when they broke down, they left their mark on modern politics as we know them. 

We have already said that government and state in the first half of the nine- teenth century were dimly seen as agencies for the exaction of taxes, occasion- ally interfering to impose public order (not necessarily identical with local cus- tom) and to mete out justice (not necessarily identical with equity). Like the Alpine peasants Adolphe Blanqui described in 1848, like the Bretons Emile Souvestre wrote about in 1843, the country people of these times knew only "la douane et le fisc." Government, its form, its name, the names of its leaders and its institutions, remained unknown or almost so. And such parties as existed were political only because they represented something else, like religion. The author of a guide to Aulus in the Pyrenees put it well. For the local peasant, 

Peasants and Politics 243 he wrote in 1873, government was a being "given to mischief-making, hard on little people, that demands taxes, prevents contraband, and dwells in Paris." It was no part of the peasant's life, he had no share in it; that it might repre- sent him would seem nonsense.S 

The thousands of officials-policemen and gendarmes, judges and public prosecutors, prefects and sub-prefects-who kept close check on the "public spirit" of the countryside lived in the towns. Their reports reflected opinion there. It is important to remember this, because even the lower orders in the country towns participated to some degree in a national politics that their fellows in the countryside were oblivious of. The officials knew there was a difference, and they said so-when they could be bothered to make the point. Politics were for nobles and for bourgeois, explained the Republican mayor of Saint-Aignan (Loir-et-Cher) in 1848. As for the poor farmers, they were divided into two categories: "the misguided and the stupefied." You had to distinguish between rural populationsand townspeople, wrote the imperial prosecutor at Bordeaux in 1864. The country folk were indifferent to political debate and to issues that did not affect them directly, whereas "in the enlight- ened classes and among the working populations of the cities," political life, the "spirit of criticism and discussion," took a new dimension.· Platitudes, of course, hence so familiar that we tend to overlook them, here are two themes that would be repeated until the end of the century. The first, that political activity or at least discussion was confined to towns, and that the country, in- different to politics, was interested only in its labors. The second, that beyond this, there were certain "enlightened classes," their numbers clearly limited, thus paring down still further the politically significant minority. 

"Only the most enlightened part of society" (Issoire, Puy-de-D8me, 1841). "The newspaper-reading classes" (Ariege, 1866). "The upper and enlightened class that forms the opinion of the masses" (Lombez, Gers, 1867). "The literate class" and "the restricted circle of people who take an interest in politics" (Murat, Cantal, 1867), those few who are "a little more literate than the mass of the population" (Mauriac, Cantal, 1866). "The lettered part of the popula- tion," and "the other part ... which takes no interest in politics" (Epinal, Vosges, 1869). Townsmen alone are interested in political questions (Angers, 1866). "Only those in comfortable circumstances" (Limoges, 1867). Mean- while, "country people, ... the immense majority, are exclusively preoccupied with their agricultural labors and indifferent to the events that stir opinion in the larger centers" (Angers, 1866). "The unenlightened working population isn't interested in questions of principle" (Limoges, 1867). "The countryman proper is absorbed by his tasks" (Mauriac, 1866). Les populations "take no in- terest in political questions. In the towns, where newspapers are read and discussed, the Chamber debates are followed with great interest" (Mauriac, 1867)·G 

The peasants lent an ear when things plainly affected their own lives, such244 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

as the projected army reorganization and the cost of exemptions from military service. Let their "private interests [be] touched, which alone dominate their aspirations" (Cantal, 1866), and officials noted with some surprise, "even" country people began to stir. Most of the time, though, indifference reigned; and the Third Republic does not seem to have wrought any great change at first. "Only the few better-off literate persons" paid any attention to politics, wrote a policeman from Plaisance (Gers) in 1875. The constitutional laws, reported the commander of gendarmes at Bordeaux in 1875, "fascinate the towns, but pass almost unnoticed in the countryside preoccupied only with the way wine is selling." Even the political crises of 1876-77 had no effect on people interested in the phylloxera, not politics. And May 16, 1877, found the once ardently revolutionary Gers with scarcely a reaction outside the bigger centers like Lectoure.6 

I shall presently show how all this changed. But, at least in the Pyrenees, the official reports suggest that the process was painfully slow. Public opinion "remains that of the towns and of the bourgeoisie." The public seems to be identified as those few voters who read the newspapers, the population as that tiny portion of people who were "intelligent and literate." Finally, in 1898, a police superintendent at Perthus hit on the right descriptive phrase, singling out a "political population" as opposed to a "general population" that was indifferent to politics. The political population remained small--perhaps the four or five in every village who the sub-prefect of Pamiers, writing in 1905, thought would pay attention to national or international news.1 Even so burn- ing an issue as the Dreyfus Affair, whose ins-and-outs "fascinated public opin- ion" at Limoges, left country people quite indifferent and kindled little interest outside of the provincial capitals with a political class.* 

But political awareness can exist outside those persons, a limited group in any age, who sustain an interest in political news and political debate. If it is misleading to suggest that the views of a few men constituted public opinion, surely it is just as misleading to suggest that the majority had no opinion. Yet that opinion was doubtfully as coherent as some would have it. Marxist his- torians in particular have sought to show that political tensions of quite a modern sort affected the peasantry, and that their struggles against landowners 

• Jacques Duclos first heard the name of Dreyfus four years after the Rennes trial, in a discus- sion during the feast of Saint Anne at Tarbes. The younger men (from Bordeaux and other cen- ters) were for Dreyfus, the older men against him. In his own village, Louey, Socialism was unknown, and the separation of Church and State, though an issue of some interest, caused no trouble. The disturbances that shook Herault in 1907, by contrast, stirred much talk. (Memoires, I: 49.) Maurice Halbwachs points out that the downtrend in suicide rates during the Dreyfus Affair was of much brider duration in the French countryside than in the towns, lasting only from 1899 to 1902, and that over the larger period 1898-1905 the reversal was much less marked there, with the rate in the country falling less than half as much as in the towns, an indication of a very incomplete participation in national affairs. (Les Causes du suicide, pp. 344-45.) On the impact of the Affair in the countryside, see Archives Departementales, Haute-Vienne IM 191 (commissaire special Limoges, Nov. 1898; prefet, Sept. 1899), and Pyrs.-Ors. 3MI 167 (telegram of Jan. 31,1898, and passim). 

Peasants and Politics 245 and officials involved a political vision and a kind of protest that fit a recogniz- able pattern of class struggle. Marx knew better than that. For Marx, French peasants were not a class because "identity of interests" had engendered in them "no community, no national bond, and no political organization." Hav- ing come to this conclusion in 1850 in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, Marx saw no reason to change or qualify the statement with a footnote for the second edition of 18fi9, no more than Engels did for the third edition of 1885. Both saw quite correctly that isolation, mode of production, and poverty, "increased by France's bad means of communication," made for a life that had little to do with society-meaning the political society with a recognizable class structure that interested them. Both concluded from this that the peasantry, unable to see itself or to function as a class, was an inchoate "addition of homologous magnitudes, much as potatoes in a sack form a sack of potatoes." The famous phrase bears witness to the incapacity of even the most perceptive to see the structure of the peasant world: "a small holding, a peasant and his family; alongside them another small holding, another peas- ant and another family. A few score of these make up a village."B Nothing but potatoes, because the forms of organization, the solidarities, and the values of the peasant world were not reducible to urban terms-not yet. 

In my own view, it seems rather that peasants saw (and see) themselves as participating less in a class than in a condition, a way of life with its own hier- archies of the old-fashioned sort (rich and poor, more or less valiant, and so forth), which for a long time served them very well. Social divisions were marked: between those who had and those who had not, between those who owned land and those who rented it (but among these last, the large-scale ten- ant could well be a monsieur or a bourgeois), between journeymen-small- holders and landless farmhands. Groups of this sort did not intermarry-any more than woodcutters and farmers' daughters intermarried.'*' They kept to themselves, stayed separate at dances and festivities. In Lauragais, for instance, in the 1860'S sharecroppers and domestics danced to the bagpipe and stuck to old standbys like the rigadoon, while smallholders enjoyed a three-piece band of trumpet, clarinet, and drum, and swung around in waltzes, polkas, and quadrilles "as in the towns."9 

Wealth was a crucial factor, of course; the more so since the rich and poor were usually related. Village society distinguished between "BreIet, the rich" and "Brelet, the poor"; between a domain that raised cattle and a holding that had only cows; between an ordinary cottage and a chateau with an: upper story and a weathervane on the rour; between the Miyette whose forename sufficed, La Coulaude who carried her husband's name, the bourgeoise who 

• Or at least if they did, it offended everybody's sense of propriety. See Pierre Gilland's story "La Fille du braconnier" for an illustration of the deep gulf between the rich farmer (considered a bourgeois) and the landless peasant. When a lowly woodcutter marries the farmer's daughter, no one approves of the incredible mesalliance. But note also that the story treats the gentry of the chateau with sympathy and the "bourgeois" with dislike. This, of course, in the 1840'S. 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

had shed peasant garb, and Madame Lepaud who sold groceries. The social hierarchy asserted itself in the relations between the sexes. At a dance the youngest son of a middling farmer could not dance much with the daughter of a rich farmer without exciting comment. There was a gulf between "the big house" and the rest, the former easily recognizable by a second story, a·monu- mental gateway, or some other expensive embellishment. To this day, says Pierre Bourdieu of his Bigorre, the girls look at the gateway more than at theman.10 

Inevitably, wealth affected political alignments. "The peasant of Nord is a bourgeois," declared a Democratic-Socialist ("red") Tulle newspaper in May 1849; "next to him the peasant of Correze is almost a beggar." The con- clusion to be drawn was clear. In 1849 around Tulle the peasants dubbed the conservative electoral list la liste des riches. The conservatives lost heavily. All over the Limousin, the public prosecutor of Limoges reported, the peasants voted for the "reds" expecting "le partage des biens des bourgeois."11 Radical ideas penetrated the countryside clad in old rancors and even older hopes. It was not surprising. But it should be borne in mind when interpreting their success. 

Yet wealth was far from the only consideration. Olivier Perrin's excellent portrayal of the Quimperois emphasizes the diversity of classes and of rankings (not used in a Marxist sense) to be found in Breton villages, especially the distinctions between those who owned, who rented, and who sharecropped the land they worked, and within each group the further ranking based on antiquity. "Vanity," wrote Perrin, "presides over marriages as much as arith- metic," and rustic aristocrats would have thought it a derogation to marry outside their "caste." The more plebeian remainder was just as careful about whom it wed and whom it consorted with in general. People looked down, not up. In 1909 leaders of peasant unions in Allier denounced the peasant hierarchies, above all the sharecroppers, who exploited and despised their putative "inferiors," showing "contempt," "pride," and "arrogance" to the servants and hired hands whose life-style they often shared. Scorn seems the leitmotif of class relationships, from one group to another, every society a small cascade of scorn explained or rationalized on a variety of grounds. But it is hard to fix such archaic attitudes into a modern model. The comparatively high rate of endogamous marriages in Vraiville (Eure) operated most visibly on an occupational basis, with farmers and weavers keeping largely apart, and mar- riages reflecting more family traditions than purely economic considerations. At Chablis (Yonne) the two "classes" were smallholders and winegrowers, as divided in politics as in interest. In the Limousin farmers despised mere wool carders. In the Alpine regions, Philippe Vigier could discern no clear-cut social classes, only different groups, distinguished by profession, fortune, and local influence.12 Social interaction of this sort is better depicted if we replace the familiar image divided by horizontal lines with one in which several 

Peasants and Politics 247 circles overlap and intersect. * That would account for instances of "vertical" solidarity, peculiarly numerous in 1848 (and before that), where local author- ities (mayors, priests, or rich men) sided with the peasants against the national authorities and their representatives and against members of "the wicked rich" like usurers and absentee landowners.13 

But the very use of the word class tends to be misleading, because it sug- gests real social oppositions and solidarities that go beyond specific instances. The fact is, as Roger Brunet has shown of Comminges in the mid-1880'S, ten- sions arose mostly between groups engaged in different activities, or between rival villages, or between rival sections of one village. As long as the social horizon remaIned limited, political categories remained limited too. It would take some time before the didactic affirmation and the experience that make a class would cut across the community of site; before accessible, visible, local hierarchies and tensions gave way to more abstract national ones; and before the transition was made "from a system of social orders based on localities to a national system of social classes."u 

It is within this context that we must take a quick look at the main argument for peasant politicization before the Third Republic, above all, the events of 1848-51. It would be unfair, though it is tempting, to quote Richard Cobb on the Great Revolution "as a magnificent irrelevance"-unfair, because out of context, since Cobb writes of marginal groups, however numerous these may have been.15 Yet in important ways Cobb's words apply more broadly: for the Revolution did little to modify the conditions of labor or pay, or to change the customs and traditions that bound villagers to each other, and sharecroppers or domestics to their masters. As Emmanuel Labat noted of Gascony, the Revolution "passed above the villages, hamlets, farms, without affecting social and economic life, the everyday routine of life." New leases simply repeated the old with new taxes added. Thus a Republican master, who had changed his name from Pierre to Scaevola and vowed to follow "the sacred principles of the Mountain," entered in his journal a new lease for his sharecropper (not dignified as a citizen in the description) incorporating traditional terms and obligations-chickens to be offered at Saint John's feast, capons at All Souls, hens at Christmas. Under the July Monarchy, the taxes the sharecroppers of Haute-Vienne paid were still called a poll tax; and in Gers and the Landes some sharecroppers' contracts included tithes up to the First World War.16 

Official or semiofficial commentators of the day insisted that the lower classes had been politicized. But even they admitted that this went no further than concern for material interests. In any case, who were these lower classes? The evidence suggests that they were urban. In the Limousin, for example, Alain 

• Not too far off from Soboul's remark that there was no one French peasantry in 1848, but rather various "peasant classes, often antagonistic," with many nuances in their social attitudes and political stance ("La Question paysanne en 1848," p. 55). 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

Corbin has found that urban populations at all levels were open to political ideas, while in the countryside mass reactions reflected an older, deeper peasant revolutionary tradition. When rural disturbances were not caused by food shortages, they arose in traditional animosities, as at Saurat (Ariege), where in 1834 "hundreds" of village children, armed with wooden weapons, clashed on the commons; or in anxiety and anger over infringement of traditional forest rights, best documented in Provence and the Pyrenees; or occasionally under the influence of a nearby town. Yet in the end, as a report on the food riots that broke out near Bellac in the winter of 1847 put it, "It was the war of those who have nothing against those who own."17 Not politics, but want made for trouble. And when there was trouble communities "acted as one," as they had always done, as they would go on doing, voting en bloc whether for government or for opposition, traditional solidarities expressing themselves even in electoral terms."" 

Traditional ideas, too. The peasant's ideological arsenal, like his vocabulary, remained anachronistic. In 1 848 the idea of a Republic seemed difficult to accept not just in Brittany, but in the Limousin and the southwest. "If there's no King, there's no government," the peasants told a tax collector at Ajain in Creuse. When would a new King be appointed, they wondered in Gironde. "Le "Due Rollin (Ledru~Rollin) who governed was no King." As for Lamar~ tine, who was this woman Martine? (Qu'es aquette Martine?) Changes of government meant little at that level, and a different system of government seemed little different in a peasant's eye. Duchatellier found that, for Breton peasants in 1863, Emperor and King were much the same; and the brief Second Republic was connected with vague memories of 1793 but was per· sonified, leading many to remark that "by today the lady must be pretty 01d."18 Are these only tall tales? One is inclined to doubt it, the more so since there was little reason for successive regimes, successive governments, to have meant very much. But memories did mean something, and the association of ideas. Fears that the Ancien Regime might be reestablished persisted for a long, long time. Many times these were kept alive by local or family traditions: during the Revolution one had thrived or suffered, sometimes by sheer chance. But there were also more general folk memories. For a decade after 1848 the propaganda of the "red" party, the Mountain, denounced its enemies as whites. In 1858 the prefect of the Drome explained that the reds still found popular support when they referred to "the party of order" as "nobles, royalists, repre· sentatives of the reaction of 1815," which had left bad memories behind.19 

• In the elections of 1849 the Democratic Socialist "reds" did particularly well in poor and remote rural areas, where their majorities were often higher than in working-class areas. In Correze and Haute-Vienne, 39 of 56 rural cantons gave them an absolute majority, and in 17 of these they won 70-80 percent of the vote (Jacques Bouillon, "Les Democrates socialistes," p.88). Such unanimity can be explained only in terms of an archaic approach to political action. See also Alain Corbin, "Limousins migrants," p. 1269, on the elections of 1857. 

Peasants and Politics 249 

Many villages remembered small local tyrannies, often magnified and em- broidered: the game laws prohibiting free hunting and fishing; the injunctions against organizing a dance without the lord's permission; the squire's mo- nopoly of selling wine or keeping dovecotes.2o They had gained the right to hunt at the Revolution, and they held it dear-first as a resource, but also for the simple pleasure of killing game, a right the nobler for its having been so long reserved for the squire. The institution of a hunting permit in 1844 was unpopular not only because it struck a blow for gents against the peasant, but because it suggested that freedoms or privileges achieved within living memory might easily be lost again.'*' This applied particularly to tithes and corvee service, which must have been uppermost in peasants' memories. In 1848 some rash legitimists (in Lot-et-Garonne) declared that before long tithes and feudal rents would be reestablished. In May 1849 the peasants of Dordogne voted en masse for "Republican Socialists" because (explained the general prosecutor in Bordeaux) they feared that the "old nobles and bourgeois would reestablish tithes and the corvee."t 

In Perigord, Maconnais, the Morvan, and elsewhere the nobles had left bad memories behind. Popular tales recalled them as brutal, bloody, and greedy: ready to shoot a mason off the roof for fun or torture a tenant who refused his daughter; hypocritically claiming they treated their subjects well at;1d struck down for perjury by the wrath of God; turned into the beasts of prey that resembled them, wolves, wild dogs, or other nocturnal wanderers. Peasant language, too, kept alive the image of the mechants chatias and their zeu-z- oubyettes (the evil castles and their dungeons), not forgetting the batteurs des queurneuilles, kept up all night to beat the moats and ponds to keep the frogs from croaking. And where the local ferruginous sands were red-tinted, peasants insisted to the twentieth century that castles (and churches) were built with mortier de sang, a mortar mixed with the blood of sacrificed victims. In Perigord especially, the bitterness lingered: the old songs of 1793 voicing the peasants' resentment of rich farmers and messieurs were revived in 1848 and still sung in 1909; in 1830 castles were pillaged; in 1848 the local gentry made preparations to defend their halls; and in 1849 the rumor spread that the moderate candidate in that spring's elections had stocked 100 yokes or more 

• See Eugene Le Roy, Moulin du Frau (Paris, 1905 ed.), especially p. 58. It may even have pro- vided an opening for urban social propaganda in the countryside. The revolutionary Paris chanson- nier Charles GiBe wrote a song against the hunting law-"Bons paysans du Beauvoisis I Cachons, cachons bien nos fusils"-which he could well have sung in Vexin and Braye while spending time on a friend's farm in the area (Pierre Brochon, La Chanson franf'aiJe, 2: 127-28). 

t Albert Soboul, "La Question paysanne," p. 32; Eugene Bonnemere, Histoire des paysans, 2: 418. In places, of course, the old practices survived with only little change. At Saint-Lary, in southwestern Haute-Garonne, where in the late 1840'S the old men still wore pigtails and knee breeches, "Ies usages gardaient encore une sorte de couleur fOOdale." The tithe survived in the shape of gifts, the corvee as more-or-Iess voluntary services. "Quand man pere avait besoin d'un gros charroi, de pierres par exemple, ille faisait crier au sortir de la messe et c'etait a qui se presenterait; on leur donnait a souper." (Comte de Comminges, Souvenirs d'enfance, pp. 28, 29.) 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

in his castle to use on his ex-vassals if he won.21 How long such hatred and suspicion lasted is mirrored in the success of Eugene Le Roy's Jacquou le Cro- quant, published in the last year of the century. Jacquou is the heir of an old revolutionary tradition. When, on the eve of the revolution of 1830, he wreaks revenge against his wicked local baron, he avenges not only his own wrongs but those heaped on his father and his kind. Under his leadership, his fellow peasants set the oppressor's castle on fire and, more important, assert their own right to the land; the same land that was sung by the Gascon poet Jasmin, "from which alone could issue forth the balm that would put an end to the plague of misery." Four acres and a cow, if one may say so, were scarcely the inspiration for modern politics. 

And that is just the point. For all the way into the 1870's fear of a restoration of the Ancien Regime and its servitudes hung in the back of many peasants' minds. In 1871 a Republican newspaper in Gers campaigned against the Mon- archists by arguing that they would reestablish tithes. In 1873 the command- ing general at Bordeaux reported relief in the countryside when the Count of Chambord eliminated the possibility of a royal restoration, because "right or wrong they believed tithes and forced labor were about to be reestablished." That same year a sub-prefect in Lot remarked that the peasants would accept the monarchy if only they were persuaded that they need not fear tithes or feudal dues.22 

These were the sentiments that lay behind the curious jacquerie that ran through Dordogne and the Charentes in the late spring of 1868, and that appears to have begun when the de Lestranges, an aristocratic family of Che- vanceaux (Charente-Inferieure), put their coat of arms in a stained-glass window of the local church. This persuaded villagers that noble privileges were on the point of being reestablished. It was not long before alarming rumors began to circulate throughout the entire area to the effect that very soon the priests would be demanding every thirteenth ear of corn and noble- men would be back sucking the peasants' blood. Official reports noted great disquiet in the region, made worse by the fact that the local population was "ignorant, irreligious, [and] exclusively attached to its material interests." Riberac (Dordogne) was full of "absurd stories." At Saint-Paul-de-Lissonne an old woman asked the mayor if it was true that the Empress Eugenie had wed the Pope. Troubles broke out at Cercoux (Charente-Inferieure) and spread to Saint-Pierre-du~Palais nearby. Most of the troubles had to do with churches. At Saint-Michel-Lepauou (sic), near Barbezieux (Charente), some 20 peasants armed with sticks sought to remove clusters of flowers and grain (apparently including lilies) from the church altar because, they said, these signified the coming reestablishment of tithes. Another church, near Cognac, was invaded by several hundred persons bent on removing a (nonexistent) painting of Saint Joseph carrying a bunch of lilies and an ax, the which announced the return of feudalism. Priests were beaten up (as at Gigogne, 

Peasants and Politics 

Charente), insulted, threatened; all were accused of planning to reestablish feudal dues.23 

Only two years later these and similar hatreds found an outlet in the ter- rible murder of a local nobleman in the marketplace of Hautefaye (Dor- dogne). Seized by the peasants, accused of Prussian sympathies, the lord of the manor was brutally beaten, dragged around, tortured, and finally, still breathing, thrown on a pyre to be burned alive. Andn~ Armengaud has sug- gested that hatred for inaccessible foreign enemies was transferred to more accessible ones (such as the nobility, the rich, the clergy, or Protestants), who were regarded as traitors or the next thing to it.24 That may be so. But would it not be simpler to recognize instead an old existing hatred to which moments of high tension offered an outlet and official hostilities a convenient label? This was why during the war of 187<>-71, as Philip Hamerton tells us, the Burgundian peasantry so readily believed that all priests were Prussian agents, and that all the monies they collected went to the German cause.'" Before bad motives are ascribed to a particular group, there must be a presupposition of their potential for evil. Where that potential was attributed to nobles or to priests, it was easy to hold them responsible for every sort of misdeed. The "faint underhand rumors" and "slanderous imputations" reported by the im- perial prosecutor at Toulouse merely reflected what the peasants thought of those they blamed, and what they feared from them.25 Historical memory and plain interest combined to make the peasants hate these groups more than foreign enemies. Nothing had happened yet to suggest that such priorities might be improper. 

A simpler, inner-looking world reacted to political events that came from the outside in terms that it understood, and that urban observers scorned as ignorant and petty: would it lose liberties held uncertainly, regain liberties lost in forest rights or hunting, be made to pay more taxes, or be freed to pay none? At Draguignan the initial reaction of the procession that celebrated the news of the Second Republic in 1848 was to sack first the toll offices, letting the mistral blow their papers off, and then the chief tax agency, where the records were burned. At Avignon the committee that proclaimed the advent of the Republic simultaneously abolished the tolls and the tax on wine. Elsewhere, peasants seized former commons and forests that had been lost, or ravaged new plantations that had encroached on their pasturelands. In Y on ne and else- where enthusiasm in February turned to disgust in March, when liberty turned out to mean additional taxes. In Lot, a police official maintained the 

• Round My House, p. 213. Again in the First World War the charge was made that nobles and priests had subsidized Germany's attack on France. In the hilly, wooded country around Nontron in northern Dordogne many believed that the Kaiser was hiding in a local chateau, where the marks left by his nighdy walks could be plainly seen on the sandy paths (Georges Rocal, Croquants du Pengord, pp. 131-33). 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

troubles that broke out in June 1848 had only the vaguest relation to the Paris rising; it was just that people were determined to seize the first opportunity to rid themselves of the tax collectors. If government was above all the collec- tion of taxes, there was little reason for liking the Republic. Peasants and artisans acted logically in suspecting it, the more so since "the principle of equality crudely understood had spread through the ignorant and credulous masses."26 Memories of an earlier tradition tended to leveling, and there was little need of political propaganda to stir the embers of such tendencies. But they expressed themselves in the attempt to eat and drink at the expense of the rich (if need be at their table) and the pulling down of that most con- spicuous sign of their wealth, the weathervane perched on their roof.'" Amid hunger, want, and political confusion, coupled with disunity at the top, traditional hostilities created fears, myths, hopes, and mobilizing images enough. Everyone recollected the lessons of the past. Nobles and townships feared their peasant foes.t The peasants hated the "bourgeois" and thought to march on them. One hears a great deal about secret societies and the effect of their propaganda in small towns and in the countryside between 1849 and 1851. Certainly their organizations seem to have been effective enough to pro- duce local insurrections in numerous areas after the December 2 coup. But it is very doubtful that any countryman stirred to defend the Republic or the constitution, or to oppose Louis Napoleon's coup. One is struck by the political ignorance of the peasants enrolled in such societies. "They put me in a club; I always thought it was a benevolent society," said one, and though he may have been lying, like the good soldier Schweik, the evidence suggests this was frequently the case. There was certainly confusion on what both clubs and insurrections were about. In Ardeche several rebels testified that they had been told the prefect awaited them in Privas to collect their votes. Even the prosecutor admitted that many insurgents did not know what they were doing: some thought they fought to abolish taxes or to obtain work; some believed they were answering the President's appeal for help or his call on the people to march on country towns; many were simply pressured into going along with the crowd. This last often counted heavily, as for the peasant in Zola's Fortune des Rougon who, brought to trial for taking part in the in- 

• For examples of such incidents, see Alain Corbin, "Limousins migrants," pp. 665-66. Thus at Mazeau, near Ambazac, "the gang [of insurgent peasants], having gotten a written promise from the steward to pull down the weathervanes within two or three days, dispersed slowly and returned to their respective villages singing" (Archives Departementales, Haute-Vienne M 741). t In Cognac and other urban communities of the Charentes, Raymond Doussinet tells us that the townsmen were singing: "Panl Panl Rantanplan! sus la gouleJ sus la goule! / Pan! Pan! Ran- tanplanl sus la goule aux pesantsl" (us Travaux et les jeux, p. 355.) No wonder that local loy- alties, especially urban versus rural ones, overrode economic or class resentments. Gilbert Garrier has noted the division in the Lyonnais: "cloisonnement entre Lyon et son departement rural; Ies idees ne circulent pas plus que les hommes." The same at Givors, where Red voracu held the town until June of 1848 but never managed to affect the neighboring countryside. (Paysant du Beaujolais, I: 317-18.) 

Peasants and Politics 253 

surrection, could only stammer, "I'm from Poujols." For him this was enough; and village solidarities (whether red or white, the men marched to the church bells) or the prestige of a local notable (like the notary who led IOO men out of his village to march on Mirande, Gers) or hatred of towns, of usurers, of the rich, sufficed to account for most of what took place.21 

The authorities accused the rebels of social revolution. That it was-but in limited ways: "We wanted to maintain the rights of the people," explained one prisoner from Bourg-Saint-Andeol. "What do you mean by people's rights?" "I do not know." We hear of calls for "five hours of pillage," and if an incentive was needed, "aren't you tired of being poor?" Antoine Soulies of Saint-Privat (Dordogne) was taken in custody for declaring that he had sharpened his scythe to weed the houses of Saint-Aulaye. The urban agitators tried to appeal to peasants by playing on their hatred of the towns: they prom- ised that they would be razed or set on fire, or better still, that they were al- ready in flames (Limoges) or had been burned down. And the revolutionary language harked back to sources of the traditional sort. In Ardeche they sang a couplet about the unclean blood soaking through their furrows, raising the chant: "Let us march on Privas and set the mortgage registry and the tax office on fire." At Thiers the password was "Marat and Revolution," the war cry "Death to the rich!" The 2,000 countrymen marching on Agen roared "Vive la guillotine!" And at Narbonne a ditty was selling well: "Song of the Guillotine." At Carcassonne Leon W ralier of Moux was heard to shout: "We must play bowls with rich men's heads." At Seyches (Lot-et-Garonne) one leader of the crowd assured his listeners that the poor would not be happy until every monsieur and every priest had been cut in two. 

The imagery was unmistakably that of the Revolution: I want to drink a pint of blood and carry off a head on my staff .... I want a belt made out of their guts .... I'll throw their liver to the dogs .... Let blood run in the streets like water on a stormy day. But the mood was festive, for rebellion was a break in the everyday routine, a letting-off of steam much like Carnival. "To- morrow," shouted an agitator to a Limousin village crowd, "tomorrow we'll be 50,000 at Limoges. It will be the finest festival we have ever had in our life." The woodcutters hesitate to join; they are promised chicken, turkey, cham- pagne, and Bordeaux wine. "It's not today, but tomorrow surely we'll cele- brate le grand carnaval. The peasants' Republic is here; tomorrow we'll have the harvest feast." Even in failure, when a courier arrived to warn that the cause was lost and the insurgents should disperse, the language remained consistent with the mood: It is too late to disperse now, came the response, for "the wine is tapped; it must be drunk!"28 

A revealing scene unfolded at Beziers, where the surrounding villages rose en masse and filled the town with armed and angry men by daybreak on December 4. A band of these, hunting for enemies, encountered a local law- yer and his father-in-law, both Republicans. The gentlemen cried out, in254 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE French, that they were Republicans and friends. The peasants cried out, in patois, "Let's get them/" They killed one and severely wounded the other. For these rebels "of the poorest and most ignorant portion of the peuple of Beziers," the foe was simply the bourgeois, and a French-speaking bourgeois at thatf When we are told that in 1849 Republican politics penetrated areas and levels of society that had been unpoliticized up to that time, we have to ask just how new this could have been. Alternatives to traditional resignation were greeted with delight, but the forms of expressing rebellion were tradi- tional-farandoles, songs, threats-and the objects against which such rebel- liousness was aimed were traditional too. As Philippe Vigier points out in masterly detail, the themes of the time were old themes warmed over, and the tensions that exploded after December 2 were familiar tensions: town against country, poor against rich and against usurers, people against notables, not workers against employers. "The Socialist infection" that was spreading so deplorably fast among poor peasants in the Alps, and elsewhere no doubt, caught on because it had a familiar ring. "It's frightening how they let them- selves be caught with the snare of riches coming to them in their sleep," com- mented a Bonapartist agent. Why not, when this was a traditional theme of peasant tales and, anyway, only a miracle could bring the peasant riches? "Surprising continuity of peasant reactions," comments Albert Soboul. Why should it be surprising, when so little had changed?29 

Seen in this perspective, the Second Empire was not an interlude of repres- sion for a newly politicized peasant "class," but a period of relative well-being, during which, with order and economic activity restored, the possibilities of urban or urban-led economic growth percolated into the countryside to give men satisfactions on their own terms. The people of his town, announced the mayor of Courgis (Y onne), were pretty satisfied with the new constitution of 1852, the more so since their wines were selling reasonably well.so Peasants often identified opponents of the Empire with reactionary forces set on re- storing old oppressions, rather than with those forces concerned to preserve or recapture some vague new liberties.· And concrete evidence that things were going well for them made peasants identify the Empire with prosperity. "The peasants vote for the Emperor not because they are unfree men," wrote Eugene Tenot in 1865, "but because they are satisfied, and because they have 

• The argument has been made that the Second Empire helped introduce the peasants to po- litical life and that rural Bonapartism was the beginning of the fin des notables. A vote for the official candidate was a vote against the local notable or priest: "a revolt of small rural democracies against the oligarchy of departmental notables," as Jacques Rougerie puts it in Georges Duby, H;sto;re de la France (Paris, 1972), 3: II7. Conversely (and bearing him out), Patrice Higonnet tells us that in one Lozere village, at least, before 1870 "a vote for the Left was a vote for Napoleon Ill" (Pont-de-Montvert, pp. UI, 124). It is worth noting in this connection an observa- tion of Alain Corbin's: "Tout se passe comme si l'histoire de l'opinion politique se situait a deux niveaux, dans le cadre de deux systemes de psychologie sociale differents" ("Limousins migrants," P·1375)· 

Peasants and Politics 255 their way of looking at things which is different from that of townspeople." There was no one like Napoleon Ill, the peasants said, for keeping up hog prices.S1 And the sulrprefect of Brive reported the success of the big fair of 1853: "The peasants return home with fervent cries of 'Long live the Em- perorl' ". Martin Nadaud grown old, appointed prefect of his native ereuse in 1870 by Gambetta, found that men no longer talked as they had in 1849, about bravery, selflessness, self-sacrifice. Their sights had shifted from abstract for- mulas they barely understood to concrete objects brought within their reach. Politics was about the way life was lived, and on the whole life was better lived; so talk was about how to produce more crops (now that communica- tions and trade made increased productivity possible and relevant), and about the price of cattle.32 

Such attitudes have generally drawn pejorative comments even from sen- sitive and sympathetic observers. Paul Bois, discussing the elections of 1790 and 1791 iu Sarthe, shows how the 1790 elections, involving departmental posts, drew a very high participation from the same peasants who the next year turned out in incredibly low numbers to vote for representatives to the Legis- lative Assembly. In 1790 local government and local interests were at stake; in 1791 the government of France was being decided. For the countrymen, "ignorant and selfish, political deliberation was pretty much devoid of sense"; national issues did not move them, only "the sentiment of their interests." Indifferent to news of the King's flight to Varennes and his capture, fall, and execution, the peasants showed concern about grain shortages, the plundering or requisitioning of grain, rising bread prices, and the falling value of the assign at, and about troubles that involved local priests and churches.s3 Was this so strange, regrettable, wrongheaded? Questions of national interest must remain of little concern to those who do not see what they can mean to them. A lively interest in matters that do concern them, that can be seen to matter because they are close to home and that one can hope to do something about, seems eminently sensible. But setting such value judgments aside, if that can be done, it is true that indifference to questions of more than local interest reflects mental and practical isolation: conditions that make the outer world unimportant also make one feel powerless to affect it. By the end of the Second Empire, greater material involvement would be translated into broader political scope. But only barely. 

The peasants were moving into the modern world, but the shift was am- bivalent and inevitably uneasy. Politics continued to be personalized, and so 

• Archives Nationales, ploIII Corrcze 3 (sous-prHet Brive, Jan. 1853). Conversely, consider the case of a village carpenter near Orleans who got ten days in prison in 1859 for shouting that the Emperor was a pig for having raised tobacco prices (see correspondence in AN, ploHI Loiret 12); and, significantly, Hamerton's remark that President MacMahon had a bad press with the peasants because the removal of Thiers had coincided with a fall in the price of cattle (Round My House, p. 270). 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

were programs and policies. We are ill-placed in the twentieth century to denounce the personalization of political issues as evidence of a primitive mentality. It may simply reflect a realistic understanding of how politics work. Yet the predominance of personalities over issues remains an indicator (how- ever faint) of an earlier stage of politics and of a time when the role of inter- cessors, leaders, and interpreters was more readily admitted than in the popular politics of today. This is in part because that role was objectively greater, and in part because mentalities had not adjusted to abstraction, which is the su- preme characteristic of the modern world and mind. 

Personalized politics are the introductory stage of modern politics, and the elections of February 1871 very quickly turned into symbolic plebiscites: a battle between Thiers and Gambetta, heading their respective lists in many departments, embodying the major issue of peace versus continued war but also providing a personalization of the conflict. No wonder, in these terms, that Bonapartism endured as myth, as model, or as the mainspring of local su- premacies. Policies, issues, governments were abstractions. Most people "vote for a man," reported a police official in Gers in 1876, "not necessarily against the government." No wonder that a Republican paper wrote bitterly in 1878 that peasants still thought Napoleon III responsible for the fine harvests of the Imperial years, still felt they had to have as a leader a man "who must be to some extent thaumaturge"-healer and sorcerer-in times of need.34 When peasants in Charente said, "we need a man," and voted for Boulanger, they may have meant a strong man, but they also meant quite simply a recognizable and recognizably symbolic figure-the "man on horseback," not necessarily an image of reaction, but something concrete.:II: 

The personalization of politics was particularly evident at the local level, where those national issues that did arise became rallying points for local factions, feuds, and interests. The rivalry of clans and partisans joined national politics to unrelated local issues and provided labels that can easily mislead. In eastern Perigord, scene of fierce rivalry between the two great river-trading houses of Barbe from Auriac and Chamfeuil from Espontours, none could avoid taking sides with one or the other. "You have to be for Barbe or for Chamfer" went the popular saying, and national politics had little to do with it.t 

• Le Figaro, March 9, 1888; Emile Faguet in the introduction to Arthur Meyer, Ce que mes yeux ont flU (Paris, 19II), p. vi. In chapter Il of L'Appel atl so/dat, Maurice Barres remarks in passing that, after Gambetta, the peasants of the Moselle valley did not know a Minister's name until Boulanger came along. To what extent did the "American" methods that Comte Dillon used to spread the General's fame serve as a politicizing agent, as the enthusiasms and tensions of 1848-51 had done? t Eusebe Bombal, "La Hailte Dordogne," pp. 391-92. Such divisions often ran deep, as in the small town of SarI at, whose two religious fraternities (into which one was born) were at daggers drawn-"Capulets et Montagus dont les querelles ont defraye les chroniques de Sarlat" (Alfred de Tarde, L'Esprit ph-igom'din, p. 10). Or in the Picard village of Bienvilliers, where well into the nineteenth century there was a bitter feud between families faithful to the sanctuary of Saint Etton, 

Peasants and Politics 257 

It is not that national politics were totally irrelevant, but that, enlisted in the service of a local cause, they became part of local politics. Memories of 1793 or 1815 affected the orientation of a local clan, and sociopolitical interests ex- pressed themselves by gravitating around a man or family. According to one analysis of the elections of 1869, the votes of different areas in Vendee tended not to divide along economic lines but rather to reflect local historical experi- ences. A conservative traveler writing about the Monarchists of Carpentras in 1873 remarked that they hated not so much the Republic as the Republicans. In upper Maurienne "one belongs hereditarily to reds or whites, and many would find it difficult to explain their political beliefs." In Vivarais, too, "one is red or white." The Revolution redefined the struggles between Protestants and Catholics; Right and Left would carry on their feuds. Interests, sympathy, experience involved one in the traditional factions but scarcely altered the factions themselves. One became white or red because one was a carter or because a relative had been ill-treated by the government; and perhaps also because of "individual and family temperament."35 National themes, adopted for local consumption, enabled one power group to oppose another that was often very similar in wealth and social standing. "It is not that one doesn't seize every occasion to hide questions of personal interest behind the mask of politics." But everybody knew that this was what was being done.36 Thus, 1848 found the little community of Martel (Lot) "divided from time imme- morial into two camps," both led by "honorable families," one camp standing for "progress," the other necessarily for "resistance" to it. But as a judge com- mented when troubles broke out at Le Vigan, nearby, though the leaders of the two parties may have been involved in politics, "in the ranks it's a choice of persons." And in 1853 the sub-prefect of A vallon spoke for more than his district when he wryly described "all these internal struggles quite devoid of political coloring, turning within a narrow circle of personalities."37 

The rich mass of official reports harvested by the Second Empire and the Third Republic shows that politics continued to be local, and local politics continued to be personal. "There are no political parties properly speaking," reported the sub-prefect of Mirecourt (Vosges) in 1869; "there are only local parties." Like the Sarthe peasantry described by Paul Bois, the peasants in every region I surveyed, from Vosges to Brittany, remained indifferent to national politics, concerned with local issues and local personalities. The pre- fect of Vosges found reason for satisfaction in 1870: "The temper of the countryside is excellent: political opinions are almost totally unknown." And from Agen: "General politics leave the masses indifferent." Local notables exercised political influence not only because they wielded power, but because political issues mattered to them more than to the peasant; by his simple sup- 

destroyed in 1720, and those who accepted the new parish church dedicated to Saint Jacques, each party refusing to celebrate the other's saint, each frequenting its own cabarets and avoiding mar- riage with members of the other group (Marcelle Bouteiller, MMecine populaire, p. 99). 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

port, the peasant could thus at no pain oblige associates or superIors who seemed to care about such useless things.3s 

Physical and economic isolation, where they obtained, limited the alterna- tives or the access to them, and imposed a hierarchy of priorities. Strangers hawked strange ideas in strange language, often quite literally incompre- hensible.39 Work, crops, and land were what mattered; access to them, to cash, to help in need; and all these were tied to personal relations. So was the general welfare of the community, whose fate rested in the hands of a strictly limited few: a family or two. Personal pride and minimal means might assert independence, but this would be personal, too, with the general cause, vaguely articulated and vaguely understood, adopted to stress a personal stance, not an ideological commitment. Judicious regard for private and community in- terest made conformity with the concerns of notables hardly a sacrifice, and possibly quite profitable. Being courted by one's social superiors was a rare occasion that increased one's self-respect. But in any case selling one's vote or giving it to one's master was seen as the trade of an empty right for concrete advantage. All sides recognized this in contested elections, with the Republi- cans fully as eager to provide free drinks as their opponents, and drumming peasants' votes on their estates and those of their relatives."" 

Interpretations must perforce remain tentative, but I am struck by the lack of comprehension in a remark like the one made by the commissaire of Plai- sance (Gers), who noted that the people "don't try to understand the conse- quences of their votes: they vote for these gentlemen and that is all."40 Of course, they voted for the gentlemen. Who else would they vote for, and why shouldn't they, in light of what has been said above? But within these limits they also voted hoping, as voters do today, that they might achieve a tax cut; and though, like more modern voters, they were only too often disappointed, this was a reasonable basis for choosing where to cast a vote. So was the in- terest in personal protection, which could transcend ideological differences. So was the concern that representatives, whatever their opinions, should stand in well with the national administration, once this had been recognized as a potent source of largesse. This was what made the second district of Riom reject Alexandre Varenne for the General Council in 1907, as the prefect ex- plained, for while appreciating his "advanced opinions," the electorate, "es- sentially pro-government," did not want their representatives on bad terms with Authority.41 They knew what this could cost them, and though they did 

• Jacques Lovie quotes the corporal of gendarmes at La Roche in Faucigny, where the Re- publican Jules Favre ran against the government candidate in the elections of 1869: "n serait necessaire et meme tres urgent de payer a boire .... Deja ... nous avons eu lieu de remarquer I'effet produit ... par quelques bouteilles de vin et de biere. Ainsi, par ce procooe, les partisans de Jules Favre ont reussi 150 suffrages en deux jours seulement, chiffre enorme sur quatre com- munes rurales." (La Savoie, p. 468; see also Archives Nationales, BB 18 1785, quoted by Guy Palmade in Louis Girard, Les Ele(tions de 1869, p. 210.) 

Peasants and Politics 

not mind electing a Socialist, they wanted him to stay on friendly terms with the men in power. 

Apart from (or around) such considerations, national politics at the local level remained a travesty of local politics, just as before. Local rivalries and family quarrels divided the inhabitants (Aubenas, Ardeche, 1874). Political parties were essentially nonexistent, the vast majority paid no heed to them; only local issues mattered, not political ones (Bourg-Madame, pyf(;nees-Orien~ tales, 1876, 1882). The peasants were too busy with the potato harvest and with winnowing to notice the manifesto of the Comte de Paris-widely circu- lated by the Monarchists (Rambervillers, Vosges, 1887). Politics consisted of one man against another; there was no political spirit in these parts (Saint~ Flour, Cantal, 1889). Parties concerned themselves with politics only at elec- tion time (Billom, Puy-de-D&me, 1890). Utter indifference to political matters (Riom, Puy-de-D&me, 1892). Local affairs and local hatreds (prefect of Pyre~ nees-Orientales, 1892). In this district there were no political differences, just personal ones (Thiers, Puy-de-D8me, 1896). Political ideas played only a small part, but everywhere there were many personal quarrels and animosities (Issoire, Puy-de-D&me, 1897). Elections were built on the name of a man, not on the principles and ideas the man represented (Gourdon, Lot, 1897)' There were no true parties, concluded Raymond Belheze in 1911: "The [typical] peasant chooses his candidate according to family tradition or what he be- lieves his immediate interest to be."4z 

I do not want to suggest by all this that such motives do not enter into politics today. Far from it. It is only that now they are weighed against other considerations, whereas at the time they were dominant. Personal bonds are fitting and necessary in aristocratic or oligarchic societies, where they provide working substitutes for the more complex institutions of societies built on a larger scale. The waning of personal allegiances in the politics of the French countryside was an effect of scale, of a growing number of participants, along with improved techniques of communication, of what we call modern politics. Yet there are certainly places where personal and local ties continue to be an important and even the most important political factor. Writing about a rural canton in Santerre between the wars, Jacques Bugnicourt has shown how personal and clan rivalries still ruled local politics there. "On employe pour mieux s'insulter, un certain vocabulaire, on etablit un lien entre les tendances locales et ce qu'on croit comprendre des tendances nationales." In the end, though, "the election is only one episode of the rivalry of the clans ... a con- venient means of stressing old animosities."* 

• Bugnicourt in Jacques Fauvet and Henri Mendras, Les Paysans et la politique, pp. 463-'75. This is borne out in a remarkable article by Claude Karnoouh on kinship and politics in a Lorraine village. In that village, she writes, "Ies notions de droite et de gauche s'estompent au profit des categories parentales et familiales. L'interet public se con fond avec des querelles dont 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

Maurice Agulhon has suggested that this adaptation of alien themes was important in the transition period, when rural populations little affected by the outside world could be swayed with ideological slogans that corresponded with local hatreds or aspirations, and that the interaction of these themes with local folklore was part of the acculturation process.4S Quite so. But it is well to remember that what Agulhon says about village society before 1848 holds good half a century later in many parts of France, where the acculturation was still very incomplete; and that the ploy was used for at least 100 years. 

By then, the village in Picardy that Bugnicourt has studied was fully inte- grated into the modern economy, so that the persistence of personal politics must mean something more. For old animosities to survive, they have to be remembered; for clans to endure, there has to be continuity. The less mobile the society, the greater the stability of its themes and of its categorizations. Though no rural society was ever fixed in its composition, the proportion of newcomers was always small enough to allow for assimilation and indoctrina- tion in the local lore. Themes could persist and so could families in a way that urban politics, at least since the nineteenth century, did not need consider. The degree to which this affected political activity and language in the countryside can serve as one index of modernization. 

Another explanation of the persistence of personal politics comes from Henri Mendras, who sees rural society as founded on a confusion of roles. That is to say, every participant has less a functional than a total perception of every other: the postman is also a neighbor, a cousin, a creditor; the shopkeeper sells, but he also buys things himself, drinks with you, is a political ally; and so forth. 44 Functions and institutions are incarnated in men (as they are in the Welsh usage "Jones the chapel"), so that the church is the priest, the school is the teacher, the townhall is the mayor or his substitute. Social life is con- ceived as the interaction of individuals, and all events are attributed to some person's will. It follows that the operations of institutions, of abstract func- tions, trends, or forces, are not realities in the experience of villagers who have difficulty in understanding the workings of politics and economics beyond their immediate ken. This difficulty may diminish as acquaintance with the operation of unfamiliar institutions grows. But it will never disappear alto- gether.1t has not done so in the urban mind. Once again, the difference is one of degree; but a watershed comes at the point where a peasant of the Mendras model admits, however grudgingly, that politics is an indirect way of dealing with matters of direct concern. 

la genese s'est parfois estompee dans la memoire des acteurs. Ici les concepts de bourgeois, de proletaire ••• se reveIent sans pouvoir sur les faits." ("La democratie impossible," Etudes rurales, 1973, p. 34.) We find a curious comment on all this in an article by Margaret Peil, reviewing two books on Nigerian politics: "Factions arising out of personality conflict betWeen individual leaders often continue long after these leaders have passed from the scene, because politics is based far more on personal relations and the struggle for personal advantage than on ideology" (Times Literary Supplement, Oct. 17, 1975, p. 1241). 

Peasants and Politics 

One other tendency, still surviving though enfeebled, reflected the enduring archaism of politics. The prefect of Pyrenees-Orientales put it very well when he explained the electoral situation in 1889. Not party labels, but regionalism determined the vote: "Local rivalries ... will reawake as strong as in the past; it suffices to have one parish vote for Mr. B, for the rival parish to give its votes to A."45 Again and again, since labels were masks for local politics and local sentiments, the roots of a candidate counted more than his political label. So that in several instances Left-wing parishes were led to vote for a candidate of the Right because he was "their man," and Right-wing areas to vote Left because the candidate happened to be a local doctor, or just to spite the hated rival from up or down the hill. 

Here too the permanencies are suggestive. Age-old oppositions were simply redefined when the plains went Left and the mountains remained obstinately Right and Catholic. A pastoral economy surviving on the upper slopes would be reRected in the clinging to old ways that were rapidly disintegrating below. The process would be hastened when, as in Maurienne, industrial development turned the peasants into proletarians and brought in immigrant workers from outside.46 All this created hierarchies to rival old familiar ones, class divisions of a modern kind, and estrangement from traditional practices and loyalties: tensions that opened the door to modern politics. But there was no consistent pattern.* All one can say with certainty is that isolation and self-sufficiency made for political (or rather apolitical) stability, or put another way, the re- fusal to entertain new ideas; and that they coincided with a political orienta- tion toward personalities, rather than toward either Right or Left.t 

Proximity to towns and their markets, on the other hand, with all the traipsing back-and-forth this implied, accelerated the tendency to movement and evolution. However small it was, the town had a few civil servants, shop- keepers, doctors, veterinarians, men of law; clubs or societies, perhaps a Ma- sonic lodge; and a "press" put together in the cafe and published once or twice a week-all likely carriers of outside ideas. The tension between the little town-sub-prefecture or district center-and the surrounding country- side was increased and complicated by urban novelties. In turn, the small town 

• The mountaineers of Ariege, smarting under the injustices of the wood-greedy iron forges and their usurious owners, voted heavily for Republicans and "reds" in 1848 and 1°49. But during the Second Empire, the Ariege forges declined, the population thinned out, wood was more readily available, popular dissatisfaction waned, and the political coloring altered. t Thus the people of the Thones valley in Savoy were known as the Bretons of Savoy, and their valley as a Vendee savoyarde; yet nearby Nancy-sur-Cluses, wealthier and closer to the more politically sophisticated Cluse d'Arve, "se paie le luxe de voter quelquefois a gauche par pure fantaisie" (Paul Guichonnet, "Le Geographie et le temperament politique," pp. 70-71). On the coincidence of isolation and personal politics in Isere, see the map in Pierre Barral, Departement de I'here, p. 450. Of the poor, undeveloped terrcs /raides in the department's northwest, the sub- prefect of Vienne remarked in 1905: "Les courants politiques sont mains accuses, les questions de personnes et les petites querelles de c10cher tiennent plus de place" (Archives Departementales, Isere BM 37). 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

often introduced new political tensions into the countryside. Thus, in Allier the political emancipation of the rural areas from the domination of great landowners seems clearly due to the vitality of certain bourgs, "kernels of op- position," which gave the countryside around them an alternative political lead. Whether a village or township gave such a lead or not may have de- pended on the degree to which the town itself was part of the wider world. In Ardeche, for example, Le Cheylard, which remained outside economic cur~ rents until the 1880'S, was politically quiescent, and so was the region around it. But to the south, Largentiere, an important center for trade between com~ plementary areas, and its .environs were politically alive.u 

Other tensions with political possibilities developed on the land itself. Cracks had appeared and were deepening in the foundations of rural society-in that "submission and respect to the laws and regulations and respectful deference toward the agents of authority" reported by the gratified police superintendent of ceret.'8 But this was in 1876, and ceret lies in a Pyrenean valley. Elsewhere the seeds of change had sprouted long before. They had come with alterna~ tives: the possibility of choice, and of escape from authority. Baudrillart, travel- ing in the south, noted that local speech had no term for respect and hence used "fear." In fact, respect (respe) appears at least in dictionaries. But so does crainto, which covers both respect and fear. Awe and reverence are not far apart. A child was taught that he should fear his father, an underling his su- perior. External manifestations of deference symbolized submission: kissing the father's hand, kneeling before one's master, as peasants in Brittany still did in the 1840's. Deference based on fear, dependence, and submission did not avert spite, but rather helped to breed it. Popular proverbs reflected the malice of underlings who rejoiced at the discomfiture of superiors: "When the mas~ ter's foiled, the meniallaughs."'9 And in Lauragais, where the big domains grew wheat and the smallholders corn, the poor greeted summer rains that threatened the one and helped the other with "It's raining insolence." If the squire's harvest was ruined and the little man had plenty of corn, he could afford to set fear aside and to be as "insolent" as he pleased.· 

The opportunity for insolence was slow to come, though sources beginning in the 1830's deplored the waning of respect toward authority of every sort, especially toward masters. The Agricultural Survey of 1867 lamented that though conditions of rurallabor had improved, relations between workers and employers had deteriorated. The two things were of course related; the possi- bility of leaving the land, the thinning out of rural populations, however 

• M.-F. Pariset, who quotes this saying, provides another of similar sentiments: "'Vhen it's wet, the servant laughs, and the master's pretty mad" (Economie rurale •.• Lauragais, pp. 59, 135). A proverb of the Lower Vivarais reveals another aspect of the same yearning: "Windy March, rainy April, make the peasant arrogant" (Pierre Charrie, Folklore du Bas-Vivarais, p. 165). April rain promises a fine harvest, but the peasant looks forward just as much to the prospect of holding his head high. 

Peasants and Politics 

limited at that time, had nevertheless raised wages. A decade later, in the 1870's, a doctor in Tarn wondered at the disappearance of the sharecropper of yore, "full of deference for his master." Sharecroppers now were "less slaves of routine, more competent, more hard-working, but very independent, treat- ing the master as an equal, very selfish ... less obliging than they used to be and inclined to sacrifice all for their own interest."1IO There it all was: the change, and the observer nonplussed at inferior groups beginning to set their own interests before their masters', indeed discerning a difference of interest at all. 

The mere existence of alternatives had encouraged higher expectations, and had to some extent brought gains. But the gulf between actual gains and ex- pectations that grew at an unprecedented rate (however modest they may seem today) intensified the existing frictions and evoked remarks about the malev- olence and hostility of the inferior classes toward the higher ones. In conjunc- tion with this came another development, rued by Theron de Montauge in 1869: "The bond of patronage, so powerful in the past, ... has no force today." Hence, the superior classes "no longer constitute a mainstay for the state."51 There was the rub. The superior classes had diversified to such an extent that they provided a whole series of alternative authorities. Deference did not need to die out in order to wane, but simply to be transferred from one object to another. Yet the multiplication of authorities, and their rivalries, sapped the notion of authority itself. 

From the very beginning of the nineteenth century, rural society and its hierarchies had become increasingly complex. The acquisition of national property by bourgeois, the greater number of nobles living on their lands, especially after 1830, and the increasing number of professionals and officials in small country towns had raveled what had once been a fairly simple social fabric. This happened at a time when prosperous farmers, enriched by the suppression of feudal survivals and by opportunities to purchase property, began to assert their new social position. Still close to their fellow peasants, they nevertheless sought to mark their distance from them by imitating higher social groups.· Inevitably, their relations with their workers changed in the process. A life of common hardship had long established a rough equality be- tween a farmer and his neighbors, even more strikingly between a farmer and his help, who shared his board and, if they slept in the cowshed, felt not much worse off than he. Whom poverty had united, prosperity set apart. The do- mestique (part of the household) became an outlrier. In some families two sorts of bread began to be prepared, the better quality for the masters, who learned to eat from crockery and to drink wine, the customary black bread for the hired hands, who washed it down with water or thinned wine. The di- vision was sharper still if a wealthy farmer turned from land to horse- or cattle- 

• As can be seen, for instance, in George Sand's Vaimt;ne and Le Meunier d'Angibatllt. But all these developments were slow-moving until after mid-century.THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

breeding, for then labor in common ceased. The workers and their employers no longer shared the same timetable. The farmer went to the market, where he drank and gossiped. The worker who stayed behind resented this, especially because it flouted traditional modes. Here was privilege. Leisure came to be enjoyed separately, just as work was now done apart. The workers left the common table and ate separately in the stable or, on a holiday, at the cabaret. Everyday relations reflected the new tensions, the new frictions, so that by 1884 the village landowners who used to be cordially greeted by their fellows were now looked on askance. 52 

This trend, suggestive of new divisions through the whole of peasant so- ciety, in due course propelled successful farmers into the list of local notables. Farmers too could become bourgeois, especially when they began buying up the properties of urban absentee landowners. They joined the struggle for political places (henceforth symbols of status and proofs of influence), and they vied among themselves and against others in municipal politics and in the struggle for honors.1i3 All this competition in an increasingly open political market created per- plexities and some confusion, but also provided lesser men with opportuni- ties for maneuvcr or, at least, with a sense of discretion and the possibility of choice. It also helped improve their self-respect. Writing about Berry in 1913, Hugues Lapaire noted that the peasant had left servility behind. He no longer bowed to any city slicker, to any gent. True, he still used polite formulas when he talked to you, but when you turned your back he called his pigs "gentle- men" or "nobles." He may have done that before, out of the master's hearing (though it is doubtful that he would have dared). The novelty lay in the self- assured tone, in the shedding of "servility," in the refusal to regard the city slicker as automatically superior.54 

The peasant was simply doing better, and he was seeing more of city people, too. But the opportunity to choose among his betters must have helped build up his self-respect. It was not that dependency did not continue; the little man was still under pressure from his creditors, from men who employed him or lent him their team of horses to plow his land, above all from the local land- owner, noble, or bourgeois-"masters of the land, of life, of souls." As late as the turn of the century the squire at Chanzeaux in Vendee still required his tenants to gather at his chateau before Sunday mass, march to church behind his carriage, and then return to the chateau for a quiz on the day's sermon.55 The interesting thing is that such types maintained their hold less by straight- forward economic bonds than by sustained relationships and attention, once the rural voter had a chance to choose."" Where the lord of the manor was a 

• A study of the account book of Albert-Auguste Flahaut, a country notable, owner of some 250 acres of good land and mayor of his village in the Pas-de-Calais, shows the devices he used to maintain his authority over the workers on his estates near Bethune: he lent money to those who preferred to borrow from him rather than the notary; he kept surpluses he might have sold elsewhere to sell to those of his workers who had to feed themselves; he provided essential services 

Peasants and Politics 

tangible presence, as in the case of the Baron of Rochetaillee, who opened an account with the butcher and the baker for all the poor of his village close to Saint-Etienne, traditional loyalties were bolstered by gratitude. Where a great family had the wealth and influence to wangle for a community a church, roads, a bridge, schools, a town clock, and a telegraph office, as the Dampierres did at Cazeres on the Adour, "this is known, judged, valued by all families, even by those undisposed to gratitude." But in most cases, the great landowners did not live on their land. They visited the estate intermittently, transmitted their instructions through their stewards, and lost touch with an electorate that was increasingly choosy and susceptible to suasion. Local families, notaries, solici- tors, veterinarians, and especially doctors-some of whom had served the re- gion for several generations-provided an alternative elite, and one that culti- vated the voters more assiduously.1i6 

When, in 1871, Leonce de Vogiie, though elected to the National Assembly just behind Thiers on the conservative ballot, lost his seat in the General Coun- cil of Cher to a country doctor, he attributed this to the opportunities that had "excited all the ambitious mediocrities (notaries, doctors, justices of the peace)." People like these, he contended, "live closer to universal suffrage and avail themselves of this to canvass votes." In VogUe's eyes, as in his terms, this was somehow demeaning. Nor did he mention, as his grandson would, that the doctor in question, though an indifferent practitioner of his art, was honored in his canton for the many services that he had rendered his fellow citizens. A generation later we find Melchior de VogUe carrying elections for- the Cher council, through the 1880'S and 1890's over "a little village doctor," who finally succeeded in defeating him in 19°4- A friend wrote to console VogUe on his failure, assuring him that there could be no fair contest "between the charlatans who promise that the state will change the lot of workers ... and who repeat this 365 days a year in the local pub, and a private individual, who once every four years speaks to them of efforts they may have to make."57 The point was not the content of the propaganda, but its intensity and its con- tinuity. One man was a permanent presence, talking and tobe talked to, the other was available only periodically. The presence created bonds of reci- procity; social encounters strengthened these bonds; small attentions and interested concern flattered the self-respect of men who by custom, manners, dress, education, and sometimes even language were in a class apart. French was the language of ceremony, but it was important to be able to address the lower classes in their speech. They were hungry for personal recognition from 

to those employees who owned some land of their own; and he took the earnings of employees on deposit, "managing" the money and requiring the depositors to state how they were going to use their money when withdrawing any. But all this was subject to change at the peasant's initiative. (R.-H. Hubscher, "Le Livre de compte," pp. 380, 400.) On the ambiguity, see Georges Rougeron, Le Conse;l general, pp. 171-72; Jean Becarud, "Noblesse et representation parlemen- taire," Revue jrancaise de science politique, 1973, pp. 986-87; and Archives DepartementaIcs, Puy-de-Dome M 0162 (Thiers, May 1892). 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

their superiors, and grateful to those who offered it. "One thing torments them more than questions of salary," wrote Audiganne about the workers of Rouen. "It is the need for some consideration." Attention of this sort "elevates them in their own eyes and narrows social distances, without hurting the hierarchy." The moment would come (and Melchior de Vogiie predicted it in 1886) when "the inferior ranks" would choose their representatives among themselves ("What will become of our beautiful France then!"). But that was far away, and for the moment, those who succeeded in combining the traditional virtues of generosity and some kind of public munificence with a new "familiarity" pleased the crowd. 58 Social distances were still so great that to be "not proud" was the supreme praise peasants and artisans could heap on a bourgeois.:II: 

More sensitive to the symbols of status than to supposed class antagonisms, flattered by fair words that heightened their sense of dignity, the lower orders responded with particular readiness when notables showed signs of wooing them.59 Politicization was one aspect of acculturation, of listening to the lan- guage of one's betters and imitating it, as one imitated dress when one could afford to. Political manners were part of urban mannerisms slowly and awk- wardly being assimilated by another world, but one increasingly predisposed to learn. 

How was the new language of politics assimilated? To put it differently, how did the unpoliticized many begin to act as if politics was not the interest and the preserve of a very few? 

We may safely say they did not learn it through reading. "The peasants don't read electoral literature," reported the sub-prefect of Rochechouart (Haute-Vienne) in 1857. They did not read very much of anything else, either. Opinion in traditional communities was consensual, not a privately developed view of things. Founded on personal relations, opinion was affected by the spoken word, not the written word. Whether in the 1850's, when pub- lications were being distributed free through the countryside, or in the 40 years before 1914, political propaganda remained chiefly verba1.60 Indeed, speech was an act that transcended words.t Words, in any case, tended to generalities that left men who were concerned with immediate problems quite unmoved, or moved them in unexpected ways. Ideals could easily appear as threats to peasants for whom patriotism meant war and military service, order meant the rule of the chateau, and progress meant disturbing novelties, in- comprehensible laws, and more gendarmes. Only when interpreted and trans- lated into familiar terms could the political language of the cities carry posi- tive attractions.61 

• Frcderic Mireur, us Rues de Draguignan, 3: 156-58. When Martin Nadaud was addressed by a medical student in a reading room, "c'ctait la premiere fois qu'un bourgeois me donnait la main, et j'avoue que j'en fus tres flatte." t Speaking of the Vivarais peasants, Gaston Rioux wrote in Fo; et vie in 1912: "lis ne s'interes- sent qu'a la parole, qui est un acte" (June I, 1912, p. 332). But, then, consider these two Basque proverbs: "Words are female, acts are male"; "Words and feathers By in the wind" (Sylvain Trebucq,l..A Chanson popu/aire et /a vie rurale, I: 248). 

Peasants and Politics 

The role of the interpreters, therefore, was crucial; and just as crucial were their numbers, their variety, and their penetration into the depths of rural society.62 

At the grass roots, we find a political "class" containing a few men whose functions brought them into some sustained contact with the outside world: innkeeper or publican, shopkeeper if there was one, mayor, teacher, priest, road surveyors, inspectors of highways, the odd customs or excise agent, the cor- poral of forest guards or commander of the gendarmerie. To these one can add their underlings: the postman, the rural constable, cantonniers or road gangs and their overseers, perhaps also the sexton. All but the first two were invested with official functions. They were servants not of the public, but of the state that paid them and that they represented. They were the personifica- tion of government, and more specifically of a given regime. It was an impor- tant fact of rural political life that these offices changed hands as the regime changed.63 Precisely because politics were not abstract, regimes and govern~ ments were identified with the functionaries who represented them; a multi~ tude of rural reports emphasize this, and the dismissal, appointment, or exile of judges, justices of the peace, tax collectors, tax receivers, tobacco agents, teach~ ers, postmen, and constables shows that the reports were taken seriously. 

But the authority of such minor public servants stemmed from more than their official position. In an illiterate culture, these men could read and write, however clumsily; in a particularist culture, they were conversant with the official language-French. The postman could read out letters and vaguely explain official documents. The constable could draft notes, a report, a police citation. They were the first to hear news from the outside, from notables like the mayor, who actually read the paper, and to transmit it in relatively garbled form to fellow villagers and outlying hamlets. News of the outside world probably traveled much as in those children's games in which a word whispered from ear to ear reaches the end of a human chain transformed beyond recog~ nition. It was news nevertheless, a link with civilization. And such links were more numerous as easier travel brought city vacationers into the countryside. A Paris pharmacist begins to pass each summer at Cuers, up in the hills be~ hind Toulon, brings with him new ideas, and keeps up a correspondence the rest of the year that lets people know what goes on in the capita1.64 The in~ fluence of the carriers and interpreters of civilization, the humblest among them most likely also the most effective, should not be ignored. 

With the years the number of such carriers grew. So did the amount of news they carried. There were more letters, more postmen, simply more informa~ tion. Wars awoke the countryside to the existence of a distant world. What the campaigns of 1792-1814 began, those of the Second Empire settled. A steady flow of reports, rumors, hearsay, and tall tales about the Orient, the Crimea, Italy, China, Africa, and Mexico irrigated France with curious anecdotes and intelligence. Events more or less current penetrated the news-tight world of the countryside, because factions and governments became interested in en- 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

listing voter interest in their enterprises. They were welcome because they of- fered something new and colorful to talk about: victories were fun. No wonder the villagers were "avid for news of Italian feats and glories," and enjoyed hear- ing about Garibaldi's successful boldness, which must have fitted into familiar tales of derring-do. But foreign news was also increasingly recognized as relevant. Relations with strange lands were recognized to affect local pros- perity, even in unlikely places like Ardeche, which got its silkworm eggs from Italy. Conscription affected peasants sharply, if only in the rising cost of re- placements for the draft. Taxes to pay for war hit even closer home, especially when, as in 1862, they threatened a rise in the price of salt. M 

The Third Republic was as eager as the Second Empire to increase its prestige with international success. Republican politicians, determined to per- suade the general public how well they managed the interests of France, taught the peasants even more about the wider world. These lessons were al- ways recited in a particular context-the Prussian menace, frictions with Italy, or Russian friendship-but once again they introduced new areas to popular consciousness. The war of 1914-18 capped the process. The impact of all this should not be exaggerated; knowledge of the wider world remained vague, interest in its details slight and at best anecdota1.66 But the growing awareness that international affairs were capable of affecting one's life and the life of the locality carried with it a growing awareness of the nation. Willy- nilly, the inward-looking rural islands, self-sufficient at least in their own view, were being forced to attend to wider complications. 

Taverns, the liveliest centers of the rural man's social activities, were forums for political talk as for every other kind. A deliberate resort for mutual aid or a social center for regular customers, the tavern gave workingmen the chance to mix with tradesmen and artisans, and gave the young who idled around the bar the chance to indulge in opposition for the sheer pleasure of it.61 In or near the tavern, inn, or cafe, there grew clubs, circles, or associations in great variety. Originally designed to provide distinction, privacy, special comfort, easy access to newspapers, mutual aid, common entertainment, or simply cheaper drinks, these could easily become political circles. They cer- tainly offered opportunities for talking politics. But clubs and circles tended to be urban and to recruit their membership rather in terms of social status than of political sentiment.* For obvious reasons, those associations that needed to draw on a relatively numerous recruiting base were also urban organiza- tions: fire companies, singing societies, bands, religious fraternities, mutual- aid associations. We would not expect to find them any lower than the chef- 

• On the other hand, at the end uf the nineteenth century we find a countrymen's club, Le Cercle des Bastidans, with about 100 members, in the little town of La Garde-Freinet (Var). In its quarters in a building in the center of town country people could gather on Sundays (only Sundays!) to talk, drink wine, and play cards. The Bastidans remained neutral in the political conflicts that divided the town. (Uon Senequier, Connaissance de la Garde-Freinet, pp. 134-36.) 

Peasants and Politics 

lieu-de-canton (Cazals, Lot), and most would have been at the level of the sub-prefecture (Bonneville, Haute-Savoie) or above. By 1870 many of these social groups did in fact become politicized, at least in those regions where politics were already a part of run-of-the-mill social life; so that in Provence "innumerable" Republican circles flourished, and Monarchists tried to oppose them with circles of their own.6B 

Here is a description of one of the latter, the Cerde de la Concorde, quartered in a side street of Carpentras: "Around a table sit a dozen peasants, their staffs beside them, drinking their coffee. A handsome young man, who seems to be from the town, reads aloud an article from [the Monarchist paper J. He stops at almost every sentence to explain it in Provenc;al. This is greeted with cries of approval."69 Here is the urban club at work: the visiting peasants, the paper they never saw and would not have known how to read anyway, be- cause it was written in French, the young man from town acting as interpreter, presumably preaching reactionary ideas, yet helping to detach these men from the old world, and easing their passage to a new French one. There is no way of telling the incidence of clubs even at the urban level. The authorities seem to have regarded most taverns as potential havens of political propaganda and to have kept a sharp eye on all of them; but the popularity of the club as such appears to have varied a great deal. The north, south, and southwest, for in- stance, seem clearly to have been more prone to organized sociability than the center regions and possibly the west as well. This was in part a function of available means, in part perhaps of tendencies bred by living in dispersed parishes or concentrated ones (though Lorraine, where villages were fairly large, had far fewer clubs than Provence). 

We know that throughout Languedoc, Gascony, and Provence, an old urban orientation in the countryside made clubs popular. But in the Limousin Corbin finds none of the imitative tendency of Agulhon's Provence; and in the Vosges in 1901 we find only 287 clubs in 138 localities, in a department with 531 com- munes and a population of 421,412.70 In Pyrenees-Orientales, too, a dip into the files on associations shows that these were scarce outside the region of Perpignan. The six cantons (113 communes) of the electoral district of Prades seem to have had fewer than 40 associations by the end of the century. The official file is not exhaustive, but it does suggest that where a group was not a social club for the upper classes, joined by the judge, the retired army officer, and the mayor (Cercle de France, Vin~a); or a society of artisans and shop- keepers, "formed to put each other in the way of work" (Cercle des Ouvriers, Ille-sur-T~t); or "a device for the cafe-owner to keep his establishment open after hours" (Mosset), associations were politically based. The politics were very probably local politics, as when, following the municipal elections of 1896, the little township of Corhere saw the founding of a circle in opposition to the existing one. Nevertheless, by that time, and considerably earlier in some places, local and national politics had become inextricably mixed.71 Once that 

270 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE happened, party allegiance would thereafter be reflected in clubs, dances, various festivities, and other "public amusements" connected with the political orientation of their participants.· 

One step below the relatively formal clubs came more ad hoc affairs- chambrees, chambrettes-of the sort studied by Maurice Agulhon and Lu- cienne Roubin. They could be offshoots of local gatherings, such as we find before 1870 in the Seine valley between Vernon and Mantes; there after dinner, while the women gathered in veillees, the men went to smoke and talk around the stove of some late-working tailor, weaver, or sabotier, producing several so-called clubs of ten or fifteen per village. They could result from the initiative of an individual or a group of friends seeking the privacy their bourgeois betters enjoyed. They could also be answers to the need for mutual assistance and support, didactic institutions established for the informal transmission of information, the facilitation of rites of passage, and the performance of certain local chores (for example, a special role at Carnival).72 

A rented room, preferably near a tavern whence one would fetch the wine, some chairs, and a table, and a quasi-club was born. It offered a respite from the overcrowded quarters that drove men into taverns, a chance for physical escape from the home. There one could drink more cheaply, play cards ("gambling" was frowned on by the authorities), and chat. In bigger vil- lages, which could have a score of such "room lets," membership would be based on neighborhood and affinity. The group, already sharing the minimal rent and cost of buying drink, might also assess itself to subscribe to a regular newspaper. Even limited social purposes could bring involvement in eco- nomic, hence political problems, as when the authorities tried to tax the group's drinks. In any case, the solidarity that brought members together was rein- forced by regular association. We hear that group members got the same voting bulletins and went together to the polling booth. By 1905 Thorame-Haute, a little village in the Verdon valley, had four such associations, made up of heads of family, youth, radical Republicans, and residents of Riou, a hamlet on the slope above the village.73 We see here the traditional division into age groups, each with a role to play in the life of the community; an equally traditional neighborhood division; and the incorporation of politics in tra- ditional structures-just as these were now recognized by nationallaw.t 

• La Garde-Freinet was one of the places where the politicization of clubs came relatively early. The Union Philharmonique split into two factions in 1879, the Bravade broke up and eventually died in the 1880'S, hunt clubs divided, and so forth. In the end the local youth began to react against this trend and took to frequenting cafes and dances and courting girls irrespective of political camp. Unfortunately, just when this reaction set in is left vague. (Senequier, Connaissance, pp. 10411, 125, 172 .) t Emilien Constant, who has also studied the much-plumbed chambrles. feels that these helped to introduce their members to the practices of modern political life: the nomination of officials, discussion of issues and doctrine, diffusion of slogans and programs. Constant cites a letter reply- ing to Prime Minister Emile Ollivier's circular of 1870 that was published in the "democratic press" of Var and signed by "the delegates of all the peasant chambrees of Draguignan." But it is 

Peasants and Politics 271 

But the most effective politicizing agent was politics itself, that is to say, electoral practice. Abstention from voting is more common and more routine, remarks Alain Lancelot, to the extent that voters belong to categories or com- munities ill-integrated in "global society." Put in our own context, isolation tended to result in nonparticipation and abstentionism. But we are not talking about mere physical isolation; voters living away from it all may in fact relish the chance to take a little trip to town to do their civic duty. There is a sort of isolation that makes "global" affairs irrelevant, and makes the effort of voting meaningless.74 Precisely the sort of economic and cultural isolation we have documented right along. After all, going to vote meant taking time from work, plus perhaps the costs of an unusual trip."" The problem ot getting to the polling place remained a real one, especially before 1871 when voting took place in the chief town of the canton. We know that country roads were bad and few. Easier movement as communications improved in the latter part of the century, together with the expansion of polling places, now no farther away than the parish bourg, encouraged participation.71s But intellectual con- ditions also mattered. There is a direct relationship between literacy and elec- toral participation, just as there is between poverty, isolation, and literacy-or rather illiteracy. Georges Dupeux has shown this relationship in Loir-et-Cher, and Serge Bonnet has found a similar correlation in Lorraine, where, in the early years of the Third Republic, the villages with the poorest voter turnout also showed poor attendance at school and church.76 

Ignorance made it easier for politicians and local leaders to manipulate and confuse their constituents: to argue that repeal of the Falloux Law on educa- tion was tantamount to the abolition of taxes; to put it about that Republican voters would be deported to Cayenne, as was done in Allier in 1873; to intimi- date villagers into abstention, so that in one Finistere village in 1889 only I I of 396 voters dared cast a ballot; or as in Isere in 1887, to put Republican ballots on a chair at the door of the polling place because "the major part of the popu- lation being illiterate, voters take what they find to hand." The secrecy of the ballot was not particularly well preserved until 1914, when voting booths and envelopes to put the ballots in were instituted. And even then, the suspicion of discovery made deviation difficult in small communities.77 

Still, each election, with the campaign preceding it and the talk this caused, introduced indifferent populations to new practices and issues. Political wastes 

well to note that this letter was presented by a well-known militant of Var, Dr. Felix Bremond; and while admitting the following he had among peasants, one may wonder how far such a document really reflected their thinking. (L'Esprit republicain: Colloque d'Or!eans 1970, Paris, 1972, p. 287.) 

• Hence perhaps the elections of April 23, 1848, held on Easter Sunday when whole villages were bound to assemble for high mass (Anarcharsis and Hippolyte Combes, us Paysans, p. 81). Similarly, after May 16, 1877, the date of the elections was set at the uttermost legal limit (Octo- ber 14), not only because this would give the government time to "prepare" public opinion, but also, as a provincial newspaper in Loire pointed out, because the grain and grape harvest would b~ over by then, and the rural voters free to go to the polls (Journal de Mombrison, July 22, 1877). 

~ 25%·29.9% 

.30%.34.9% 

I~ii~g~il 35% and over ......... 

Map 16. Electoral abstentions above national norm, r898. Norm: 23.9 percent. SOURCE: Alain Lancelot, L'Abstent;onn;sme electoral en France (Paris, 1968), p. 58. 

~ 25%·29.9% 

.30%.34.9% 

1::::::::1 35% and over . ...... . 

Map 17. Electoral abstentions above national norm, 1914. Norm: 22.7 percent. SOURCE: Same as Map 16, p. 59. 

~ 87-74 ~ ~ 73-60 11 59-46 

Map 18. Rank of departments by highest rate of electoral abstentions, 1876-1914. SOURCE: Same as Map 16, p. 72. 

T...--.;;;w' 

~ 1,000 or fewer 

~ ~ 1,001-3,500 

Map 19. Number of velocipedes (both 2- and 3-wheeled cycles), 1899. SOURCE: 1899 tax rolls, Annuaire statistique de la France (Paris, 1900). NOT E : By comparison, 16 of the departments north of the line had more than 5,000 vehicles, and in 6 of these the number sur- passed 10,000.THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

were being cleared and plowed: as the term has it, cultivated. In 1860 a Savoy peasant was quite certain that his local squire would win in the elections; for after all, "the mayor thinks so, the priest thinks so, everyone thinks so." Per· sonal relations and local orientation were still dominant. But the peasant added in passing, "I've heard say in the market," and what he heard there would in due course reveal unsuspected alternatives.'*' By 1869 the sub-prefect of Saint-Die was claiming that political issues had brought politicization and a new spirit of criticism to an area where political ignorance and indifference had once reigned. Political agents soon ranged the countryside. Their rival arguments and their political meetings (well attended as long as there were few other sources of entertainment) imparted a new terminology and new interests. Officials mocked the "banal, vulgar language" and the "democratic optimism" addressed to the gens du peuple. But it was not in sophisticated terms that one would wake them Up.78 

Pierre Barral has remarked that the Republic won peasant support in the 1870's on a purely political level, with no reference to socioeconomic measures or state aid, concerns that developed only in the (later) 1880'S. This makes good sense, especially in those parts where the relationship between politics and the market was late to be appreciated, so that political awareness developed first. The precipitation of political activity and the frequent change that marked the 1870's made political subjects more intriguing and more disquieting too. At fairs and markets now, in electoral periods, there was more talk of politics than of business. And politics, since 1877 at least, had made their official ap· pea ranee in the village, where, thenceforth, the mayor was no longer appointed from above but elected by the municipal councll, themselves elected by all males over twenty-one. For Daniel Halevy, this revolution des mairies, affect- ing the very fabric of society, was a far more important event than the Revolu- tions of 1830 and 1848, which affected only the state. For contemporary ob- servers, too, the result was not in doubt, especially when this measure was coupled with the decision that senators would be elected in an assembly where delegates of rural communes were overwhelmingly preponderant. "C'est intro- duire la politique au village," exulted Gambetta. And indeed, as Doctor Francus wrote in 1879: "Politics has been everywhere for the last few years."79 By the 1880'S the polarization of political issues was training "apprentice citizens" to new awareness and independence.8o 

Even in remote places modern competitive politics replaced the tensions and alignments of the traditional world. Few people were indifferent today, re- ported a police superintendent in Gers in 1888. "All pay attention to politics, 

• Courrier des Alpes, December 7, 1860, quoted in Jacques Lovie, La Sat/oil', p. 370. This is the significance of the electoral "consultations" that Daniel HaIevy has dismissed as irrelevant (De- cadence de la liberte, Paris, 193 I, p. 21). Perhaps-but each was one more experience, familiariz- ing people with things that had indeed been irrelevant to them for a long time. 

Peasants and Politics 275 

more or less, talk about current events, analyze, discuss them." The Puy-de- Dome reports reflect this aroused interest by the 1890's. Peasants realized that laws and national politics affected them; they talked about and called for laws on taxes, credit, protection, and health insurance, and the authorities noted the novelty. In remote Ariege the tone of the official reports changed as local politics gave way to the politics of national parties. The character of the issues dis- cussed had become "modern" and the department "civilized."81 

A work devoted to Aulus-les-Bains, close to the Spanish border, reflects in its second and third editions the change that took place there between 1873 and 1884. The second edition described the local people as caring only for local issues and utterly indifferent to national politics. The right to vote was seen as drudgery with no meaning or profit. Official lists of the votes cast were regularly filled in with imaginary figures that bothered nobody. This, said the writer, Adolphe d'Assier, was the routine practice in all the parishes of the upper valleys, and in a great many others besides. By 1884 d'Assier had to correct himself: voting was taken as seriously at Aulus as it was everywhere else. Left to themselves, the men of the older generation would be as skeptical and as indifferent as they had been in the past. But the young men and the village artisans were keen and full of zeal on election day. This made the elders think, and prompted them to vote as well.82 

By the turn of the century, the force of inertia that had made for indiffer- ence earlier now made for familiarity, however vague. Most Frenchmen had grown to manhood under the new system and were little inclined to question it in a fundamental way. They had learned to combine modern politics and local tradition, political campaigns and traditional farandoles.* They stepped into a world whose social mechanisms were alien to them, whose political and economic workings they understood only imperfectly or not at all. They were not clear on how economics, politics, law, and science worked, but they knew they were affected by them. Their ever-increasing, ever-more-significant num- bers created a public for the miracle-working panaceas of isms that traded on ignorance and anxiety-Boulangism, anti-Semitism, nationalism, Social- ism, too-before further integration and adjustment could take place. Even aggressions shifted from the village society where they had been worked out to a wider context. We know by now that political claims that seem to chal- 

• Thus, around 1880 in the Bonapartist Charentes the ogres invoked to scare children turned into Gambetta, pronounced Grand-Beit~, while Republicans spoke of their opponents as Bounat- trapistes-partisans of PoUyon Boune-Attrape, neveur a son onc'. (Raymond Doussinet, Le Paysan santongeais, p. 130, and us Travaux et les jeux, p. 421.) In the same period, the traditional Proven~al ritual known as "giving the feet" (douna di cambo), when an infant was allowed to take his first steps in church, preferably at the moment of the elevation of the host, was shifted to a Republican context. At Aries, around 1885, toddlers would take their first steps in the vestibule of the city hall, under the benign gaze of a bust of Marianne. Similar substitutes seem to appear about the same time in the surrounding countryside. (Fernand Benoit, La Provence, p. 139.) 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

lenge a society actually help integrate the claimants into the society they purport to fight.· The near-insurgency that stirred the Midi in 1907 showed an immense advance of political sophistication from the days of the Second of December, when the peasant prisoner could only mutter in his defense, "I'm from Poujols." 

The southern vintners did not rebel blindly, but in support of a well- understood interest. Their leader was a local man and not a burgher, but he was also a product of the country schools. The rebels conducted a remarkably efficient and sophisticated campaign, which included moving large numbers of demonstrators about by special trains that the railway companies put on at their behest, enlisting the cooperation of municipal authorities over a wide area, and organizing a tax strike directed against the national government.83 Particularism and historical references (these last facilitated more by history taught in school than by folk memory) were incidental to the modern project of bringing political and economic pressure to bear on the government of the day. It does not matter that the project failed. What matters is that those who undertook it saw a direct relationship between their problems and the total society, and sought to act in terms of this new perception. They made political choices, determined their particular ends and how to employ their resources, and mobilized to achieve their goals. They had passed from the realm of local consensus to that of national contention and debate. Their collectivity no longer ended at the borders of a small pays: it was recognized as part of the larger one. 

Political dispute, even rebellion, on the national level played its part in diminishing the significance of local solidarities, suggesting new rival ones, like the new-fangled idea of class. At mid-century, local solidarity had reigned supreme. By the end of the century it had lost its exclusive relevance. The autarkies characterizing most of the nineteenth century were breaking down. Great local questions no longer found their origin or solution in the village, but had to be resolved outside and far from it. The peasantry gradually awakened to urban (that is, general) ideas, abstract (that is, not local) con- cerns.840 

Consciousness of "social" or "economic" conflicts helped to advance na- tional unity, partly because it reflected the disintegration of traditional homo- geneity and consensus, and the permeation of ideologies imported from out- side; partly because it spurred the process of disintegration and looked for its resolution on a much broader stage. The doctrines of rebelliousness and of social war that play such a great role in modern politics could not have gained a hold where and while the social structure continued to be considered absolute 

• On this point, see Remy Leveau, "Le Syndicat de Chartres (1885-1914)," Mouvement social, 1969, p. 63. This peasant union set forth as its aim: "changer l'ame villageoise et debarasser les paysans traditionneis de tous les elements irrationnels de leur comportement pour mieux les adapter a leur travail et a leur role dans la societe fran~aise." 

Peasants and Politics 277 and immutable. In a society where no break exists between the group and the individual, the existing social order is the only conceivable order. The individual cannot oppose it; he can only transgress. Of course, there had been insurgency and there had been rebellion in the past: sporadic, spontaneous, and explosive, aiming to shake a fist at fate, not change it. This was no basis for politics, which calls for analysis and debate about choice. Only when and as this seemingly monolithic traditional society began to disintegrate could individuals begin to see themselves as separate or separable from the group. 

Public sensitivity grew as the standard of living climbed. In a world where riches and poverty had seemed prescribed by a predetermined and unalterable order, the chief question for most had been to survive, and economic injustice in the modern sense did not affect the collective consciousness. Once ele- mentary needs began to be satisfied, there was time to lay claim to more: bet- ter conditions of work, better conditions in general. Time, above all, to con- sider possibilities hitherto unsuspected, which towns, schooling, and, yes, political parties were beginning to suggest. Ideas that had invaded the towns long before now implanted new claims among the rural masses. And politics were there to spur them and to provide them an ideological garb. Doctrines found currency that taught that destiny is only a concept and society another, both of them open to question, challenge, and eventual change. And with this lesson learned, the questioning, challenging, and changing that seem so much a part of modern politics began their work in a countryside hitherto immune. 
