+++
title = "16 MIGRATION: AN INDUSTRY OF THE POOR"

+++

Partir c'est mourir un peU.-EDMOND HARAUCOUR T 

IT WAS AN obscure French writer of the late nineteenth century who said that to go away is to die a little. For many in France, staying put would have been more likely to threaten their lives: leaving home was the price paid for sur- vival. In those parts difficult of access, where roads were scarce and rail roads late in coming, the only easy export was men. The poor sought out the richer regions, the mountaineers went down into the plains.- Their earnings supple- mented scarce resources, their absence eased the pressure of a population too numerous for the land to feed. Where the pattern of temporary and seasonal migration in the 100 years or so from the late seventeenth century on has been studied, for instance, in Auvergne, we find an expectably close relationship between misery and the search for resources, between the high price of bread and the number of passports delivered in a given year. Similarly, in the Morvan it was the pressure of need, the endless search for a bit of cash to make ends meet, to pay an outstanding debt, to buy a tempting field, to re-roof a house or build one, that drove peasants out as carters, herdsmen, harvesters, thatchers, and domestics, going away from home because that was the only way to keep the home going.1 

In the high Alps winter blockaded families for six months a year. To the end of the nineteenth century, most men, women, children, and beasts had had to live that half year out crowded together in the stable: table, benches, coal stove, perhaps three or four beds with two or three persons sharing each; be- tween the beds goats and sheep; calves in the middle; and at the back the horses, cows, and oxen. Pigs were relegated to the corner closest to the door and farthest from the beds. As winter drew on, the air grew more noisome and garbage turned to manure underfoot. If the family also went in for trading, 

• But there were exceptions. Unlike the Alps, for example, the Jura had almost no history of temporary migration, because the Jurassiens had small family and artisanal industries-a more difficult solution, perhaps, than going away, but one that forestalled the need to leave home. 

Migration: An Industry of the Poor 

selling wine or some groceries, the clients coming in and staying to exchange a few words added to the overcrowding, and also used up the scarce air. In such conditions, one person less to breathe the air, take up bed space, or con- sume scarce food made a contribution to the family's wellbeing even if the migrant brought back no cash at al1.2 

In earlier centuries, population had been limited by plague and famine. To the extent that these were mastered, idle hands survived to find employment only at times when the demand for labor called on every member of the community-sowing, haying, harvest. To make a living, they had to go away, even more than in the past. They had done so from time immemorial. Gangs of harvesters had regularly left areas where crops ripened late to gather other people's, before returning home to work on their own fields. Vintners and vineyard workers had sought employment away from home in the middle of summer and sometimes in winter, to raise some cash with which to pay their taxes and their debts. Cities like Aries sent out annual couriers to recruit the labor for the coming crop. The numbers involved were large. The Agricultural Survey of 1852 found nearly 900,000 seasonal workers mobilized for harvest- ing alone.s 

Such migrations often followed traditional routes based on mutual need. The southern Limousin long saw a "natural" migration from Correze to the moors of Millevaches, from the Segala of Rouergue to the Margeride, and from the Causse valleys to the Causse plateaus, as men in need of work trekked to areas that lacked the hands to harvest the rye crop with a sickle. These move- ments died out in the last third of the nineteenth century as the poverty (of men and of labor) that had triggered them was reduced. Similar migrations continued further to the north in the Upper Limousin, which was still poorer, to the eve of the First World War. On the other hand, haymaking gangs went on serving Upper Cantal and the Mezenc area, because farms there were prosperous and able to pay higher salaries.4 

Other periodic migrations put to use locally developed specialties or skills. In Franche-Comte, where sawyers and woodcutters came from Cantal and Puy-de-D8me, the long saw was "the banner of Auvergne."5 The poor Cantal (which supplied important numbers of workers for the hardest and worst- paid urban jobs) had a century-long tradition of sending the men of many villages into Castile as bakers, clothiers, and iron smiths."" And all over France, 

• One effect of these border crossings was to establish remarkably close relations between south- ern Auvergne and Spain. Educational surveys show that the people of Can tal overwhelmingly favored having Spanish taught as the required foreign language in the schools, and many Spanish children were sent to the Cantal schools to learn French. By the middle of the nineteenth century there was not one commune in the arrondissement of Aurillac that did not have a family in Spain. Indeed, in 1845 the AuriIlac municipal council went so far as to set up a chair of Spanish. Simi- larly, reports from Mauriac show that hundreds of residents spent a great part of the year in Spain or had to travel there on business several times a year. (See Archives Departementales, Cantal, IT 442 [1893; educational surveys], 99 MI [Aurillac, Mauriac, Murat, St.-Flour, passim, 1808- 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

the little gangs of chimney sweeps and beggar-children were known to be coming from Savoy. In 1628, when Cardinal Richelieu built the great dike blockading La Rochelle, he called on good Catholics to help him. Among those who responded were men of the Marche-now roughly the department of Creuse. They found that they made some money at it, starting a tradition of periodic migration by men of the region to sell their skill in towns as construction workers.6 

Peddling and trading had long been important occupations in some poor areas, but these activities sprouted in many parts with the new availability of certain goods and of roads between manufacturing towns and isolated hamlets. Some peddlers, like those who came out of the bocage of Nor- mandy-the end of the world as many called this roughest, poorest, rainiest area in southern Manche and western Calvados-sold goods produced by their own rural industries: iron war king, cooperage, fabrics, paper. Others jobbed horses, especially at Breton fairs, specializing in buying and selling sick, worn, sorry nags good only for the glue factory. But most of the men who hit the roads were simply hawkers, selling trinkets and tawdry, spectacles, pins and needles, thread, vanilla, devotional objects, scythes and grindstones; whatever the market and their backs would bear.* 

All migrants timed their departures with the seasons. Most left during the winter when work was slow at home. Some went out in the spring and summer because the going was better on difficult country roads or because, as in the case of construction workers, the job prospects were brighter. But migration was not haphazard. The process was dominated less by private enterprise than by the family's common interest in finding additional resources. In the Alps girls migrated from those areas where some winter labor was possible for men, and men from those areas where long, rigorous winters prevented any work except the indoor jobs that could be done by women.7 

Local economic changes forced certain populations with no habit of migra- tion to begin the practice. When, in the 1840'S, the local industries of Ariege (mines, ironworks, charcoal burning) suffered in the general economic crisis, the peasants had no option but to fan out. Most of them begged; some worked, 

46; "Notice sur les emigrations ... du departement du Cantal," n.d., 18I2?]; and Mazieres, I: 127. See also AD, Cantal IT 754 [156] of Aug. 1870, and IT 772; and M. Trillat, "L'Emigration de la Haute-Auvergne en Espagne, du XVIlIe au XXe siecle," Revue de la Haute-Auvergne, 1955, pp. 257-94.) 

• Placide Rambaud, Economie et sociologie de la montagne, p. 196, gives the contents of a peddler's pack in 1841: 507 dozen spools of thread; 24 lengths of cotton; 3 dozen combs; 3,000 needles; 9,800 pins; 4 dozen pencils; 27 gross (3,888) buttons; 18 snuffboxes; 3 dozen thimbles; 3 boxes "Limoges"; 4 dozen pens; 200 quills; 2 dozen scissors; Yz dozen each cakes of soap, knives, notebooks, suspenders, and hooks and eyes. There could have been little profit after paying for the stock, invoiced at 294.42 francs. But there was the pride of handling cash and being left with some, the benefit of conserving home resources, and the new ideas, objects, techniques, and above all tales brought back from faraway places. For details on peddling in general, see Marcd Gautier, Chemins et tlehicules, pp. 47-50; R. Musset, "Les Genres de vie anciens," pp. 5-7; and the articles of Abel Chatelain. 

Migration: An Industry of the Poor 

some traded. In any case, the seasonal exodus became part of the annual rhythm. Later, in the 1860'S, when new roads permitted the use of carts, wagons, and eventually coaches, opening the mountains to travelers, the people of the lower valleys took to hawking, both to their neighbors and farther afield. The in- teresting thing is that as the area emptied and such enterprises (as well as permanent emigration) drew off the surplus population, temporary migra- tion fell off, to disappear entirely in most places between the 1880'S and 1914. Too many hands had driven potentiallabor away. Too few hands had raised agricultural wages for those who remained. The process of demographic de- compression helped those who stayed behind; but so did modernization. The roads that made the hawker's enterprise possible also removed the need for it. On the Oisans plateau, in Dauphine, where poverty and isolation drove one family head in three to go peddling around 188o, roads and prosperity had by 19II cut the figure down to one in 18. By 1921 only one in 37 still hoisted the seasonal pack.8 

It is important to note that traditional seasonal migration made little contri- bution to cultural change. Moving, as a rule, along traditional "routes, often involving gangs or groups from the same village, these migrations did not break up the solidarity of the village but on the contrary reinforced it, staving off a deterioration that might otherwise have come sooner. Such passages from stability to movement then back to a new stability suggest that the crux of traditional society is not immobility but mobility of an impenetrable sort. However far the masons of Creuse, the harvesters of Tarn, the lumbermen of the Livradois, or the peddlers of Savoy and the Pyrenees traveled, mentally they scarcely left home. 

Much rural migration was to rural regions: a circuit of backward men and women visiting backward regions in which each side preserved its integrity. The more so since most migrant labor gangs camped together, with women sometimes brought along to do the cooking, and with a minimal desire or need to share the ways or learn the speech of a different pays.9 The cultural wall would be breached to some extent where seasonal migrants were exposed to a higher degree of "civilization": not just to the societies of regions similar to theirs, but to the temptations of an urban world, alien and superior. Yet, even then, migrating gangs kept up a reasonably efficient insulation. Part- time farmers with wife, mother, and family at home, their ambitions differed from those of city workers: their chief aim was to preserve or increase the family holding and to be treated with the respect and deference to which their role as the family breadwinner entitled them.10 Cultural integration on such divergent terms was hardly possible. 

All sources show the masons, stonecutters, and tilesetters from Marche or Creuse keeping to themselves in Paris, lodged in dormitories or living in bare, furnished rooms rented by one of them or provided by the contractor. The contractor or a wife of a member of the gang looked after food and laundry. 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

The very numbers involved encouraged the maintenance of traditional sOli- darities. In many communes almost all able-bodied males went off for the working season, and carried most of the group's normal constraints with them.ll Reading the memoirs of Martin Nadaud, one wonders what impact Paris could have on such men. They marched down in their seasonal thousands, camped in quarters of their own, passed from there to the work site and back twice a day in their great bands, talking in their own speech, strangers in a strange land. 

A mid-century book describing Paris workers marvels how migrant masons (about half of the capital's building workers) remained completely unaffected by the environment. Indifferent to what went on around them, they persisted in taking nothing, learning nothing that Paris offered them: "impossible to break down [their] apathy."12 Alain Corbin has found things little changed 20 years later, at the fall of the Empire. In his view, the Limousin migrants' poor integration into the urban milieu accounted for their failure to share in the popular hostility to the regime rising among urban groups in 1868 and 1869. As late as the eve of the First World War, this same particularism was still exhibited by such migrant workers as the glaziers from the Val Soana in Savoy, who lived all together in "tight and homogeneous" communities, speaking a special j argon that not even Savoyards could understand. Such "tight homogeneous" communities resulted in Parisian ghettos of immigrants from certain regions: Auvergnats clustered around the Rue de la Roquette in the eleventh arrondissement, Bretons around the west-country railway terminal at Montparnasse in the fourteenth and fifteenth arrondissements, Alsatians around La Villette to the northeast, in the nineteenth arrondissement. Even in isolated outposts like Jean Ajalbert's father's farm in Levallois-Perret at the gates of Paris, one heard mostly the patois of Cant ai, "for my parents had come straight from the mountains with cowhands and servants from the same villages. "13 

Though people such as these came to the city for months or even years, their eyes remained fixed on home society. Their work did not insert them into the urban realm that permitted them to realize their aims, but screwed them more firmly into the limited world of the parish, family, and culture of their birth.a We shall shortly see that their imperviousness was relative, and that even though their eyes were focused on home, such migrants could not help acting as carriers of modernization. Temporary migrations do, as we have said, maintain traditional societies by furnishing resources that enable them to resist the crises of rural life; they also pave the way for a later exodus and later changes. The road was not just a facility for going and returning; it was also an opportunity to compare conditions and modes of life. It affected the peasants who set out on it, getting them used to strange places, showing them the way, permitting alien notions and a sense of different prospects to germi- nate in them or in those listening to the tales they told. 

Migration: An Industry of the Poor 

This kind of effect can most easily be noted in looking at a type of migrant who lacked the support of a surrounding group: the wet nurses of Y onne and Nievre. Wet nurses had been going from the Morvan to Paris at least since the late eighteenth century: milch cows as they were called in Nivernais. One of them nursed Napoleon's heir, the roi de Rome; others, the sons and grand- sons of Louis Philippe. But comparatively few undertook the difficult trip until the railway, which at the same time ruined the region's traditional log- floating industry, brought easy access to Paris. As lumbering, which had been the Morvan's chief source of revenue, declined in the 1840's and men began to seek work on Paris wharves or building projects every spring, nursing be- came a large-scale local industry. What had been the exceptional indulgence of rich or ailing city folk began to be commonplace in bourgeois families, and to be used sometimes even by working-class couples when the woman had to provide a second income; and the demand was rising. On the eve of 1848 the third verse of Pierre Dupont's popular "Chant des ouvriers" was devoted to the women who hired out their breasts to strangers' offspring. By 1853 the sub-prefect of Avallon reported that the revenues from wet-nursing were spreading a certain comfort in areas where poverty had always been the norm; after three nourritures a woman had the wherewithal to build a house. In cer- tain districts two of every three nursing mothers left for Paris; most of the others took city babies into theirhomes.15 

Many Morvandaises became wet nurses simply to conform, or under the pressure of husbands or family. One young woman actually committed sui- cide when her milk dried up and she was unable to contribute her share to the family's revenue. By the middle 1860'S a doctor denounced this most important of Morvan industries for the deadliness of its effects on babies. Some saw other no less troubling effects. The women, complained a government official, re- turned from Paris with disturbing ideas of unwonted luxury. They had got used to comfort: no more buckwheat porridge, no more boiled potatoes, no more thatched roofs.16 New buildings blossomed in remote areas, with win- dows, several rooms, and the furniture to fill them-maisons de lait. Fresher bread was eaten; pork became a daily staple; "meat," i.e., beef, once quite un- known, entered the diet, and so did little drinks of great sophistication, such as one had tasted in the wine shops of Paris.l1 In Brittany, too, in the 1890's we hear that half the women in some parishes left for one, two, or three years, returned with new tastes, denounced their traditional condition as bondage and were bent only on bearing a child so they could leave again. Worse still, their stories sparked such dissatisfaction among the local young that they too thought only of getting away."" 

• Abbe Elie Gautier. L'Emigration bretonne, p. 58; Georges Rocai, Croquants du Pbigord, pp. 208, 303. Perigourdine wet nurses could make good money in town: 20 francs a month in 1884.25 in 1888, plus a weaning gift. Indeed. we are told that around 1900 a father rejoiced if his unwed daughter bore a child: "Me val autan que ma vaco!"THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

If dissatisfaction rose rather than abated, it was because exposure to a dif- ferent life created expectations that could not be fulfilled outside the towns; but also because there was now an avenue of escape that had not existed before. The nursing industry would never have developed without the railways. And railways stood at the core of the increase in migration, just as they did in so much else. 

When the fourteen-year-old Martin Nadaud, wearing his homespun suit, went off to Paris in March 1830, the wailing of his womenfolk could not have been more piteous if they had buried him. This was not surprising. Three other youths who left the village at the same time as he were soon to die. The some- thing over 200 miles from Creuse to Paris took four days, three of them on foot, the fourth in a bad, expensive coach from Orleans. Nadaud speaks of a golden age beginning in 1856, when a railway station at La Souterraine allowed his countrymen to make the trip in comfort. In the new conditions, more men could go to work and more survive. The enterprise seemed less fearful.18 The distant trip that had put off so many became a temptation difficult to resist. The postal service made communications easier. The letters the postmen car- ried suggested the possibility of leaving to those who had not yet taken the plunge. The railroad line, complained a politician, became a magnet attracting the filings of humanity.19 

New rail facilities greatly increased the seasonal migrations from certain poor areas like the Oisans and COtes-du-Nord, which seem to have reached their peak in the 1880'S and 189o'S.20 With the coming of a rail line to Rodez in 1860, increasing numbers of migrants streamed out of the once-isolated parts of Rouergue that had seen their first migrants depart only in the 1840's. War and the Commune stemmed the flow, but only temporarily. Thus in the 20 years after 1890 about two-thirds of the young men of Saint-Chely (Aveyron) were consistently to be found in Paris; and in 1908 half of the conscripts of the district of Espalion reported to the draft board in Paris. Railways eased and encouraged the great migrations of the 1880'S out of the southwest and west hard-hit by the Phylloxera, then in due course the immigration into these same regions (Poitou, Saintonge, later the middle Garonne valley) of westerners from poor, overpopulated Brittany and Vendee, who turned the abandoned vineyards into farm and pasture.21 

Rails also began to change the nature of migration in a deeper way. They struck hard at such subsidiary occupations as peddling, but even more so at the local manufacturing of the things peddlers peddled. Once nails no longer came specifically from Forez or from the Pyrenees, once spectacles could be obtained easily outside the Jura, a trader's local base became irrelevant. The sabotiers in Brittany and elsewhere no longer needed to migrate from one copse to another for raw material that the railroads now brought to them, or to wander about selling products that distributors now collected from them. The spread of shops in market towns and bourgs meant less trade for hawkers, 

Migration: An Industry of the Poor 

who gradually gave up their accustomed ways and settled down, either re- turning to the land as full-time farmers or setting up a new home with a store and perhaps a carriage to make country rounds within a small area. Mean- while, many of the men who had once migrated seasonally began to settle in the cities where they worked, especially in the building trades. The introduc- tion of new equipment under the Second Empire-lights that permitted work- ing after dark, steam engines that pumped out flooded ground more quickly, waterproof canvas that sheltered workers and scaffolding-made building feasible through most of the winter, shortened the period of unemployment when weather had sent men home from work, and broke the rhythm of sea- sonal migrations. Workers now stayed longer on the job and might not return home for years at a time.22 

By 1885 women were accompanying their husbands to the city. By the turn of the century half the married couples in the godforsaken northeastern parts of Aveyron were leaving for Paris; by 1911 four of every five newly married couples were fleeing Saint-Chely. As a case in point, Emile Guillaumin traces the fate of five peasants found hoeing a field of beets on a hot summer day of 1902, not far from Moulins. By 1910 one had become a janitor, one worked for a concession company at Vichy, another had a job in a furniture factory, and a fourth had become a footman; only the fifth was left to work the land. At Saint-Alban, in Loire, an old woman later remembered that "around 1900 all the young people went off, they went off to town." Migration had gradually been turning into emigration. Where once migration had been undertaken to perpetuate the peasant community, it was now becoming an end in itself: an opportunity to break with the community, its ways, its heavy pressures, to free oneself from the charges and restrictions of the family, and also from the slavery of agriculturallabor.23 

Migration, seasonal or otherwise, had always incorporated an element of adventure. To leave home was an anxious act, but also an eventful enterprise and a release. A search for work, for supplementary income, for profitable activity when home offered none, provided socially acceptable explanations for motives more difficult to express. Of course, there was higher pay to be earned in town. One could make money fast, so it was said. But there was also escape from the conditions of life in the country. Life in the towns was easier and more pleasant; work was not so hard and working hours lighter; medical aid, charity, organized help in need were easier to obtain. Above all, towns were fun. In the village "amusements were few and church services nu- merous"; in town there were "coarse, dissolute delights," and furthermore "in the crowd, no one knows you." One did not need to seek debauchery in order to appreciate a certain anonymity, an easier access to entertainment, the readier availability of company. For Breton peasants Paris was like the en- chanted fairy-tale city of Y s. "Since Y s sank down beneath the sea, there is no town to match Paris" went the common saying.24 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

With the continuous bustle of its thoroughfares, its streetlights, shops, cheap shows, and easy women, the town was an unending fair or feast. "Attracted by city splendors like the moth by light," wrote Jules Meline in an apt simile (for light was important, even crucial, in somber villages condemned to long dark nights), the peasants dream of "magnificent theaters, sparkling cafes, brilliant festivals, luxury, pleasures," and reject their drab cottages. Life was indeed drab in the cottages, as we have seen. For all the horrors of life in the industrial cities, the peasants voted for the city with their feet. It offered more (and more constant) diversions than home ever did, and better means to take advantage of them. A school inspector, attempting to refute accusations that education taught children to flee the country for the town (of course it did!), advanced his own list of determining factors: a person got regular pay, higher of course but above all without unemployment; dressed like ladies and gentlemen; could see far more people and more interesting things; exerted less effort or at least was better rewarded; and did not have to bear with the rain, wind, sun, and cold. And all this only a few hours away 1211 

We must not lose sight of the fact that urban unemployment, especially in the latter part of the century, seemed far less drastic than the seasonal unem~ ployment of country life. Moreover, the urban worker worked shorter hours and received regular pay regardless of the weather. Above all, if he could se~ cure the sort of permanent job that carried a pension at the end, the constant nightmare of insecurity would be laid to rest. 

It was very tempting. The young and the women felt the temptation most. Jules Valles mentioned that peasant lads objected less to military service than the city boys because the barracks were in the towns. And military service, as we shall shortly see, was a big recruiter for the urban life. As for the women, all witnesses emphasized their role in persuading men to abandon land and village, a life that so far as they were concerned added up to fear, insecurity boredom, and overwork. If the young men could not be persuaded, the girls went alone. In one Eure village in 1900,42 of 100 sons of agricultural workers stayed on the land, against only 15 of 100 girls.28 

Finally, to dwell in a town was to rise in the world. The peasant felt inferior because he was a peasant, bound to a condition he despised. In scorning his own station, he shared the scorn of the burghers, whom he both resented and envied for having made good their escape from the land. And as more and more people left, the self~steem of those who stayed behind dropped still further. Many would have agreed with the Socialist leader who told the Party Congress of 1909 that "those who stay on the farm are poor clods incapable of any intellectual experience, soaked in ignorance and alcohol, condemned to shuttle from church to tavern, and from tavern to church." Parents were proud to see their children "well-dressed, moving in town society, fashionable," and seized on opportunities that would permit promotion of this sort. In 1900 a student of the "rural exodus" placed "the parents' vanity" first among the 

Migration: An Industry of the Poor 

factors that encouraged this exodus. The others, in order, were the school cer- tificate, which facilitated escape; military service, which cut youths loose from their home surroundings and exposed them to the facilities of the urban life; the scorn of farming, as both an unprestigious and an unrewarding occupa- tion; the fear of boredom; the attraction of unknown pleasures; the hope of an easy life and of ready fortune; and, finally, the contagious example of others, the more powerful since transport permitted their return to show off their new clothes, wealth, and status, and leave the impression that city people seldom if ever did a stroke of work.27 

However false such images might have been, the envy felt by stay-at-homes and the "vanity" of parents who encouraged their children to leave the land were nevertheless objective estimates of the situation. And the very image that country people formed of the city now-a place of greater job and personal security, of comfort, leisure, and entertainment, of schooling and welfare- reflected a revised scale of values and a new sense of alternatives. 

Yet if the motives for emigration were increasingly admitted to be personal" its effects were and continued to be social. One of the first effects to be noted was the impact of migration on rates of pay. As workers gradually left regions where pay was low, depleting the labor supply, the competition for hands pushed wages up. Officials and employers showed great concern at the "ex- orbitant pretensions" of the stay-at-homes as once densely populated areas be- gan to thin out. The Agricultural Survey of 1866 produced a rich crop of grum- bles about hands who cost more to hire, did less work, and were more de- manding than in earlier times. But the most marked improvements took place in the 1890'S and after, when a shortage of labor and greater productivity, coupled with the spread of acquired tastes, made for better pay, quarters, food, and savings opportunities almost everywhere, especially in the regions that had been and still were the most backward. Farmhands who had been ac- customed to sleeping with the cattle began to get small rooms of their own. Sharecroppers who had lived in hovels got larger, lighter, "modern" dwell- ings.28 Domestics who had been forced to work in the fields on Sunday morn- ings and get their church finery wet with dew, stipulated as a term of hire that they would be free all day Sunday "to ramble, laugh, and drink" to their heart's content."" 

Emigration contributed to these advances in two ways: the first was the decompression that it brought to the labor market, the second, which may have counted more, was the ideas it put about. A landowner from Puy-de-Dome 

• Francis Le Bourhis, Etude sur la culture, p. 77. Still, one must be cautious about talk of im- proved conditions in official sources. In 1894, for example, the police superintendent of Brassac forwarded a report to the prefect of Puy-de-Dome describing the harvesters' diet: six meals a day, plus two liters of wine or piquefte, "which is not very good." A few days later the prefect put this information into a report of his own designed to show how well agricultural workers were doing, leaving out the last comment and not explaining that this was the special case of harvest fare. (Archives Departementales, Puy-<ie-D()me, M 04469, fall 1894.) 

288 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

complained in 1866 that workers insisted on shorter hours (they now began at 5 A.M. instead of 4 and took a whole hour for lunch instead of half), de- mands he felt sure were inspired by the subversive principles that emigrants had brought back. As soon as a construction worker returned home, he "spread demoralization through the countryside." The emigrants were used to higher pay and different conditions. "Their presence manifests itself by immediately disturbing the local workingmen." A witness from Creuse agreed: "The in- subordination of the workers grows on contact with the emigrants."29 It was not that there had been no reasons for dissatisfaction, but that there had been no reasons to hope for a change. The laborer who came home in effect taught his fellows that things were different elsewhere, and that changes were not completely impossible. Despite the emigrants' remarkable isolation from the urban environment that employed them, they nevertheless spread its germs among their fellows at home. An Auvergnat, writing on the eve of the Great War, noted how quickly migrants returned to local usages as soon as they were back home. Yet, though almost impervious to strange ideas, they brought different manners with them, "they became easier and more polite."30 They sent back letters, tracts, and newspapers; they suggested new practices and tastes; they sent home parcels containing all sorts of curious sweets, spices, and fabrics; they came home for holidays and they retired there, bringing with them the notions and the fashions of the town. They were first to use dishes at the table, to show off a bicycle, to paint their houses or install lighting.* First also in many places to speak French, as part of their "city dress." We hear of them returning to the village, showing off their fashionable garb and describing the marvels of the city "with French words that they do not know too well."31 

If they did not know them, at least their children would. Migration advanced literacy on two fronts: migrants found that reading, writing, and arithmetic were useful in their work and in keeping up links with the family by mail; and they wanted their children to learn what they themselves in many cases had only a shaky hold on. In 1881 it was noted that the Ambert district of Puy- de-Dome, though ill-equipped with schools, turned out a singularly small number of illiterate conscripts because-said the school inspector-men who migrated appreciated the use of writing for their correspondence, and wanted their children to read and write better than they. But this was a detail. Instruc- tion was a ticket of leave from the straitened village life and a pass to urban opportunities. As a school inspector from M urat (Cantal) explained : "Not only do the parents ... want schooling for their children, but the children themselves seem to appreciate the practical advantages that may follow from what they learn at school." The fat basin of Brive apart, literacy rates in Cor- 

• Yet did emigrants always bring new ideas, or only different ones? We are told that in Savoy men returned with books of magic like the Petit or Grand Albert, "which confused those with little learning" (Antoine BaIIeydier, Apropos d'un mal mysterieux a Morzine sous le Second Em- pire, Chambery, 1949, p. 9). 

Migration: An Industry of the Poor 

reze were consistently highest where migrants were thickest on the rolls. And though in Haute-Vienne as a whole only one child in three was enrolled in school in 1872, "almost all the boys" attended in the district of Bellac, where migration was a notable and continuing phenomenon.82 

We can observe the impact of these attitudes on farming communities, in which farmers as a group had always been less literate than other rural cate- gories (artisans, masons, tradesmen). In those regions of Haute-Vienne that had the highest rates of migration, there was the least difference in literacy between farmers and the other groups, because by the third quarter of the nine- teenth century, the farmers too had cottoned on to the advantages of schooling. In other words, migrants spread literacy in concentric circles, first in their own families, then among their neighbors.33 

Inevitably, literacy would in due course mean greater political awareness. I doubt that the migrant workers of the Limousin, Marche, and Savoy were very soon "proletarianized," as Abel Chatelain and other students of the sub- ject have suggested. My argument is that the overwhelming majority of those who migrated remained peasants with peasants' values for most of the cen- tury, and that until the great explosion of change after 1880 what they intro- duced from town was little and easily assimilated. Nevertheless, as the authori- ties complained, they were carriers of urban ideas and urban notions of eman- cipation.34 

Certainly the migrants were more politicized. When, in the electioils of 1857, a Norman was put up as the government candidate at Gueret, Norman workers in Paris taunted their mates from Creuse because they could not find a candidate of their own. What Norman peasant still in Normandy would have even known about it? In 1870 remote villages in Cantal heard about Henri Rochefort, "defender of the people": "It is the emigrants coming home who report what they have heard said in the cities where they work." In Puy- de-Dome in 1871 the new "Lyonnais" came back to teach their fellow villagers the politics that they had picked up in that rebellious town. Villages like Sornac (Creuse) and Saint-Setiers (Correze) sent hansom cabdrivers to Paris, who returned "dressed like gents," dazzling their compatriots with their gift of gab, and preaching radical and socialist doctrines. In 1908 the Diocesan Congress of Aurillac charged that migrants who had lost their religious prin- ciples (and accounted for "almost all the civil burials in our parishes") were contaminating their fellows.s5 

The kind of employment matters here. Chimney sweeps had few oppor- tunities to establish the sort of relationships that would alter their mentality. The porters and stevedores who worked in the markets, dockyards, or railway stations of Paris, the laborers who went to work in the southern vineyards, above all the petty civil servants, who however low their station were endowed with much prestige, were likely to return home with the radical and anti- clerical ideas they had picked up in town, and to infect their village. We hear 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

of libraries being set up in isolated villages of the Limousin or Savoy out of the books the emigrants sent back, playing their part in the advance of radical- ism. The political complexion of a village could be changed by the votes and the influence of emigrants who returned to retire.s6 But there are more subtle subversions than those of politics. Changes in dress, manners, diet, the gradual rise in expectations (especially among women), the very breakdown of isola- tion, may well have counted more than radical politics. Nor, possibly, would politics have been much radicalized without them. 

The increasing ease and practice of migration (and emigration) meant that strangers entered once insulated communities in such numbers as to affect their cohesion and their way of life. In the formerly homogeneous department of Herault, for example, where in 1851 outsiders accounted for a mere half of I percent of the population, the percentage of foreigners rose to 2.46 by 1896, 3.5 by 1901, and 10.7 by 1921. In France as a whole, the percentage of the pop- ulation born in one department and living in another, 1I.3 in 1861 and 15 in 1881, climbed to 19.6 in 1901. By the end of the First World War one-quarter of the French people lived outside the department where they were born.s7 It would be interesting to focus more narrowly, and see how particular regions were affected by this. I have been forced to limit myself to a more general view. One thing is clear, however. The massive influx of "foreigners" into the cities shattered the hold of local speech and lore in the urban centers. Arnold Van Gennep has noted the disappearance of the local folklore of Passy, Montrouge, Montmartre, and other Parisian neighborhoods as alien "colonists" submerged the local populations.* Similar developments took place at Lille and in the industrial centers of the north. So, large-scale immigration into the cities and especially into Paris not only increased their sphere of influence throughout France; it also had a homogenizing effect on them. 

The countryside held out longer than the cities. The impact of alien in- fluences was less massive, the pace of change slower.t But there too "civiliza- tion," "luxury," and drink were making inroads-the deeper where migra- tion and emigration contributed to the process, notably in the Massif Central, COtes-du-Nord, Ariege, and parts of the southeast.ss Familiarity with the urban economy eased the move away from local traditions of self-sufficiency and 

41 Mal1ue/ de folklore franrais, I: 55. In 1864 school officials noted that La ViIIette was heavily populated by German workers from Alsace and other areas close to the Rhine who knew only a few words of French and whose children found it hard to get into school because they knew even fewer (Instruction primaire, 2: 220). One has to ask to what extent these workers and their children provided an inspiration and a recruiting ground for the Parisian anti-Semites of the 1880'S and 1890'S, for les bouchers de La Villette would be the storm troops of anti-Semitic violence into the twentieth century. t Even slower, perhaps, than I wish to suggest. Consider this comment of Henri Bachdin's in 1919: "n y ales gars qui reviennent du regiment avec des habitudes d'elegance et des besoins de comfort, mais cela leur passe vite. Il y ales fiIIes qui, pour huit jours, rapportent de Paris, ou dies sont femmes de chambre, du Iinge, des provisions et des nouvelles. Mais, des qu'elles sont parties, on range le linge dans l'armoire ... et I'on ne pense plus aux nouve\les." (Le Village, p. 4.) 

Migt:ation: An Industry of the Poor 

barter. Lessened concern with sheer subsistence as job opportunities increased helped in the "dissolution of social bonds," encouraging "insubordination" to all authority, including that of the family elders. An increasing unwillingness to bow to natural contingencies expressed itself, among other things, in the earlier practice of birth control. A growing belief in the possibility of social advancement spurred the development of personal ambition and a sort of in- dividual enterprise subversive of old family and communal bonds. Literacy, together with access to books, newspapers, and other sources of information, forged a new attitude to politics, and this in turn cast up new leaders, different from and competing with those molded by the local hierarchy. None of this was entirely new, not even in isolated areas at mid-century. But only improved communications turned a tiny trickle into a mainstream. As Agulhon has put it in another context, the fundamental point is not the appearance of new ideas, but the appearance of conditions that made such ideas relevant.39 
