+++
title = "17 MIGRATION OF ANOTHER SORT: MILITARY SERVICE"

+++

Honneur! Honneur aux conscrios! Honneur a notro patrio, Accourons a sa voix cherio Servir notro payo! 

Catineto ploures pos, Toun galant partira pos. 

---CONSCRIPT SONGS OF ARIEGE 

SYSTEMATIC CONSCRIPTION in France dates back to 1798. Its general lines for the first four score years were set under the Empire, when Napoleon in~ troduced the draft lottery (tirage au sort) and defined the basis of exemption from service. Every canton of France was responsible for a certain number of recruits. The lots were drawn annually, and the youths with numbers higher than the required contingent were exempt. So were married men, priests, and those who could afford to pay for a substitute to serve in their stead. Once the law was set in motion, there ensued a great many religious vocations, and the rate of marriages among eighteen-year-olds increased considerably. A new job opportunity also appeared: hiring oneself out as substitute for those who could afford to pay the fluctuating price that would save them from hard and dangerous service. 

In 1818 the recruiting policies of the nineteenth century were set by a new law, which bore the name of Louis XVIII's War Minister, Laurent Gouvion- Saint~Cyr.l In its essentials the new law did not differ from the earlier system, though it did free those who drew "a good number" or paid for a substitute of all liability from further calls to service, something that Napoleon had done when he ran short of men. The long term of duty (six years after 1818, eight years after 1824, seven years between 1855 and r868, five years until 1889) meant that comparatively few men were inducted yearly: IQ percent or less of the age group subject to the draft. Of these, until the late r850's, at least a quarter or more were substitutes-poor lads seeking a way to raise some money, or veterans who meant to re~nlist in any case and who, this way, made a profit on their decision.· 

• In 1868 the draft (in imitation ot some aspects of the Prussian system) was divided into two "lanes," one involving five years' active service followed by four in the reserve, the other involv- ing service in the Garde Nationale Mobile, which made its brief historical bow in 1870-71. From 1872 to 1889 the military contingent was still divided in two: those who drew "un bon numcro" served for one year (in practice, six months); the rest served five years. 

Military Service 293 

The finding of substitutes was a haphazard process until around 1820, when the agents of newly founded insurance companies made their appearance in the countryside. Then, in the 1830's, Louis Philippe's government encouraged the organization of "rrmtual" and "family" associations that would offer more solid guarantees against induction than the dubious promises of ad hoc mer- chants of men, whose enterprise was often rather fly-by-night. For something between 1,500 and 1,800 francs a "casualty" or "victim" of the draft (as com- pany language had it) could buy his way out of service, and about 20,000 men a year seem to have done so, thereby setting a great deal of money into circu- lation.* 

The investment made sense. Through most of the nineteenth century still, the peasant's basic capital and the major factor in his productivity was his working capacity and the number of hands at his disposal. A loss of hands could have serious repercussions on the fortunes of a family or parish, as can be seen at Plozevet (Finistere), where in 1860 the village mayor begged re- mission for a peasant's son, "for if he has to return to service ... his father will be forced to abandon his farm"; and where statistics of 1873 translate the loss of manpower during the war of 1870-71 into a shrinkage of the lands under cultivation. "The peasants accept the heaviest sacrifices to keep their sons," wrote the imperial prosecutor from Angers in 1866, "not out of affection for them, but because labor is scarce and expensive." It was to the farmer's benefit to buy off his son, but he grumbled and thought of the time when it had cost him only 1,000 francs, half as much as he had to pay now. In Vendee even hired hands preferred to go into debt rather than leave for seven years' military service, though it meant that their entire salary was given over to paying off the money raised to hire a substitute.2 

Substitution was abolished on January I, 1873, in the first military reform of the Third Republic, which also confirmed the five-year term of service. At the same time the government introduced a wealth of dispensations, mostly for the educated classes, ranging from outright exemptions to a "voluntary" tour of duty for one year on payment of a fee of 1,500 francs. By then, sections of public opinion favored universal service, partly because military.discipline could be expected to reestablish respect for authority, partly because they saw in military service a means of making instruction general. Suggestive motives; 

• According to Louis Peygnaud, the total yearly expense of securing substitutes came to over 70 million gold francs (Le Ba! des consents, p. 149). The commutation rate varied widely from region to region. During the 1860'S over 40 percent of the draftees in Eure, Lot-et-Garonne, and Herault took this way out, against 8 percent in Alsace and Brittany and a mere 2 percent in Corsica (N. Sales, "Rempla~ants, remplaces, marchands d'hommes et assurances pour le service rnilitaire," unpublished manuscript, 2 vols., Paris, 1964, 1: 72-74; Sales, Comparative Studies, 1968, p. 263). But everywhere saving the young from the rigors of service was recognized as a meritorious act. Thus, a collection of edifying stories for the young, published during the July Monarchy, includes one in which a whole class contributes the money to buy a substitute for the man-servant employed at the school (cited by Marie-Therese Latzarus, La Litterature en/antine en France dans la seconde moitie du XIXe s;ecie, Paris, 1924. p. 70).294 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE but they had to wait. Shorter and more general service, initially advocated by the Minister of War, General Boulanger, and by the radicals, was in the end voted as an anti-Boulangist measure, passed in the hope that it might cut some ground from under the dangerous General's feet. In 1889, at last, the term of service was reduced to three years, the I,soo-franc dispensation was abolished, and all who had been exempt before (notably, students, teachers, priests, semi- narians, and the oldest sons of widows or of large families) were required to serve one year under the colors. The measure was popular. 3 This was the crucial point at which all Frenchmen who were physically fit began to see service under the national colors. In 19°5 the term of service was made two years for all; in 1913 it went back to three again. But the institutionalized migration and kneading together embodied in universal military service had gone to work in the 1890's. 

It is important to note that in its limited form conscription had little effect on the country mind.· Yet it had sufficient impact to color the peasants' re- actions to national policy and international politics. The Crimean War in 1854, for instance, remained popular as long as it involved "no actual and di- rect sacrifice." The Italian War of 18S9 was greeted with a plain lack of en- thusiasm and an awareness that it might raise the cost of substitutes. The middle 1860's brought a "lively demand for peace and economy," especially since a cut in the village levies would lower the price of a discharge; whereas in 1867 news of a reduction in the official cost of a discharge (whose high price had been taken as a sign of preparation for war) brought calm to a country- side anxious about its pockets and its sons. A new army law began to be dis- cussed in 1867. In the southwest, where "military spirit is so little developed," people did not like the uncertainty that would be introduced by the proposed changes (notably, a reserve period subject to recall). The standard term of service might be shorter, but people would not know when they might be called to serve for a longer time and, anyway, reported the imperial prosecutor in Rennes, "there won't be any more good numbers"-things would be the same for everyone.1! 

Nor did the upper classes like the idea "of seeing their sons called to serve side by side with peasants' sons." In the event, the two groups did not have to mingle. But we hear, and it is illuminating, that "of the different measures brought before the legislature, the military reform is the only one to have gone to the heart of the country; the masses pay little attention to the question of public liberties."6 Perhaps rightly so; public liberties were scarcely likely to affect them. Nor as a matter of fact was conscription. At least, in their way of life. In any given year in the period between the wars of the late First Empire and 1870, one, two, three, or none of a commune's young would actually be conscripted. We shall soon see that few of those who went returned after their long term of service. And this was just as well, since conscription was seen 

Military Service 295 not as a duty owed to some larger community or nation, but as a heavy tribute exacted by an oppressive and alien state.· 

The most visible reactions to conscription lie in the continuing tale of draft evasion or desertion wherever and however it could be contrived. The record that Richard Cobb paints for the 1790's and that Ladurie's study confirms as true a generation later persisted under the Second Empire and the early Third Republic. The elementary schools of the 1830's, whose pupils still drilled to the drum as they had done a quarter century before, were suspect as recruiting grounds and avoided for that reason. Everywhere one turns, the evidence of a lack of appetite for soldiering is abundant. "Little inclination for military ser- vice" (Herault, 1825). "Pronounced antipathy for military service" (Cantal, 1832). "Very reluctant to join the army; all farmers with any means buy a man to replace their sons" (Loiret, 1839). Basques tend to desert to Spain to escape military service, which they dislike, just as they deserted the imperial armies (Pyrenees, 1840). Great tendency to avoid service by self-mutilation, de- camping, or attempted bribes (Ariege, 1856 and 1857). Little taste for military service and continued practice of self-mutilation to avoid it (Loir-et-Cher, 1859); same note a year later, insisting on the numerous self-mutilations at conscription time. Only those who are forced to will be soldiers-a trade held in very low regard (Eure-et-Loir, 1860). Military service is looked on as a tax exacted by the state, a sort of theft; it follows that the army would meet a poor reception, because it reminds them of conscription (Ille-et-Vilaine, 1860). Profound horror for military service (Seine-Inferieure, 1860). In Vendee "they were hard to budge before 1850, they hid or ran away. After 1850 they redeemed themselves."7 

Stendhal had noted the anxiety and horrendous tales surrounding military service. Rumors said that no conscript survived more than four years. The regimental barracks took on the aspects of a Bluebeard's castle. Nearly two score years later, in 1869, Bruno's Francinet (one and a half million copies of which would be sold) held the avoidance of military service to be a natural desire, escape from service the reward of virtue. 

Auvergne and the Pyrenees specialized in desertion. In 1844 an officer was shocked to hear "one of the richest and more civilized farmers" of Gevaudan boast that in 1813 he had deserted together with five other men: "What did the wrangles of the Emperor and the other rulers mean to usl" Such wild people, commented the officer, were so devoid of all honorable feeling that they "would not distinguish between compatriots and foreigners, and treated all of them as enemies." The judicial archives of the Pyrenees are full of proceed- 

• In Emile Guillaumin's description of nineteenth-century Bourbonnais, the mother wails that she would rather see her sons dead than have them go off to be soldiers. "Anyway," comments the author, "in our countryside one did not have the least idea of the outside world; beyond the limits of the canton ... there lay mysterious lands ... fulI of dangers and peopled by barbarians" (lA Vie d'tm simpl(', p. 57). 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

ings and lawsuits against deserters, draft evaders, insubordinate recruits, crooks selling fake draft insurance, men known to have maimed themselves to avoid service, and frauds who tried to slip through by offering substitutes already found unfit for military service. In Savoy migration was a favorite way of seek- ing to escape the army. At the end of 1872, after the new five-year service law had passed, a third of the 50 young men who applied for passports belonged to the age group being called up. Among the youths of fifteen to twenty years, 95 future recruits had left officially, and many others had slipped away without any papers. In 1875 the village of Mery could present only one conscript out of the 18 on its list.8 

In other words, the war of 1870 had changed very little. Traditionally, in one small Bourbonnais village near Lavoine, in Allier, "almost all boys at birth were declared as girls," and this subtle avoidance of conscription was still practiced in the 1870'S.9 Five years of service removed indispensable labor from farm and fields, raised local wages, delayed marriages, prevented the young from settling down. Military reports continued to reflect the country- side's antipathy. Detestation (Basque country, 1873) or at best indifference (Landes, 1874, Ille-et-Vilaine, 1876). No sense of the general weal (Haute- Garonne and Gers, 1876). Underdeveloped military spirit and frequent emi- gration to escape service (Haute-Garonne, 1877). Anxiety and effort to avoid military service (Sarthe, 1878). Official relief to see recruits go off without problems in a department where "recruiting has always been a little difficult" (Pyrenees-Orientales, 1879). There was no end to all the practices that had been used to escape conscription, Francis Perot noted in his study of the folk- lore of Bourbonnais. For one, there was the renting of wedding rings of widows of irreproachable virtue, which were reputedly potent in securing a good draft number and which fetched rates that suggested both rarity and demand. In Brittany, too, conscription continued to be surrounded by rituals and sorcery designed to elicit a good number and to ensure escape from dreaded service.10 Popular lore absorbed conscription and incorporated it in its ways to such an extent that the cockades traditionally worn by conscripts, originally adopted to sport more visibly the number they had drawn, remained part of their paraphernalia even after the lottery had been abolished in 1889. Witches, saints, even miracle-working fountains were enlisted to protect the recruit. Masses were said; bones, rings, coins were sewn in his hat or uniform."" As late as 1913, when the two years of service were raised to three, the authorities feared that the response would be mass desertion. Nothing of the sort happened, but the anxiety and subsequent relief testified more to reflexes that several genera- 

• Francis Perot, Folklore Bourbonnais, p. 10; Jean Vartier, Sabbat, juges et soreiers, pp. 209-10. But note the shame of being rejected as physically unfit in a society where health and strength were essential. In Brittany the consequences were insults and difficulty in finding a wife. In Bourbonnais girls would not dance with a re£orme or accept his attentions. (Paul Sebillot, Cou- tumes populaires, pp. 82-83; Joseph Voisin, "Entre Loire et Allier," p. 24.) 

Military Service 297 tions had conditioned than to the anti-military propaganda of the twentieth century.ll Ami-militarism is generally regarded as a creation of red propaganda after the turn of the century. It makes more sense to see that propaganda as a play on prejudices still very much alive in many minds. 

Until 1889 the army was one of the countryman's bogeys, and soldiers were feared and suspected even in their own communities. Men who returned home had picked up alien ways and probably bad habits. "He went to the army a horse and came back a mule," they said. The nicknames by which the village knew its veterans revealed their oddity and identified them as different in kind: Carabineer, Swashbuckler, Swordsman, Military, Dragon, Moustache. To go asoldiering was humiliating, remembered an old man in Perigord. "Only the poor, the landless, and the roofless would do it."12 And since so few went from any parish, their effects on the overpopulated communities of the nine- teenth century were slight. The handful who chose to return were forced by community pressure to conform. Many had scarcely learned to speak the na- tionallanguage. Writers right through the 1870's remarked on the presence in Brittany of old soldiers-veterans of the revolutionary and imperial armies- who had never learned to speak French, or who unlearned it "out of respect for the prejudices that prevent its use."* 

There was, in short, little sense of national identity to mitigate the hostility and fear most country people felt for troops. The record suggests that soldiers ( except in garrison towns, where the middle classes appreciated their presence highly as a source of revenues) were treated like an army of occupation, with little or no sense that they represented any kind of common weal. "The troops have to be careful to avoid quarrels and trouble," warns an early report from Herault: "Even in cities [my italics] garrisons are sometimes exposed to the provocations of inhabitants of all classes who show a decided malevolence for the military. Soldier and officer are more ill-regarded ... than in enemy coun- try." Throughout the Landes, we hear in 1843, the natives viewed soldiers as "strangers whom they are forced to receive in their midst." Difficult relations (Rhone, 1859). We might meet some resistance (Allier, 1860). We expect help only if they gain from it (C8tes-du-Nord, 1860). Strong disillusion (Deux- 

• A. M. Duchatellier, De la condition du fermier, pp. 6, 221; Archives de la Guerre, MR 1236 (1826); Louis Oges and F. M. Deguignet, "Contes et legendes," p. 114. Stendhal, writing about the men around Vannes and Auray in 1838, remarked: "A peine les soldats qui ont servi 5 ans sont-ils de retour au pays, qu'ils oublient bien vite tout ce qu'ils ont appris au regiment et les cent ou deux cents mots de fran~ais qu'on leur avait mis dans la tete." Three-quarters of a century later, Rene Bazin voiced the same sentiments about the three-year men: "Eh bien! ramenez-les chez eux, les soldats d'hier: au bout d'un an, la terre les aura repris. lis ne differeront pas, sauf peut-etre au fond de leur coeur par la reminiscence malsaine des mauvais lieux et des propos de caserne, des anciens qui n'ont jamais quitte la commune .... Oublie le passe .... Les trois ans n'ont ete qu'un episode .... Rien ne subsiste ... pas meme une curiosite." (En Province, p. 237.) I would argue that these lines, written before the Great War, ignored fundamental differences in the impact of the military experience. 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

Sevres, 1862).13 Dislike and scorn were mutual; soldiers and civilians regarded each other with an equal lack of sympathy and trust. The military archives of the Second Empire show numerous cases of soldiers attacked or stoned, of rocks thrown at detachments on the march, and of fights between soldiers and workingmen, even in very small urban centers.14 Of course, violence was en· demic, friction between local people and strangers natural, drunken squabbles fairly commonplace. Yet it is fair to assume that an unrepresentative army, almost a professional army in terms of the period of service, was conceived by ordinary people as the creature of others-the "thems"-and hence the more readily rejected. 

In 1889 an English writer observed that the army had come to be recognized as national after 1870, and that soldiers and military service were now accepted, which was not the case before that date.15 We have just seen that resistance to military service survived at least to the time when this remark was made. But it is likely that the war with Prussia, which mobilized unusually great numbers while focusing attention on their fate, a war also in which the con- nection between local and national interests became more evident to large numbers of people, marked the beginning of change. The old prejudices took their time to die, and the 1870's offer scattered instances of enduring antipathy.* But the role played by war in promoting national awareness was reinforced by educational propaganda, by developing trade and commercial ties, and finally by something approaching universal service. By the 1890's there is persuasive evidence that the army was no longer "theirs" but "ours."16 111- feelings between troops and civilians were countered by the sense of nationality being learned in the school, and in the barracks too. At least for a while, the army could become what its enthusiasts hoped for: the school of the fatherland. A school in several ways. For one thing, quite literally: the law of 1818 linked promotion within and from the ranks to literacy, and led to the creation of regimental schools where soldiers could learn how to read, write, and count-and what it meant to be a French citizen. Regimental festivals cele- brating the unit's feats of arms began in the 1870's; regimental colors became the centerpiece of special ceremonies; every barracks had a special room that served as a regimental tabernacle; the presentation of the flag to the recruits and the oath to the flag became quasi-religious ceremonies. For two score years the result of such observances may merely have been that local patriotism was replaced by regimental allegiance, that attachment was shifted from the parish pump to the regimental flag. But they prepared the way for national allegiance, too.17 

• As a case in point, on June 18, 1876, a detachment of the 88th Regiment met a hostile recep- tion at Montestruc, specifically from the innkeepers and shopkeepers, who refused to have any- thing to do with the "voleurs" and "pillards." Moreover, the commanding general reported that this was not the first time his troops had been treated this way. (Archives Departementales, Gers M 2278.) Note the difference, though, between garrison towns, in which the army meant good business, and mere way-stops roch as this. 

Military Service 299 As a school for the French language, the army often had to deal with ob- stinate recruits, and again the advances seem to have come slowly. We hear of Breton conscripts in 1:849 refusing to understand orders in French; and half a century later they still used their own speech. Recruitment was regional. Men served in local units. Successive regimes expressed concern over the excessive regionalism and isolation that kept the army from becoming "truly French," but the very reiteration of measures designed to remedy this condition sug- gests that it endured.18 

As late as 1907, when the southeastern departments seemed ready to erupt around Agde, Narbonne, and Beziers, the locally recruited army units showed where their loyalties lay. The 100th Infantry Regiment mutinied in sympathy with the crowd. The 17th Regiment of Infantry mutinied, too, its disaffection set off by rumors that it was to be posted far from home-to the V osges, the Alps, or at least Rodez. The 139th, a Cantal unit brought down from Aurillac, was initially friendly but lost its sympathy under the hail of stones and other missiles that greeted it. The proceedings of the board of inquiry into the events of those days bring out precisely this: the initial friendliness between the crowds and the infantry troops who were either local or spoke a recognizable dialect; the hostility to units brought in from other regions, and to regimental officers, also "foreigners" to a man.19 

This last suggests that the army must have been the last official institution to keep up the Ancien Regime's practice of bilingualism, with officers addressing the ranks in French and the noncommissioned officers interpreting when neces- sary. Nevertheless, in this very process even the most reluctant troopers could not help picking up a smidgen of French, learning at least to understand it and in all probability more than that. Military service rendered "inestimable services," reckoned a report from Rennes in 1880. "The young Bretons who don't know how to read, write, or speak French when they get to their units are promptly civilized [degrossis ], ... lose the prejudices of their pays, abandon native suspicions and backward opinions; and when they return to the village, they are sufficiently Frenchified to Frenchify their friends by their influence."2o Once home conditions became appropriate, that is, when the command of French was recognized as an advantage and was accepted socially, the very forces that had formerly prompted people to resist acquiring it made them eager to take it up. By the last quarter of the century we hear that returning veterans in Bourbonnais were showing off their new knowledge in ridiculous but significant ways. By 1893 Cantal dialect, barely breached until late in the century, was dying out perceptibly because "now everybody goes off" to the army. Such scattered evidence is suggestive and not much more. On the one hand, local speech persisted well into the twentieth century; on the other hand, it was crumbling before 1889.21 But if it crumbled as fast as it did and if a garbled French replaced it, the army's role in this cannot be ignored. 

The army was a school in still another way, and perhaps its teaching there 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

acted more rapidly on more willing pupils.· In 1827 a military officer found it puzzling to have such difficulty wringing the annual contingent out of Puy-de-DBme when the recruit would be "infinitely better off than he is in his vile shanty." Twenty years later in Haute-Vienne, young men who had returned from military service stood out as less habitually dirty than their peers, and had picked up a little French, otherwise quite unknown in the countryside ("as well as the more virile bearing of the north"). Could the "virile bearing" have been the result of better nourishment? Certainly army fare, however spartan, set standards far above those of many a home. "The army is good, it cannot be better. And the soup is good, it cannot be better," goes the Flemish conscript song:22 

Everyday, meat and soup, Without working, without working. Everyday, meat and soup, Without working in the army. 

In diet, lodging, bedding, hygiene, dress, the soldier's wellbeing was well above the standards of the rural working class. Indeed, during the 1860'S the soldier's average daily ration of 1.4 kilograms of food exceeded the national average of 1.2 kilograms, a figure that included the vast quantities ingested by the rich. The mortality rate for young men between the ages of twenty and twenty-seven was II per 1,000 among civilians, 10 per 1,000 among sol- diers; the rate of sickness was 43 per 1,000 among civilians against 41 per 1,000 among soldiers. In noting these disparities, we should bear in mind that the vast majority of soldiers came from the poor classes, whose food consumption was a good deal lower and whose rates of sickness and mortality were a good deal higher than the national average.23 

Equally revealing are commissary reports showing that in the 1870's soldiers ate well over half a pound of meat a day, plus about half a pound of bread and some two pounds of vegetables, including potatoes. The bread they got was often white (because the men rejected the regulation fare); and, in ex- ceptional circumstances, they were issued coffee, wine, and sugar. The work schedule in barracks was comparatively easy next to the farm routine. Thus at Le Mans in 1872, we see the troops shifting earth from 6 to 9 A.M., eating at 9, resting at I I :30, working till 4 :30, and then returning to barracks for the evening meal. "It was the best time of my life," remembered a cowherd from 

• They may not all have been willing, but most learned something. Around 1890 Edward Harrison Barker, Wandering hy Southern Waters, met a man with a donkey gathering wood. "The army, he told me, was the best school for learning to treat a beast with proper considera- tion .... When a soldier is caught beating a horse, he gets eight days of sa/le de police" (p. 54). In 1906 Marcel Baudoin noted that Vendeans learned "more respect for modern laws" in the service. Le Maraichinage: Coutumes du pays du Mont (Vendee) , Paris, 1906, p. 187. 

Military Service 

Cheylade (Cantal). "We would go out every evening at half past 5, we were well fed, we had meat twice a day, fresh meat you understand, and what a broth! It had globs of fat in it; one would have said it was oill White bread at every meal and coffee in the morning!"24 

Even so, when Hubert Lyautey, then a major, took command of a cavalry squadron at Saint-Germain in 1887, about the time the cowherd spoke of, his unit had no mess hall, let alone any canteen or common room. Lyautey's recollection of the situation indicates the gulf between the expectations of the common people and those of the better off. There was always the same soup, a bit of meat swimming in greasy liquid; vegetables and bread were served in a mess-tin twice a day, and wolfed down while sitting on the bunk, or beside a trestle table in the barrack room. "No one thought to complain," not only because conditions in the squadron had always been thus, but also because the conditions back home made the present seem pretty good. Lyautey, shocked by such primitive style, introduced a mess hall where men sat on benches at proper tables, ate from plates and drank from glasses, were served roast meat, fish, and properly cooked potatoes, as well as a games room where they could play billiards and otherwise relax in comfort unheard of outside real cafes.25 Lyautey was an exceptional man, and his reforms took time to spread. But by the turn of the century they had made great progress, as had his ideas on the social role of the officer, who was strategically positioned, as he said, in the only place "where one has all the nation in one's hands." The mere ex- perience of a radically different way of life made a tremendous impact.* A student of Breton emigration has attributed that phenomenon to the three- year service law, writing that the Breton conscript "notes that ... one eats white bread and meat every day, which is better than rye bread and porridge. He notes that fatigue duty is less hard than threshing."26 It was an exodus that would be hastened and expanded by habits formed during four long years of war, when masses of men ate and drank better than they ever had before. 

No wonder that in these circumstances, knowing what conditions were like at home, a good proportion of peasant soldiers chose not to return to their vil- lages. The livelier spirits would serve as orderlies and go on from there to get a job as footman, coachman, or domestic servant in a bourgeois house. Most of those who had earned some stripes either reenlisted or sought a job suitable to their rank in another branch of the government, such as the gendarmerie, the water-and-forest service, the rail roads, the public works department, or the post office. The army, we hear from mid-century onward, untaught work and taught idleness, became a breeding-place of petty public servants, a re- cruiting ground for urban jobs. Regiments set up their own job agencies, which 

• One result of the troubles of 1907 was an official move to get the army to buy larger quantities of wine, a decision that helped spread the habit to a number of units (Pierre Barral, Les Agrariens franrais, p. 101). 

302 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE further encouraged this tendency by offering men who had been farmers posts as servants, bus conductors, delivery boys, or maintenance men.27 The result was striking: over the ten-year period ending in 189f}, reported a correspondent from one rural parish, one in three conscripts failed to return when his ser- vice was done. The record of a Doubs village shows that only a little better than one in two opted to go back :28 

No. of Return~on No. of Returned on Year recruits discharge Year recruits discharge 1887 6 3 1893 6 3 1888 5 2 1894 8 4 1889 4 2 1895 4 2 1890 5 4 1896 4 4 1891 4 1 1892 5 2 TOTAL 51 27 

In sum, the army turned out to be an agency for emigration, acculturation, and in the final analysis, civilization, an agency as potent in its way as the schools, about which we tend to talk a great deal more. Its contribution in all these realms matters less in and of itself than as one factor among many. It was the conjunction of a multiplicity of factors, like the bound rods in the lictors' bundle, that made their force; it was their coincidence in time that made their effectiveness and their mutual significance. 
