+++
title = "04 CHAPTER II THE ORIGINS OF MUSLIM SLAVE SYSTEM"

+++
**CHAPTER II**  
**THE ORIGINS OF MUSLIM SLAVE SYSTEM**

From the day India became a target of Muslim invaders its people began
to be enslaved in droves to be sold in foreign lands or employed in
various capacities on menial and not-so-menial jobs within the country.
To understand this phenomenon it is necessary to go into the origins and
development of the Islamic system of slavery.  For, wherever the Muslims
went, mostly as conquerors but also as traders, there developed a system
of slavery peculiar to the clime, terrain and populace of the place. For
example, simultaneously with Muhammad bin Qasim’s invasion of Sindh in
early 8th century, the expansion of Arab Islam had gone apace as far as
Egypt, North Africa and the Iberian Peninsula in the West, as well as in
Syria, Asia Minor, Palestine, Iraq, Iran, Khurasan, Sistan and
Transoxiana. In all these countries Muslim slave system grew and
developed in its own way. There was constant contact between India and
most of these countries in the medieval times. For example, as early as
during the reigns of the slave sultans Iltutmish and Balban (1210-86),
there arrived at their courts in Delhi a large number of princes with
their followers from Iraq, Khurasan and Mawar-un-Nahr because of the
Mongol upheaval.^([1](#1)) Many localities in Delhi and its environs
were settled by these elites and their slaves, soldiers and scholars. In
Balban’s royal procession 500 Sistani, Ghauri and Samarqandi
slave-troops with drawn swords used to march by his side pointing to the
fact that a large number of foreign slaves from these lands had come to
India in 13th-14th centuries.^([2](#2)) When the Mughals launched their
conquest of India, there was the establishment of the Ottoman Empire in
Turkey which at its height included present-day Albania, Greece,
Bulgaria, Serbia, Romania and several other contiguous countries. Then
there was the Safavid empire in Iran. The Ottoman Empire traded with
Europe and imported “there indispensable stock of slaves. (Slav, as the
word indicates), supplied by merchants, sometimes Jewish, from Verdun,
Venice or elsewhere in Italy. Other slaves were brought from black
Africa, eastern Europe and Turkish Central Asia.”^([3](#3)) The Mughals
of India had very close contacts with the Turkish Ottoman and Iranian
Safavid empires. This contact certainly included exchange of slaves and
ideas on slavery. But any attempt in this area of study, which is so
vast and labyrinthine, is bound to deflect us from our main theme which
is restricted to India. We shall therefore confine ourselves to the
barest particulars of the beginnings of the institution outside India
which will suffice for understanding the Muslim slave system in India in
the medieval period.

Prophet Muhammad found slavery existing in Arabia, and recognised it in
the Quran. The origins of Muslim slave system can thus be traced to
Arabia, the original Muslim homeland, and the regions into which Islam
spread. Quranic injunctions, Islamic conquests and Muslim administrative
institutions gave it a continuity and legitimacy. According to T.P.
Hughes, “Slavery is in complete harmony with the spirit of Islam… That
Muhammad ameliorated the condition of the slave, as it existed under the
heathen law of Arabia, we cannot doubt; but it is equally certain that
the Arabian legislator intended it to be a permanent
institution.”^([4](#4)) D.S. Margoliouth elaborates on the theme adding
that “On the whole… the Prophet did something to alleviate the existence
of the captives… manumission was declared by him to be an act of piety…
and murder or maiming of slaves was to be punished by
retaliation.”^([5](#5)) In one of his last sermons, Muhammad exhorted
his followers thus: “And your Slaves! See that ye feed them with such
food as ye eat yourselves; and clothe them with the stuff ye wear. And
if they commit a fault which ye are not inclined to forgive, then sell
them, for they are the servants of the Lord, and are not to be
tormented.”^([6](#6)) His first orthodox biographer, Ibn Ishaq, however
mentions a transaction which set a precedent for Islamic slave trade at
a later, stage: “Then the apostle sent Sa‘d b. Zayd Al-Ansari… with some
of the captive women of B Qurayza to Najd and he sold them for horses
and weapons.”^([7](#7)) The women had been made captive after their
menfolk had been slaughtered en masse in the market place at Medina.

*Status of Slaves in Islam*

The appeal of Muhammad contained some fundamental perceptions about the
status of slaves in Islam. It recognised the slave as the property of
the master. A slave could be sold but, being a Muslim or servant of the
Lord, was not to be treated harshly. Here it needs to be observed that
in the early days of Islam it was the scum of the society the flocked to
the standard of Muhammad and became his fighting force. “Koran
acknowledges so distinctly that the followers of the Prophet were the
lowest of the people.”^([8](#8)) Arabian aristocracy “requested him to
send away this scum before they would argue with him”,^([9](#9)) (as did
the Turkish ruling classes treat the early Muslim converts in India).
But the mission of Muhammad was to spread his creed and any non-humane
regulations would have presented a very unfavourable picture of Islam to
the captives. This would have discouraged proselytization. On conversion
also Muslim slaves could not be treated badly for that again would have
been damaging to the reputation of the new creed and galling to the
lives of the new converts. How these injunctions were later on followed
or flouted by Muslim invaders and rulers in other countries is a
different matter. In the original land of Islam, in Arabia, it was
enjoined not to treat the slaves harshly; instead the masters were
encouraged to utilize to the best the services of men slaves and enjoy
the intimate company of women slaves.^([10](#10))

This tolerant treatment was not without conditions. A slave was the
property of his master. His tenor of life was determined by the latter.
For example, he could not marry without the master’s
permission. Although he was free to move from place to place, he could
not hold pleasure parties nor pay visits to friends. A slave could not
bestow aims or grant a loan or make a pilgrimage.^([11](#11)) If he
managed to accumulate any property, it was inherited not by his sons but
by the master.^([12](#12)) In theory a slave could purchase his freedom,
but bond of freedom was granted to a slave in return for money paid, and
until full money was paid there was no total redemption.^([13](#13)) A
slave should not seek his emancipation by running away, “The slave who
fled from his master committed an act of infidelity”, says
Muhammad.^([14](#14))

The emancipation of slaves was not unknown in pre-Islamic Arabia. It was
an old custom among the Arabs of more pious disposition to will that
their slaves would be freed at their death. To Muhammad, the freeing of
a slave was an act of charity on the part of the master, not a matter of
justice, and only a believing slave deserved freedom.

In short, slavery in Islam is a permanent and perennial institution. As
Margoliouth points out, “the abolition of slavery was not a notion that
ever entered the Prophet’s mind.”^([15](#15)) “The fact remains,” writes
Ram Swarup “that Muhammad, by introducing the concept of religious war
and by denying human rights to non-Muslims, sanctioned slavery on an
unprecedented scale… (and on) such massive proportions. Zubair, a close
companion of the Prophet, owned one thousand slaves when he died. The
Prophet himself possessed at least fifty-nine slaves at one stage or
another, besides thirty-eight servants, both male and female. Mirkhond,
the Prophet’s fifteenth century biographer, names them all in his
*Rauzat-us-Safa*. The fact is that slavery, tribute, and booty became
the main props of the new Arab aristocracy…..” ^([16](#16)) “The Slavery
of Islam is interwoven with the Law of marriage, the Law of sale, and
the Law of inheritance, of the system, and its abolition would strike at
the very foundations of the code of Muhaminadanism.”^([17](#17))

*Extension of Islamic Slavery*

Islamic slave system spread and developed wherever Muslim rule was
established. *Ghulam or quallar* (‘slave’) was the creation of the
Safavid state. Mamluks were found in Egypt. In the Ottoman empire they
were called kapi-kulus. “Kapi-kulu were recruited originally from the
Sultan's share of prisoners of war, and subsequently from a periodical
levy (*depshrime*) of Christian boys. Most of the youths entered the
Janissary corps.”^([18](#18)) Christian slaves were drawn from the ranks
of the Georgian, Armenian and Circassian prisoners or their
descendants.”^([19](#19)) Black slaves, natives of East Africa, were
called Zanj.^([20](#20)) Majority of slaves who penetrated and
flourished in India were Turks.

Immediately after its birth, Muhammadanism entered upon a career of
aggressive and expansionist conquest. Its Caliphs conquered extensively
and set up autocratic governments based on the tenets of Islam rather
than democratic governments based on the will of the people. Conquests
required large armies; despotic governments could not be run without a
train of bureaucrats. From the ninth to the thirteenth century in
particular it was a period of feverish activity in Muslim Asia; empires
were established and pulled down; cities were founded and destroyed. In
other words, the whole of Central Asia, Transoxiana and Turkistan was a
very disturbed region in the medieval period. Armies and bureaucrats
were needed in large numbers to administer the ever expanding dominions
of Islam. The Turks came handy for such services.

*Turkish Slaves*

The Abbasids had built up a very large empire with capital at
Baghdad, ^([21](#21)) and its provinces were administered by their
Turkish slave officers and Turk mercenary troops. Caliph al-Mutasim
(833-842 C.E.) introduced the Turkish element into the army, and he was
the first Caliph to have Turkish slaves under his
employment. ^([22](#22)) For it was soon discovered that the young
slaves acquired from Turkistan and Mawar-un-Nahr formed an excellent
material for such a corps.

Turks is a generic term comprehending peoples of sundry denominations
and tribes. The Turkistan of the medieval historians was an extensive
country. It was bounded on the east by China, on the west by Rum or
Turkey, on the north by the walls of Yajuj and Majuj (Gog and Magog) and
on the south by the mountains of Hindustan.^([23](#23)) The Turks as a
people were both civilised town-dwellers and the migratory tribes
trekking across the desert or wilderness. With the extension of the
Muslim frontier to the north and west of Persia one tribe after another,
like Turks, Tartars, Turkomen and even Mongols and Afghans came under
subjection. They attracted the attention of their conquerors by their
bravery and spirit of adventure. They were acquired in groups and droves
as slaves. The Caliphs of Islam also purchased Turkish slaves to manage
their far-flung empire. The Turkish slaves helped the cause of Islam
through their fighting spirit.

But as their numbers grew, they became unmanageable. For example, Caliph
al-Mutasim’s own guard was of 4000 Turks; the number later rose to
70,000 slave mercenaries.^([24](#24)) With time the tyranny, lawlessness
and power of the Turks went on increasing.^([25](#25)) The unscrupulous
policy of religious persecution followed by the Caliph Mutawakkil was
responsible for the alienation of the subject races. His own son entered
into a conspiracy with the Turks, which ended in the Caliph’s murder in
861. The Caliph Mutadid (892-902) was unable to suppress the power of
the Turks. The final decline of the Caliphate set in just after the
murder of Muqtadir in 932 C.E. “The Turkish soldiers made and murdered
Caliphs at their pleasure.”^([26](#26)) As the Caliphal empire
disintegrated, in the third century of Islam, its provincial governors
became independent.^([27](#27))

But technically these Turkish governors were only slaves and their
tenure of power rested on military force and chance-victory and not on
any moral foundations. On the other hand, the Caliphs were objects of
respect. The first four Caliphs were directly related to Muhammad.
Muawiyah, the founder of the Ummayad Caliphate, was a cousin of Abbas,
an uncle of the Prophet. Abbas himself was founder of the Abbasid
Caliphate. The Turkish slaves, therefore, considered it politic to keep
a sort of special relationship with the Caliph: they went on paying him
tribute and seeking from him recognition of their ‘sovereignty’.  That
is how, in course of time, their political power was firmly
established.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Minhaj, 598-99; Farishtah, I, 73, 75.

[²](#2a) Barani, 57-58.

[³](#3a) *Cambridge History of Islam*, II, 524. The word slave, observes
Ram Swarup, “is derived from Stavs, the Slavonic peoples of Central
Europe. When they were captured and made bondsmen, they gave birth to
die word ‘slave’”, *The word as Revelation: Names of Gods*, 23; also
J.H. Kremers, *The Legacy of Islam*, 101.

[⁴](#4a) *Dictionary of Islam*, 596, 600.

[⁵](#5a) Margoliouth, *Mohammed and the Rise of Islam*, 461-62.

[⁶](#6a) Cited in Muir, *The Life of Mahomet*, 473.

[⁷](#7a) *The Life of Muhammad:* A translation of Ibn Ishaq’s *Sirat
Rasul Allah* by A. Gillaume, CUP, Karachi (1955), Eighth Impression,
1987, 466.

[⁸](#8a) Margoliouth, 98 quoting Quran, 11:27.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., 97

[¹⁰](#10a) Ibid., 406-407; Quran, 4:3, 4:24, 4:25, 23:6; Muir, *Life of
Mahomet*, 334-35, 365, 421.

[¹¹](#11a) Hughes, *Dictionary of Islam*, 598.

[¹²](#12a) *Sahib Muslim*, Hadis, 3584, 3585, 3595. 

[¹³](#13a) Quran, 24:33.

[¹⁴](#14a) Ram Swarup, *Understanding Islam through Hadis*, 76.

[¹⁵](#15a) Margoliouth, *Mohammed and the Rise of Islam*,, 461.

[¹⁶](#16a) Ram Swarup, op.cit., 75.

[¹⁷](#17a) Hughes, *Dictionary of Islam*, 600.

[¹⁸](#18a) *Cambridge History of Islam*, I, 280 and n., 342.

[¹⁹](#19a) Ibid., 415, also 407.

[²⁰](#20a) Ibid.. 129-30, 179.

[²¹](#21a) Ruben Levy, *The Baghdad Chronicle*, Cambridge, 1929, 13.

[²²](#22a) Hamdullah Mustaufi, *Tarikh-i-Guzidah*, ed.  E.G. Browne,
London, 1910, 318.

[²³](#23a) Fakr-i-Mudabbir, *Tarikh-i-Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah*, 38.

[²⁴](#24a) *Cambridge History of Islam*, I, 125.

[²⁵](#25a) Ibn Asir, *Kamil-ut-Tawarikh*, Urdu trs.  Hyderabad, 1933,
VI, 319.

[²⁶](#26a) Sykes, P.M., *History of Persia*, 2 vols., London, 1915, II,
83.

[²⁷](#27a) Ruben Levy, *The Social Structure of Islam*, Cambridge, 1962,
282.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
