+++
title = "11 CHAPTER IX GHILMANS AND EUNUCHS"

+++
**CHAPTER IX**  
**GHILMANS AND EUNUCHS**

The treatment meted out to the slaves depended upon the temperament,
whim and caprice of the master. Some masters were kind hearted and
treated their slaves kindly, many others cruelly, a few abominably. But
one class of slaves who were very well looked after were *ghilman* and
*mamalik*. The eunuchs also, because of the nature of their duties,
received sort of a special treatment.

*Ghilman va Mamalik*

Muslim sultans were very fond of handsome young slaves whom they kept
close to their persons as pages, service-boys, bodyguards, special
troops and as gay companions. Infatuation for such slaves was a bane of
the life of Muslim royalty and nobility in particular, although they
considered it to be a fashion.  P.K. Hitti has this to say about them,
“*Ghilman*, who might also be eunuchs, were the recipients of special
favours from their masters, wore rich and attractive uniforms and often
beautified and perfumed their bodies in effeminate fashion. We read of
*ghilman* in the reign of al-Rashid; but it was evidently the caliph
al-Amin who, following Persian precedent, established in the Arabic
world the *ghilman* institution for the practice of unnatural sexual
relations. A judge of whom there is record used four hundred such
youths. Poets did not disdain to give public expression to their
perverted passions and to address amorous pieces of their compositions
to beardless young boys.”^([1](#1))

Muslim rulers and nobles in India were not lagging behind in these
‘perverted passions.’ Muhammad Hindu Shah Farishtah in his *Tarikh* and
Khondamir in his *Dasturul Wuzra* relate the following incident about
Mahmud Ghaznavi. Sultan Mahmud had a passion for slaves possessing
handsome faces. His Wazir Abul Abbas Fazl bin Ahmad followed his
example. “Fazl, on hearing the reputation of the beauty of a boy in
Turkistan, deputed a confidential person to purchase that boy (whose
countenance was beautiful as that of the planet Venus), and bring him to
Ghazni, according to the mode of conveyance usually adopted for females.
When an informer represented to the king these circumstances, his most
august Majesty demanded that slave (who was as white as silver) from the
minister… The minister made evasive replies, and pertinaciously refused
to part with the slave, notwithstanding His Majesty’s absolute power.
The king one night visited the minister at his house (without prior
notice), where the minister entertained him with respect and hospitality
due to the dignity of a sovereign. When the slave (who looked as
beautiful as a virgin of paradise) came into the presence of the king,
high words passed between him and his minister, and so greatly was the
king’s anger kindled, that he issued orders to seize the minister and
plunder his house. Soon after this the king departed for Hindustan, and
certain evil-disposed *amirs* tortured the minister so severely with the
rack that he lost his life.” After him the old Khwaja Ahmad bin Hasan
Maimandi was appointed to the office of Wazir.^([2](#2))

Sultan Mahmud’s “court was guarded by four thousand Turkish good looking
and beardless (*ghulam turk washaq*) slave-youths, who, on days of
public audience, were stationed on the right and left of throne,- two
thousand of them with caps ornamented with four feathers, bearing golden
maces, on the right hand, and the other two thousand, with caps adorned
with two feathers, bearing silver maces, on the left… As these youths
attained into man’s estate and their beards began to grow, they were
attached to a separate corps, and placed occasionally under the command
of rulers of provinces.”^([3](#3)) Shams Siraj Afif’s description of
acquisition and distribution of handsome slave boys by Sultan Firoz
Tughlaq points to similar arrangement.

The number of royal slaves (*bandgan-i-Khas*) was usually very large.
They were invariably good looking, bought or captured at early age. Many
foreign purchased slaves were also similarly chosen. Out of these, a few
became favourites of the sultans and sometimes rose to the highest
positions in life like Kafur Hazardinari under Alauddin Khalji and
Khusaru Khan under Qutbuddin Mubarak Khalji. During Alauddin Khalji’s
invasion of Gujarat, his generals had brought immense booty from there
including Raja Karan’s consort Kamla Devi and the handsome slave Malik
Kafur Hazardinari. The Sultan fell in love with both. In the words of
Farishtah, he converted Kamala Devi to Islam and married her, and
treating Kafur as a favourite “tied the sacred thread (*zunnar*) of his
love in his own waist.”^([4](#4)) Khusrau Khan was brought from Malwa
under similar circumstances. The rise of these catamites was due as much
to their ‘beauty’ and nearness to the king as to their ambition and
conspiratorial genius. So long as Alauddin held a firm grip on the
administration, Malik Kafur served him with loyalty and won victories on
his behalf in lands far and near. Once the king’s health declined and he
became dependent upon his dear slave-noble, the latter managed or at
least attempted to poison him.^([5](#5)) After Alauddin’s death he
gathered all political power into his own hands. Mubarak Khalji in his
turn fell in love with his favourite Khusrau Khan. Like Malik Kafur,
Khusrau Khan also provided pleasure to Qutbuddin and at the same time
marched with armies to preserve and extend his master’s dominions. But
when an opportunity came handy he killed his patron. Mubarak Khalji lost
his life because of his degenerate nature. In 1318 his favourite slave
and Wazir Khusrau Khan led an expedition to the south where he seized
much booty. As had happened in the case of Prince Alauddin, the wealth
of the Deccan inflamed the ambition of Khusrau Khan and he began to plan
to occupy the throne of Delhi. His plans fructified soon enough because
of the Sultan’s depravity. Qutbuddin was blinded by the infatuation he
had for Khusrau Khan, and unable to bear his separation any longer sent
for him from the Deccan. Khusrau Khan was taken in a palanquin
post-haste from Devagiri to Delhi where he arrived in a week’s time. One
day Khusrau engaged the king in his intimate company and got him
killed.^([6](#6)) The custom of taking favourite slaves in palanquins
seems to have been common so that Sultan Sikandar Lodi (1489-1517) could
boast that “If I order one of my slaves to be seated in a palanquin, the
entire body of nobility would carry him on their shoulders at my
bidding.”^([7](#7)) This statement incidentally conveys an idea of the
importance of handsome favourite slaves and also reflects on the status
of nobles under autocratic Muslim rulers.

Instances of love of *ghilman* abound in the history of medieval India
and hence we need not narrate many of them or dilate upon them. Suffice
it here to note that love of slave-boys sometime made kings blind and
provided not only Turkish or foreign slaves but also Indian slaves with
opportunities to strive to grab the crown through the well-known methods
of intrigue, poison and sword. Indian-born converted slaves were never
considered equal to their foreign counterparts. They were always looked
down upon by the foreign Muslims. But handsome favourites fell into a
different category. Besides ambition and intrigue there were some other
reasons for their reckless acts. The masters were often sodden and
depraved.^([8](#8)) They used their *ghilmans* for unnatural carnal
acts. The humiliation engendered by such acts made the slaves sullen and
revengeful. These slaves also derived encouragement from the examples
before them. If Balban could poison Sultan Nasiruddin and Alauddin
Khalji openly kill his benefactor Jalaluddin Khalji, why could Malik
Kafur not try to kill his master? If Malik Kafur could strive for the
throne, why not Khusrau Khan? The abuse was so widespread that Barani
writes with a sense of delight that Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq was free from
this vice and he did not allow “handsome, beardless boys” to come near
him and looked upon all immoral persons as his
enemics.^([9](#9)) According to Ibn Battuta one of the reasons for
estrangement between the Sultan and his son Muhammad was the Prince's
extravagance in purchasing slaves.^([10](#10))

But all slaves, all *ghilmans*, could not attain to such high positions
because they were there in thousands and they could not all be equal.
Alauddin had a corps of 50,000 personal slaves, Muhammad Tughlaq 20,000
and Firoz Tughlaq 40,000.^([11](#11)) Muhamad Tughlaq maintained such
large numbers of them that he set apart a day of the week to manumit
some of them and to confer them in marriage.^([12](#12)) Such was the
situation throughout the medieval period, although the detailed
description of Shams Siraj Afif about the reign of Firoz Tughlaq gives
the impression that Firoz excelled all the kings of the Delhi Sultanate
in collecting and maintaining beautiful slaves.  Afif needs to be quoted
at some length.

“The Sultan was very diligent in obtaining slaves, and towards that end
he issued a *farman* to his *amils* and *jagirdars* to capture slaves
whenever they were at war, and to pick out and send the best for the
service of the court. When the feudatories went to the court, each one
according to his ability took with him beautiful slaves, dressed in
clean attire, elegant caps, turbans and socks, in short, ornamented in
the most splendid style. They also, when they paid annual visits
brought, together with other things, slaves for the Sultan… This
regulation remained in force for forty years throughout the reign. The
chiefs who brought many slaves received the highest favour, and those
who brought few received proportionately little consideration. When the
chiefs perceived the Sultan's eagerness for slaves, and that their
efforts to get them were highly appreciated, they exerted themselves in
providing them, and the numbers brought every year exceed description.

“Some of the slaves spent their time in reading and committing to memory
the holy book, others in religious studies, others in copying books.
Some were placed under tradesmen and were taught mechanical arts, so
that about 12,000 slaves became artisans (*kasib*) of various kinds.
Altogether, in the city and in the various fiefs there were 180,000
slaves. In fact there was no occupation in which the slaves of Firoz
Shah were not employed. When the slaves became too numerous, some of
them were given into the charge of Amirs and Maliks. These nobles
treated them like children, providing them with food and raiment,
lodging them and training them, and taking every care of their
wants…”^([13](#13))

It would be pertinent here to add the observation of Major Raverty. “For
the information of the general reader uninitiated in Oriental lore, I
would mention that the words Mamluk and Ghulam, signifying ‘slave’, must
not be understood in the sense ‘slave’ conveys in our language. These
slaves were sometimes captives, but more often boys of Turkish origin
were purchased by kings and their great nobles from traders -
slave-dealers - and trained for the highest offices. They were sometimes
adopted by their master, and were frequently made governors of provinces
and leaders of armies…”^([14](#14))

Captured or purchased, Indian slaves may not always fit in with this
description, but in all cases provision was made for the *ghilman* and
*mamalik* in a liberal manner with salaries, provisions, stipends and
jagirs. In the time of Muhammad bin Tughlaq, according to Al Umari, “the
slaves of the Sultan each receive a monthly allowance for their
maintenance of two *mans* of wheat and rice, and a daily allowance of
three seers of meat, with all *the* necessary accompaniments. Besides,
he received ten *tankahs* per month, and four suits of clothes every
year.”^([15](#15)) Under Firoz Tughlaq, “those who were stationed in the
city (capital) were given cash salary, some a hundred *tankahs*, others
fifty, or thirty or twenty-five. But no one was paid less than 10
*tankahs*.” The Sultan took special care of his slaves, writes
Afif. There was a distinct muster-master (*majmu’-dar*) of the slaves,
and a Ministry of Slaves (Diwan-i-Bandgan) which was established as a
separate and distinct unit from the Diwan-i-Wazarat or Ministry of
Finance.^([16](#16))

This ‘pampering’ of slaves by sultans and nobles aroused jealousy all
around. To jealousy was added ethnic rivalry. Kindness on the part of
the master was reciprocated with loyalty by the slaves. Often this
proved to be harmful to the slaves in the long run. After the death of
Alauddin Khalji many of his slaves were murdered in cold
blood.^([17](#17)) After the death of Firoz Tughlaq a similar fate
awaited his loyal slaves. The newly crowned Prince Muhammad gave the
slaves of Firoz three days to leave Delhi. Those who escaped, survived.
Others, and particularly those who spoke the ‘Purbi and Bengali’
language, were done to death. These ‘impure’ rebels had put the crown
into commission and behaved like virtual king makers - such was the
impression of warring princes who succeeded Firoz. The fault of these
slaves seems to be that they were firstly not *asl* (or pure) Muslims
and secondly they were loyal to Firoz Tughlaq and his
progeny.^([18](#18)) This is Farishtah’s version. Whatever the real
reason, after Firoz’s death, “the heads of these his favoured servants
were cut off without mercy, and were made into heaps in front of the
Durbar.”^([19](#19)) “For a decade after Firoz’s death the princes
manoeuvered, the nobles intrigued and the people suffered.”^([20](#20))
Each new sultan - and they came to power in kaleidoscopic succession -
wanted his own cadre of nobility, his own set of slaves, and destroyed
those of the earlier ones. In short, slaves were made slaves for no
fault of theirs and they were massacred for the fault of being slaves to
their masters.

*Eunuchs*

Many if not most of the slaves were eunuchs. A Muslim king was
unthinkable without his harem; a harem was inconceivable without
eunuchs. Eunuchs were the guards and guardians of the harem. The
seraglio of the size of the Mughal harem could be a security hazard for
its inmates and even for the king, if not properly supervised by
eunuchs. They guarded the gates of the palace, checked and regulated
ingress and egress of persons male and female. They also served the
inmates of the seraglio even while keeping surveillance over
them.^([21](#21)) Harem was the largest Department under Muslim rule.
There was no sphere of court and administration which was not concerned
with the harem in one way or the other. Therefore thousands and
thousands of eunuchs were needed to serve the Muslim king and his harem.
Their cadre was hierarchical. Senior eunuchs were known as Nazirs and
Khwaja Saras. Each one of them had a number of junior eunuchs under
him.^([22](#22))

It is a very significant fact of Muslim history that some of the
greatest nobles in the Sultanate of Delhi and the Mughal Empire were
eunuchs. Imaduddin Rayhan, the chief minister under Sultan Balban, Kafur
Hazardinari, the army commander and vice-regent of Alauddin Khalji, and
Khurau Shah the favourite of Qutbuddin Mubarak Khalji who rose to be
king, were all eunuchs. Khwaja Jahan Malik Sarwar, a black eunuch, was
appointed Wazir of Sultan Mahmud, a successor of Sultan Firoz Tughlaq.
In 1394 he was sent as governor of Jaunpur with the title of
Malik-us-Sharq (Master of the East). Within a short time he brought
under his control the vast region stretching from Kol (Aligarh) on the
west to Tirhut in Bihar in the east and became known as
Sultan-us-Sharq. On his death his adopted son Qaranful (the Clove i.e.
Black) took the regal title of Mubarak Shah and issued coins in his own
name.^([23](#23)) Under the Mughals many important eunuchs, who were
known as Nazirs and Khwaja Saras, rose to the position of Mansabdars,
commanders of armies and governors of Subahs. The chief Nazirs or Khwaja
Saras generally enjoyed the title of Aitmad Khan or Aitbar Khan (the
Trusted Lord). One Aitbar Khan, who served under Babur and Humayun, was
appointed Governor of Delhi by emperor Akbar.^([24](#24)) Another Aitmad
Khan was made commander of one thousand and entrusted by Akbar to
improve the finances of the state. He took part in the conquest of
Bengal in 1576 and was later appointed Governor of Bhakkar. Another
Aitmad Khan in Akbar’s service went on a pilgrimage to Mecca and brought
a huge stone which was said to contain an impression of the foot of the
Prophet.^([25](#25)) He was appointed Governor of Gujarat and held the
command of four thousand.^([26](#26)) Aitbar Khan, the chief eunuch of
Jahangir, was the Governor of Agra city. A eunuch, Firoz Khan, was
conferred a mansab of 1500/600 by Jahangir.^([27](#27)) Bakhtawar Khan
(d. 1698), the superintendent of eunuchs under Aurangzeb, held the rank
of 1000. He was a great scholar and historian. He prepared an
abridgement of *Tarikh-i-Alfi* and *Akhbar-ul-Akhyar* and wrote the
*Mirat-ul-Alam* also known as *Mirat-i-Jahan Numa*.^([28](#28)) During
the time of the Later Mughals three eunuchs, Mian Khushfahan, Mian
Arjmand and Mian Mahabat ruled the state on behalf of Mughlani Begum
(1754-1756).^([29](#29))

According to Manucci, the chief Nazir of the seraglio “is highly
esteemed by the King. He has a large allowance, has charge of the
treasury, is master of the wardrobe, decides on the details and the
pattern of Sarapas (robes) to be prepared; in short, it is he who has
charge of all the Mughal expenditure of the clothes, the linen, and the
precious stones, of the jewelry, of everything that goes into or comes
out of the palace.”^([30](#30)) Manucci gives a list of about forty
Nazirs of the time of Aurangzeb, each of whom had a separate tide
bestowed upon him by the king. By their service to the kings and queens,
the eunuchs could wield great influence and amass large amounts of
wealth.^([31](#31)) Some indeed were so trustworthy and powerful that
they kept even grown up princes under strict disciplines.^([32](#32))

The senior eunuchs or Khwaja Saras had a number of junior eunuchs under
them. According to Manucci, “there is always one set above the rest who
directs and looks after everything that goes on in the
Mahal.”^([33](#33)) Of the subordinate eunuchs, some worked as
messengers in the harem. Others were posted at the doors to keep a watch
on those who came or went out of the palace and saw to it that no
unauthorised person entered the seraglio.^([34](#34)) Some others looked
after the education of princes. Bernier writes that Mughal princes
“instructed from infancy to the care of women and eunuchs, slaves from
Russia, Circassia… Gurjustan (Georgia), or Ethiopia, whose minds are
debased by the very nature of their occupation; servile and mean to
superiors, proud and oppressive to dependants these princes… leave the
walls of the seraglio quite ignorant.”^([35](#35))

The main business of the eunuchs was to guard as well as to keep an eye
on the activities of the harem ladies. Since they were always present in
the seraglio, they also served and helped them in various ways. The
eunuchs guarded the secrets of their mistresses. They smuggled drugs and
wines for them into the harem. The ladies sometimes even arranged
through the eunuchs to invite men into the harem; Manucci avers that
eunuchs were helpful in smuggling men into the women’s
apartment.^([36](#36)) In exchange for such delicate and risky services
the eunuchs could get from them “whatever they desired”, for they could
blackmail their client ladies. Naturally some women of the harem even
allowed the eunuchs to enjoy them according to his
ability.^([37](#37)) They served princes and their beloveds as
go-between.^([38](#38)) It is such errands of secrecy that sometimes
made the eunuchs powerful, arrogant and even vainglorious.^([39](#39))

In short, there was hardly any area of Muslim rule in which the eunuchs
were not required to play an important role. They fought battles and
conquered kingdoms, they held high administrative posts, they were
appointed governors and commanders of armies. They rendered invaluable
service in the affairs of the harem. They formed dependable escorts of
ladies and trustworthy jailers of very important persons like princes
and kings. Aitbar Khan who was earlier in the service of Babur and
Humayun, once chaperoned Akbar’s mother and other Begums from Kabul to
Hindustan.^([40](#40)) In 1565 the eunuch Aitmad Khan escorted the
daughter of Miran Mubarak Shah, the King of Khandesh, to the harem of
Akbar.^([41](#41)) Aitbar Khan, the favourite eunuch of Jahangir, was
placed in charge of the rebel prince Khusrau during his incarceration.
Another eunuch-noble with the same title was appointed by Aurangzeb as
the jailer of Shahjahan in captivity.

With so many eunuchs needed for so many odd duties to perform, their
number in the Muslim king’s harem was very large. Delve deep into the
life-story of any important noble and he turns out to be a eunuch. Boys
and men in thousands were emasculated to serve the Muslim cities as
domestics and guards in the harem primarily, although there was no work
which was not assigned to them. In the Middle Ages there were many slave
markets in Muslim cities in India and outside, and trade in slaves and
eunuchs was a regular commercial activity. Many slaves and eunuchs were
imported at high price from outside^([42](#42)), many others were bought
within the country. But most of the eunuchs comprised of slaves captured
during wars and then castrated.

The practice of converting men into eunuchs was very common in Bengal.
“In Hindustan,” writes Jahangir, “especially in the province of Sylhet,
which is a dependency of Bengal, it was the custom for the people of
those parts to make eunuchs of some of their sons and give them to the
governor in place of revenue (*mal-wajibi*)… This custom by degrees has
been adopted in other provinces and every year some children are thus
ruined and cut off from procreation. This practice has become
common.”^([43](#43)) Bengal in the time of Jahangir was a very large
province. Large tracts of Northern Hills, the Sarkar of Orissa and large
parts of Bihar were in4dluded in it.^([44](#44)) If the practice of
making eunuchs had become common outside Bengal also, then it seems it
had spread almost all over the empire. Jahangir issued *farmans*
abolishing the practice and hoped for the best. But a system in which
revenue was collected in the form of eunuchs, could not be changed
through a few orders. Said Khan Chaghtai, a noble of Jahangir possessed
1,200 eunuchs.^([45](#45)) Besides, eunuchs formed a profitable
commercial commodity and, as we shall see in the chapter on Slave Trade,
the price of a eunuch in the market was three times that of an ordinary
slave. Therefore, some areas, notably Bengal, were regular providers of
eunuchs for the Muslim upper classes in Delhi, Isfahan and
Samarkand.^([46](#46)) In 1668 Aurangzeb also prohibited castration of
young boys “throughout the empire”.^([47](#47)) It appears that in
forbidding eunuch-making, Jahangir was apprehensive of decline in Muslim
demography while Aurangzeb was prompted by religious motives. Yet, in
spite of their orders, young men continued to be turned into eunuchs and
Jahangir and his successors themselves went on accepting eunuchs as
gifts for duties in the harem.^([48](#48)) In Aurangzeb’s time in the
city of Golkunda (Hyderabad), in the year 1659 alone, 22,000 individuals
were emasculated.”^([49](#49))

The need for turning so many boys and men into eunuchs and also
obtaining them from outside is obvious. The safety, security and
surveillance of a large number of beautiful women in the seraglio could
not be left only to female matrons. And normal healthy men could not be
trusted to serve in the harem in which resided so many sex-starved young
women.^([50](#50)) So the safest thing was to make men who were on duty
in the harem harmless. The king also lived in the harem, and nobles and
servants personally attending on him also had to be eunuchs. The cruelty
entailed in this system was nobody’s concern in a despotic regime. On
the other hand, it was very advantageous to the master. Once a man was
made eunuch, his sensibility for manhood was dwarfed, his spirit of
assertiveness destroyed, and he was perforce turned into a loyal and
devoted slave; it did not matter to the master if his loyalty and
devotion were fruits of compulsion. So the practice of making eunuchs
went on and on under Muslim rule. If eunuchs were denied “the greatest
pleasures attainable in this world,”^([51](#51)) they were compensated
by sometimes performing great feats of bravery, by showing great loyalty
to the master or by just piling up great wealth.

It is not the task of the historian to pity the eunuchs or condemn those
who emasculated them. But pernicious was the system in which man could
exploit man to this extent. It is another matter that most eunuchs
perforce reconciled themselves to their lot, though cruelty and crime
could go no farther than deforming and desexing of man by man. Many,
people suffered because of the medieval Muslim slave system, but
undoubtedly the eunuchs suffered the most.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))*The Arabs*, 99.

^([2](#2a)) Khondamir, E.D., IV, 149-50; Farishtah, I, 38.

^([3](#3a)) Minhaj, 83-84 and n.

^([4](#4a)) Farishtah, I, 103.

^([5](#5a)) Barani, 369.

^([6](#6a)) Barani, 390-408; Isami, 353-63; Farishtah, I, 125.

^([7](#7a))*Tarikh-i-Daudi*, passage trs. by N.B.Roy, in his
*Niamatullah’s History of the Afghans*, 134.

^([8](#8a))*Ibid*., pp. 302-307.

^([9](#9a)) Barani, 443.

^([10](#10a)) Ishwari Prasad, *Qaraunah Turks* 39-40, citing Ibn
Battuta, Defd. and Sang. III, 212-14.

^([11](#11a)) Afif, 270, 272; Qureshi, *Administration*, 67n.

^([12](#12a)). Afif, 268.-72. Also Ibn Battuta. 63.

^([13](#13a)) Afif, 267-273. Large portions trs. in E.D., III, 340-42.

^([14](#14a)) Minhaj, 168 n 2. Also Ibn Khaldun trs. in Bernard Lewis,
*Islam*, 98.

^([15](#15a)) E.D., III, 577.

^([16](#16a)) Afif, loc. cit.

^([17](#17a)) Lal, *Khaljis*, 288.

^([18](#18a)) Farishtah, I, 153.

^([19](#19a)) Afif, 273; Farishtah, I, 153.

^([20](#20a)) Lal, *Twilight*, 12.

^([21](#21a)) Manucci, II, 352; Finch in Foster, *Early Travels*, 16,
265.

^([22](#22a)) Manucci, II, 350.

^([23](#23a)) Yahiya, *Tarikh-i-Mubarak Shahi*, 156; Badaoni, Ranking,
I, 348; Farishtah, I, 154. Lal, *Twilight*, 9, 68-69. 

^([24](#24a))*Ain*., I, 442.

^([25](#25a))*Ain*, 207, 570. Badaoni, Text, 311.

^([26](#26a))*Maasir-ul-Umara*, I, 93-100.

^([27](#27a)) Tuzuk, II, 83.

^([28](#28a)) E D, VII, 150.

^([29](#29a)) Sarkar, *Fall of the Mughal Empire*, I, 440.

^([30](#30a)) Manucci, II, 350-51.

^([31](#31a)) Barbosa, II, 147.

^([32](#32a)) Hamiduddin Bahadur, *Ahkam-i-Alamgiri*, English trs. by
Jadunath Sarkar, Calcutta, 1912, 71-72.

^([33](#33a)) Manucci, II 350.

^([34](#34a)) Bernier, 267; Manucci, II, 352, 357.

^([35](#35a)) Bernier, 144-45.

^([36](#36a)) Manuncci, II, 80.

^([37](#37a)) Pelsaert, 66; Bernier, 131; E.D., VI, 493-516.

^([38](#38a)) Lal, *Mughal Harem*, 158-59, 184-85, 187-88.

^([39](#39a)) Saqi Mustaad Khan, *Maasir-i-Alamgiri*, 73.

^([40](#40a)) Ain., I, 443.

^([41](#41a)) A.N., II, 351-52.

^([42](#42a)) Bernier, 134-36, 426.

^([43](#43a)) Jahangir, *Tuzuk*, I, 150-51.

^([44](#44a)) Ibid., 207 and n.

^([45](#45a)) Tuzuk, I, 13, 168; *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*, 16;
*Maasir-ul-Umara*, II, 403.

^([46](#46a)) Elst, *Indigenous Indians*, 375-76.

^([47](#47a)) Saqi Mustaad Khan, *Maasir-ul-Alamgiri*, 48; Sarkar,
*Aurangzeb*, III, 61.

^([48](#48a)) Tuzuk, I, 247.

^([49](#49a)) Elst, *op.cit.*, 376 quoting Michel Erlich, *Les
Mutilations Sexuelles*, Paris, 1991, 59.

^([50](#50a)) Lal, *Mughal Harem*, 179-80.

^([51](#51a)) Manucci, II, 78-79.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


