+++
title = "Problem picking"

+++

## Overview

It is very important to critique a paper or a talk, understand its
shortcomings, suggest future improvements. Thence, incremental research
occurs.

General loop: Find area. Find problem in a given area. Find solution
strategy for a given problem. Implement solution, evaluate, communicate.

Popular research mode: Knowing and heavily using old techniques: take a
few hammers, hit everything with it. Finding new techniques is rare and
hard.

OFTEN, perturb the problem and extrapolate a solution. This is a very
important skill.

## Papers

In doing incremental-improvement research, it is important to be able to
critique papers, find their shortcomings, identify unsolved problems,
then to be able to solve them.


## Talking to others

Another person may be facing a problem in research where you, having a
different perspective, may have a good solution strategy. Research shows
that this mode of finding and solving problems is results in very good
quality research.

## Choosing problems to pursue

### Judging impact: theory

The most applicable of all is a good theory.

### Importance of selectivity

You don’t have enough time and energy to pursue all interests. So, must
be selective.

### Fresh problems: Importance

Find your own, fresh problems and work on them. If a senior person is
not actively involved, it is much harder to beat others who have worked
in the field for years.

### High vs Low impact work: balance

Aim for rough water. Devote adequate time to important research, like
Leslie Valiant.

Short term/ competitive research should be avoided. As Dijkstra
\[EWD637\] said, do not compete with your colleagues who are as well
equipped as you are to tackle a certain problem.

Andy Yao said this: When you get a paper accepted to a good conference,
the main effect is that it buys you some time: some number of weeks or
months during which the pressure to publish is off and you can focus on
exciting but very hard open problems. Thus, your work should be
organized to achieve a balance between projects that will probably
improve your vita, and projects that will most likely not get you
anywhere in the short term, but that are important in the long term.

## Solving problems

See problem solving strategy.

## Parallelism

Execute many research projects/ threads in parallel. Switch between
problems. Know when a project isn’t right for the present moment.

### Time multiplexing

Must have a good way of dividing time amongst various activities.

This worked well in Fall 2009: Experiments from 4 or 5, reading and
classes before that.
