+++
title = "13 "

+++
****

13\. THE HIDDEN TREASURES

If only India knew the treasure trove hidden in her midst! There is a
knowledge here, which has been lost to the world; there is a spiritual
fervor in this country, which is found nowhere in this degree on this
planet; there is a diversity of cultural and social expression in India,
which is unique in an increasingly unipolar world. We have chosen four
stories to illustrate this point: pranayama the science of breathing;
the astounding festival of Ayappa; kalaripayat, the ancestor of all
great Asian martial arts; and the jallikatu festival in Madurai. Enjoy!

****

THE WONDERS OF PRANAYAMA

The West is fast discovering the wonders of pranayama, the ancient art
of breathing, which was devised in India more than 3000 years ago. "Our
fist act upon coming in this world is to breathe in, while emitting a
cry… and our last, is to breathe out, upon expiring. But in between, we
completely forget to breathe", exclaims Rajshree Patel ,an Indian woman
teaching pranayama in the United States ! And it is true : not only do
we all neglect breathing during our whole life - whereas it is the very
basis of our existence - but have you never noticed how, we when are
angry, our breath becomes so laboured; and how, we are in sorrow, or
nervous about something, we hardly breathe at all ? No wonder many of us
end-up with heart attacks or with blood pressure problems ! "Pranayama
is such a simple and straightforward everyday practice - and you will
derive so many benefits out of it", says Sri Sri Ravi Shankar, a great
Master of pranayama. Rajshree Patel couldn’t agree more: ! "These daily
twenty minutes are so very precious, because they are going to set the
pace for the day and give you the right rhythm which will carry you
through all problems, tiredness and hassles for the next 24 hours".

Pranayama is probably the best suited Indian yogic discipline for the
West, because it is so down to earth, so scientific - there are no
miracles, no levitation, no smoky mysticism and everything can be
explained in a rational way.

Pranayama, in Sanskrit, means breath - and in India, it is known that
*prana* circulates in the whole body and that one breathes not only
trough the nose and mouth, of course, but through ANY part of the body,
making thus *prana* flow everywhere. Thus, according to yogis, *prana*
can revitalise all these parts of our body which do not receive enough
energy - and which, as a consequence, become weak and lose their
vitality, like the eyes for instance. "Pranayama is everywhere, explains
Rajshree Patel : in the air which surrounds us, of course, but also in
animals, in Nature, in the mineral world even". It is also found in food
: "today, says Rajsree, one speaks of vitamins, proteins, calories - but
one does not understand that it is actually the *prana* in the food
which gives us energy; and the quality of this *prana* depends on the
sort of food we are partaking".

The first exercise of pranayama consists in observing your breath, in
noticing, for instance, how it is fresh when it penetrates your nostrils
and warmer when it comes out. Later, you might be able to feel how it
does a U turn between your eyebrows before re-descending towards the
throat. And you will soon realise that when you are with your
respiration, you simply ARE : neither in the past, nor in the future,
but in the present moment - which is so precious - with your 100%
concentration and abilities.

The effects of pranayama have been studied for thousands of years and
Indian teachers know exactly what results will this type of exercise
have on you and what kind of routine you should do to improve that
particular problem, or develop this certain faculty in you. But
recently, modern science has also decided to apply its knowledge to
pranayama. The National Institute of Neuroscience in Bangalore, one of
the most reputed in Asia, has studied for the fist time in the world,
under the care of Professors Meti and Raju, assisted by the Chief of the
psychiatric Service, Dr Venkatesha Murthy, the effects of pranayama on
80 patients suffering from various psychological problems : depressions,
anorexia, insomnia, obesity, alcoholism...

To do so, half of the patients continued to receive a normal treatment :
electroshocks, sedation, psychiatric help, while the other half was only
made to practise pranayama two hours a day for three months. By using
the P300 method (Positive Electrical Wave), to measure the reactions of
the brain, through electrodes placed on different parts of the body
(vertex of the skull, left lobe of the ear), the doctors were able to
study in nano-volts, thirty milliseconds after the stimulation, the
auditory and somatic reactions of the patients. They quickly noticed
that the latent periods - that is the delay between the stimulus and the
response of the subject - decrease considerably after the pranayama
exercises and one also notes a slowing down of the breathing and the
cardiac rhythm. After three months, the 40 patients having only
practised pranayama, showed so much improvement that they were allowed
to go home, while the forty others stayed on behind in the hospital.
Last year Professor Metti and his team have shown the results of their
experiments to an astonished World Meet of Psychiatry.

That indeed, is very scientific; but what about this: Indians believe,
that thanks to pranayama, their yogis are not only capable of mastering
their emotions, but also to have control over their body functions.
Thus, if you go high in the Himalayas, you can see in winter numerous
sadhous (wandering monks) who are bathing in icy torrents - and certain
yogis are even supposed to be able to slow down their breathing to such
a tiny thread, that one can think that they are dead !

In Europe, the film « the Great Blue », has shown how pranayama can be
used by sportsmen and sportswomen : remember how the hero does a series
of breathing. exercises known in India as « Viloma », to store as much
air as possible in his lungs, before breaking a world record in
underwater diving without oxygen. And today, more and more sportsmen in
the West are using pranayama to improve their performances. « Not only
are they thus able to considerably increase their lung capacity, says an
Indian Master, but they can also free their mind of all tension and find
the proper inner calmness to really achieve their best". And finally,
did you know that quite a few American companies have included exercises
of pranayama in the peps sessions of their executives ?

****

AYYAPPA

It's in the Western Ghats of Kerala. As the night falls and you start
driving up the mountain, you come upon thousands of cars, vans and
buses, carefully parked on both both sides of the road. Long queues of
men dressed in black and blue are walking bare-feet, staff in hand,
chanting something you cannot yet catch. And when you reach the top,
there are a lakh of people milling around, looking up to the top of the
mountain as if already in ecstasy - and all singing, over and again, the
same words: "Om Swamiye Saranam Ayyappa."

You thought that the Kumbh Mela in Allahabad with its five lakh people
was a record, but you're wrong there: the Lord Ayyappa festival in
Sabarimalai attracts *15 million people in a month and a half*; and on
the last three days, which are the most important and auspicious, there
are around 800,000 devotees praying on the sacred mountain.

The first thing that strikes you when you pass the Sabarimalai village
is a board which says: "Women between ten and 50 years are strictly
forbidden beyond this point." The truth is that Ayyappa disciples have
to endure a 41-day tapasya before they can start on their pilgrimage;
apart from fasting, eating only vegetarian food and abstinence from
alcohol and smoking, strict refraining from any sexual relations, in
deed or in thought, is also enjoined. Hence the black dress to warn
women to stay away and the forbiddance of their presence on the
mountain, although modem day feminists might disagree.

Below, in the beautiful flowing river, thousands of men are bathing in
the golden light of the early morning, purifying themselves of the sweat
of the journey and shedding the last remnants of their worldly life.
Then, after a preliminary puja in a temple at the foot of the sacred
path, it is up the mountain, towards the 1,000-year-old abode of Lord
Ayyappa. And thousands and thousands, all looking alike under the
centenarian pine trees, climb towards God, carrying a small mysterious
bundle carried on the head and chanting endlessly the sacred mantra: "Om
Swamiye Saranam Ayyappa." Who is this Ayyappa who whips up so much
fervour and devotion from these souls?

The legend says that Manikanta, son of Shiva and a feminine form of
Vishnu, was begotten to rid the earth of Asurin (female demon) Mahishi.
He was found near a river by King Rajashekkara and adopted by the royal
couple. When Manikanta became adult, the queen, made jealous by her
minister that her other natural son would not get the throne, sent him
to the forest to get tiger's milk to cure a rare disease, thinking he
would never come back alive. Manikanta went into the forest with his
father's blessings, who to sustain him during his arduous journey, gave
him a small bundle which contained a coconut, filled with ghee and rice
(hence the bundle carried on the heads of all true Ayyappas). In the
forest, he slew Mahishi and came back with an army of tigers. Seeing
this, the queen and king understood his divinity, and fell on their
knees, imploring him to take over the kingdom. But Manikanta, taking an
arrow, shot it in the air: it fell on the sacred spot near Sabarimalai,
which he chose as his abode and where his father is said to have
constructed the ancestor of present day temple. Saying goodbye to all,
he promised that every year he would appear to them as light (jyoti) and
vanished into the mountains to become forever Lord Ayyappa.

At last, the faithful arrive at the foot of the sacred 18 steps made of
five different precious metals, which lead to the holy abode. After
symbolically breaking their coconuts, they climb the stairs, rapture
written on their face. And there, on top of the mountain, it's an
incredible show: men ecstatic with joy, rolling themselves on the
ground, or else dancing and throwing yellow and red powder on
themselves, amidst the banging of the gongs, and the smoke of a million
coconuts burning in a huge bonfire. Finally, on the last day of the
pilgrimage comes the jyoti: as Manikanta had promised his father, the
king, every year, on the same day, January 14, at the same hour, between
6.30 and 6.45 p.m., two white eagles circle around the temple a few
times, and then a light, like a fire, appears for two or three seconds
on the mountain facing the abode.

Then 500,000 throats shout the magic mantra: "Om Swamiye Saranam
Ayyappa", making the whole mountain vibrate and shaking the soul of all
men present. Numerous are those who have tried to discover the source
and reason for the light: is it a trick or an illusion ? Nobody ever
found out. Then, as the men leave, the mountain is rendered unto peace
and the wild animals. But in the dark forests, amidst the chanting of
birds and the roaring of tigers, where the soul of Manikanta roams, one
can still hear, as if whispered by the wind, the enchanting words: "Om
Swamiye Saranam Ayyappa."

****

KALARIPAYAT

IN 522 A.D., an Indian Buddhist monk named Boddidharma, son of the king
of Kancheepuram in Tamil Nadu, arrived at the court of the Chinese
Emperor Liang Nuti, of the 6th dynasty. The Emperor granted him an
audience and gave him travel documents to walk to the Kingdom of Wei
(now Honan province), at the foot of the Han Shan-mountains, to a
Buddhist monastery called the temple of Shaolin.

Father and founder of Zen Buddhism (called C'han in China), Boddidharma
taught the Chinese monks Kalaripayat, a very ancient Indian martial art,
so that they could defend themselves against the frequent attacks of
bandits. In time, the monks became famous all over China as experts in
bare-handed fighting, later known as the Shaolin boxing art. The Shaolin
temple which has been handed back a few years ago by the communist
Government to the C'han Buddhist monks, inheritors of Boddidharma's
spiritual and martial teachings, by the present Chinese Government, is
now opened to visitors. On one of its walls, a fresco can be seen,
showing Indian dark-skinned monks, teaching their lighter-skinned
Chinese brothers the art of bare-handed fighting. On this painting are
inscribed: "Tenjiku Naranokaku", which means: "the fighting techniques
to train the body (which come) from India" ...

Shaolin boxing and Chan’ Buddhism travelled from China to Japan, through
the Ryukyu islands, landing in Okinawa to blossom in the art of the
empty hand, or later Karate and then spread into the Japanese mainland
as jiu-jiu-tsu, judo, Shorinji Kempo, etc. Listen to one of the greatest
contemporary Masters of Karate, Master Masatoshi Nakayama, Director of
the Japanese Karate Association, in the introduction to his book, "A
Dynamic Karate": "When the Boddidharma came to the Shaolin Temple, he
taught the monks physical and fighting methods to be able to bear the
hard monastic life which he imposed on them. These methods became known
as the Shaolin art and were later imported to Okinawa and blended to the
local fighting techniques..." landing in Okinawa, where Kalaripayat
blended with local fighting techniques and became the art of the "Empty
Hand" or Karate.

Kalaripayat, literally "the way of the battlefield, still survives in
Kerala, where it is often dedicated to Mahakali. The Kalari grounds are
usually situated near a temple, and the pupils, after having touched the
feet of the master, saluted the ancestors and bowed down to the Goddess,
begin the lesson. Kalari trainings have been codified for over 3000
years and nothing much has changed. The warming-up is essential and
demands great suppleness. Each movement is repeated several times,
facing north, east, south and west, till perfect loosening is achieved.
The young pupils pass on to the handling of weapons, starting with the
"Silambam", a short stick made of extremely hard wood, which in the
olden times could effectively deal with swords. The blows are hard and
the parade must be fast and precise, to avoid being hit on the fingers!
They continue with the swords, heavy and dangerous, even though they are
not sharpened any more, as they are used . without guard or any kind of
body protection; they whirl, jump and parry, in an impressive ballet.
Young, fearless girls fight with enormous knives, bigger than their arms
and the clash of irons is echoed in the ground. The session ends with
the big canes, favourite weapons of the Buddhist traveller monks, which
they used during their long journey towards China to scare away
attackers.

Kerala closed-up on the sea by the Deccan plateau, was essentially a
land of forests and jungles. The fathers of Kalaripayat carefully
watched the wild animals which peopled the forests. Thus they had the
idea to fashion a piece of hard wood in the shape of an elephant tusk.
The "Otta" is the most difficult Kalari weapon to handle, for one should
not only know his opponent's weak body points to probe and poke at, but
the parades are also extremely difficult, the Otta being only 40 cm
long. There are not many horses in Kerala and the infantry men of
ancient Kerala, worried about their safety, had devised a unique way of
blending spear fighting and closed arm combat making them redoubtable
warriors.

The "Urimi" is the most extraordinary weapon of Kalari, unique in the
world. This double-edged flexible sword which the old times masters use
to wrap around the waist or keep coiled in one hand, to suddenly whip at
the opponent and inflict mortal blows, is hardly used today in
trainings, for it is much too dangerous. Only the Masters permit
themselves a few sessions, for their own pleasure. Their preliminary
movements look like a ritualistic and powerful dance, agile and supple.
The mock fights which follow are like a challenge to gravity and balance
and the blood of hundreds of generations of warriors seem to course in
their veins.

When Boddidharma introduced Kalaripayat in China at the temple of
Shaolin, he brought with him two essential things which would
revolutionise forever the martial arts of Asia: "Wu-Te" or the notion of
martial virtue, unknown to the Chinese and Japanese of that time, and
"Marama Adi", the bare-handed combat techniques from Kerala. Nearly 3000
years ago, the first Masters of Kalari discovered 108 vital points of
the body, 96 of them considered as minors, which cause when struck,
violent pain or temporary paralysis and 12 leading to death. These vital
points were later transcribed and catalogued on palm leaves and
transmitted down from generation to generation. These writings are
called "Marama Sutras" and describe in detail, the exact location of
each point, the symptoms incurred by each blow and the reviving
techniques needed to bring back an opponent to life. The few initiated
who still practice these techniques, are also experts in "Suvasus", the
combined science of all movements' of bare-handed fighting: locks,
strangulations, kicks. The Katas of Karate bear a strong likeness to the
"Suvasus" of Kalaripayat. The most difficult Kata to execute is called
"Suparimpei", which in spoken language, is the reading of the Chinese
characters meaning hundred an eight ! The 108 desires and human passions
as defined by Boddidharma, the 108 vital points of the body of Kerala's
Marama… Finally, Marama Adi is also a medical science, using the
knowledge of the 108 vital points of the body, to cure and relieve. Some
historians think that it is at the origin of Chinese acupuncture, which
appeared much later

Unfortunately, as usual, India ignores the greatness hidden in her own
bosom: Kalari is restricted to Kerala alone, it is mostly practised in
villages and gets practically no help from the Indian Government. It is
also ironic that an art which has influenced so many other martial arts
of the world, is slowly being taken over by karate or kung-fu !

However, the world is beginning to take an interest in Kalari: the
Japanese are coming more and more to India to study first-hand the
ancestor of their martial arts, the BBC recently made a documentary film
on Kalari and there have been a few books published abroad. Will that be
enough to save Kalaripayat ?

****

JALLIKATTU

The winter monsoon in Tamil Nadu has been kind: green are the fields in
the countryside near the ancient city of Madurai; and the rice fields
ripple gently in the early dawn.

The harvest is over: it too, has been good and bountiful. Now is the
time for rejoicing, time for Pongal, the most popular of all South
Indian religious festivals.

The gratitude of the people goes first to this wonderful animal, the
prime asset of all true south Indian farmers: the bull, Nandi, which has
been revered and worshipped in India from Vedic times. In the early
morning, the stately beasts are brought to the rivers, bathed and
scrubbed. Their horns are painted in joyful hues, they are garlanded
with jasmine and marigold and finally led to the temple where a priest
performs a puja. Then the ritual cooking takes place in the temple
courtyard or in an open field: in huge brass pots, as in ancient times,
rice is boiled along with milk, ghee and jaggery; and when it spills
over, a sign of prosperity, it has made into a delicious sweet, which,
you may have guessed, is called Pongal....

Later in the morning, folk dances, which date back from centuries of
Dravidian culture, are performed by both men and women in colourful
costumes. On the fourth day of Pongal, in the late afternoon, the main
event of the festival takes place: Jallikattu. Jallikattu is an ancient,
traditional rural sport having to do with bulls. It is believed to be
more than two thousand years old and is referred to several times in
Sangam literature. This "bullfight" bears many resemblances to the one
practised in Spain: it is considered a sport of valour, in which men pit
their reflexes and skill against the bull's brute strength; some of the
animals are specially prpepared for that event; and the winners get a
prize. But the similarity stops there, because in India the bull does
not die and men, though they do sometimes get hurt, rarely get killed.

Jallikattu literally means "the tying of the coin"; for in ancient
times, a gold coin wrapped in a piece of cloth was fastened with coconut
fibre around the horns of the bull. Tacklers hung to the hump of the
bull with one hand and untied the knot to get at the prize with the
other hand. And today, though the name Jallikattu still persists, no
coins are tied anymore, but as a token, a piece of symbolic cloth is
fastened around the horn. Every year, thousands of people coming from
all over the Madurai district converge on the small village of Alaganur,
dressed in their best. The main road of the village is sealed, with all
side lanes barricaded with the wheels of dismantled carts, so that the
bulls are forced to have a straight run from one extremity to the other.
Bamboo structures are erected on each side and are already so packed
with people that some of them will later collapse.

And suddenly, the crowd is everywhere; on trees, lamp-posts, or roofs.
The air has a golden hue tainted with dust. Below, men are jolly with
toddy and some of them stage mock fights with their lathis. The tacklers
position themselves on each side of the mud walls and suddenly a small
bull, terrified, eyes wide open in astonishment at seeing so many
people, shoots through the crowd aiming for freedom, on the other side
of the village. Braggarts slap him, pull his tail and a dozen men
overpower the poor beast.

The next one though, has a respectable size: and magically a passage
opens for it amidst the thick crowd. It has courage and anger too, as a
proper bull should have: at one time, furious of the noise, it stops
suddenly in its tracks and faces the mob: everyone backs off
respectfully and there is suddenly silence and fear; then slowly, it
ambles off towards light. A daring man jumps on the next beast, grabs
with one hand the right horn and the hump with the other; and so he
rides, clinging desperately to the somersaulting animal for a
predestined distance; then he becomes the hero, is carried triumphantly
by his friends and the president of the jury throws him down a silk
scarf.

And this goes on and on the whole afternoon, as nearly a hundred bulls
are let loose; some veer suddenly from their path and charge the masses;
men fly in the air and a few even bleed profusely, but the crowd does
not lose its good humour. Finally it’s over and so, on to next year,
hoping that the monsoon will be again as good as this one...

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
