+++
title = "16 16. Things to do for the BJP"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**16. Things to do for the BJP**

 

         The cleverness of the BJP is in evidence again in its choice to
put the enactment of a Common Civil Code on India's political agenda. 
In India, marriage, divorce and inheritance are regulated by
religion-based law codes which are different for Hindus, Muslims,
Christians and Parsis.  Thus, a Hindu who wants to marry two women,
knows that he will be punishable, but no longer if he converts to Islam
(which is why there are actual cases of conversion for the sake of
bigamy).  For Christian men and women, divorce laws are equal but make
it very difficult to obtain a divorce.  For Hindus, it is a bit easier,
but divorce is the easiest by far for Muslim men, who only have to
pronounce triple *talaq*; Muslim women, by contrast, have to plead their
case before a judge.  This totally non-secular arrangement was meant to
be only temporary, for the Constitution stipulates in its directive
principles (Art. 44) that the State shall endeavour to enact a Common
Civil Code.  In 1995, the Supreme Court reminded the Government of this
directive principle, and directed it to report on the progress made in
the matter.  The BJP has replaced Ayodhya with the Common Civil Code as
its central "communal" theme.

 

         The BJS-BJP has always demanded the implementation of Art.44,
but the majority has blocked this secular policy time and again.  The
cleverness about this Common Civil Code demand is that it can be used
both as proof of the BJP's secularism and as proof of the BJP's Hindu
credibility.  Many Hindutva-minded voters mistakenly believe that the
Muslims' high birth rate is due to polygamy, and hope that a Common
Civil Code will remedy this problem and thereby save the majority
position and hence the survival of Hinduism in India.  Yet, in my
opinion a realistic evaluation would be that this issue is of little
importance to specific Hindu interests.  In a way, the Plural Civil Code
is more in keeping with Hindu tradition, where every caste had its own
distinctive marriage and inheritance customs.  The Common Civil Code is
not a demand of Hindu society (certainly not a priority), but is
intrinsically a demand of secularism. 

 

         There are excellent reasons for replacing the Muslim right to
unilateral *talaq* with an egalitarian arrangement valid for all Indian
citizens equally, but it is doubtful that this desirable goal will be
reached by means of a BJP initiative.  The trouble of raising this
impeccably secular and explicitly constitutional demand should be left
to the secularists; as long as they don't put it on the agenda, the
present religion-based personal law systems are a standing testimony to
the hypocrisy of the secularist establishment.  Equality before the law
regardless of religion is an essential requirement of a secular state,
and it is a measure of the perversion of India's political parlance that
BJP opponents actually defend the separate religion-based civil codes in
the name of secularism.  But there is one serious problem with this
demand: with extremely few exceptions, and with secularist support, the
Muslim community opposes it tooth and nail. 

 

         In a futile bid to win the Muslims over, the BJP claims that
there is nothing un-Islamic about abolishing the *Sharia* provisions on
family matters, esp. by citing Muslim modernists like Malaysian Prime
Minister Mahathir as saying that the Sharia is obsolete, and by
documenting how the Sharia was only imposed on the Indian Muslims late
in the British period, in replacement of the customary laws which many
Muslim communities had preserved since the time of their conversion. 
Less than a century ago, the majority of the Indian Muslims did not
follow the Sharia, true, but this only means that they were bad or
incomplete Muslims, not that Islam doesn't care about which personal law
system its faithful follow.  Muslim tyrants and propagandists who
converted Hindus did "first things first": the converts had to be
brought into the Muslim fold and develop an attachment to Mohammed and
the Quran; whether they also adapted their marriage and inheritance
customs to Islamic prescriptions (often a revolutionary change in their
communal life) was a question that could be put off till a more
convenient time.  While non-conformity with the Sharia can be tolerated
as an intermediate stage in the islamization of a community, it is
obvious that once the Sharia is established, it is un-Islamic to abolish
it.

 

         While the BJP congratulates itself on being so clever in
insisting on an impeccably secular demand like the Common Civil Code, it
does not seem to be aware that, like with the Ayodhya campaign, it is
merely banging its head against the wall and making itself despised and
hated.  The most realistic prediction is that an effective abolition of
the religion-based personal law systems by a future BJP government would
provoke potentially violent agitations in *every* Muslim neighbourhood
in India, as well as attacks on Indian and Hindu targets in Pakistan,
Bangladesh, Great Britain and other countries.  After all, the Ayodhya
dispute was a fairly artificial conflict, in which the common Muslim had
no stake (it is a Hindu, not a Muslim sacred site, and no ordinary
Muslim had any plans ever to visit Ayodhya), and still it provoked a
major wave of violence; but a change in the rules for marriage, divorce
and inheritance affects every single Muslim personally. 

 

         A secular Common Civil Code would also diminish the power of
Muslim clerics within their own community greatly.  If we remember that
the Shah of Iran turned a simmering discontent into an armed revolution
the day he hurt the material interests of the clerical class, we can
imagine that in India too, the mullahs would organize a massive
resistance against such an attack on their position.  The Hindus would
again be blackened worldwide as mean oppressors of the poor hapless
minorities, and the BJP's own government would find it hard to stay on
course.  There are no indications that the BJP has a contingency plan
for such a nation-wide Muslim agitation.

 

         The BJP's focus on the sensitive Common Civil Code issue is all
the more strange when we consider that there are other, far safer and
far more consequential issues waiting to be raised, which have a
potential for mobilizing the Hindus without automatically provoking the
minorities.  When Sangh leaders are questioned on what grievances the
Hindus could possibly have in a democratic state with a Hindu majority,
they often mention Art.30 of the Constitution, which lays down that the
minorities can set up government-sponsored denominational schools
(implying the right to a communal bias in recruitment of teachers and
students and a religion-centred curriculum).  When the Constitutional
Assembly voted this article, many delegates probably assumed that the
extension of the same rights to the Hindu majority was self-understood;
but in practice, this right is denied to the Hindus.  This became
hilariously clear in the 1980s, when the Ramakrishna Mission deemed it
necessary to declare itself a non-Hindu minority (a self-definition
challenged in court by its own members and struck down) in order to
prevent the West Bengal government from nationalizing its
schools.[\[1\]](#_edn1)  Art.30 constitutes a very serious
discrimination on grounds of religion, and is in conflict with the
professed secular character of the Indian Republic. 

 

         In no democratic country would a majority community tolerate
such discrimination, and it says a lot about the stranglehold which the
secularist intelligentsia has on public discourse that this article
hardly ever figures in debates on secularism and communalism.  It also
says a lot about the meekness of the Hindus in general and about the
incompetence of the Hindutva movement in particular.  Amending Art.30 to
extend the privileges of the minorities to every community including the
Hindus would benefit Hindu society as a whole, would terminate a
humiliating and damaging inequality, but would not affect the
minorities; they retain the rights conceded to them in the present
version of Art.30.  No doubt some minority and secularist agitators will
try to explain that equality before the law constitutes oppression of
the minorities, but it should be feasible to restate the correct
position in such a way as to convince most unbiased
observers.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  At any rate, the Muslim and Christian masses
would not feel affected the way they would be in case of the enactment
of a Common Civil Code, and that makes the issue much easier to handle. 
So easy that even the BJP could do it.

        

         So, from the Hindutva movement's viewpoint, this should be a
beautiful campaign theme: it is a very consequential issue, it is very
representative of the discrimination which Hindus claim to suffer in
secular India (and thereby justifies to the outside world why there has
to be a Hindu movement in the first place), the amendment is impeccably
secular, and best of all: it is not directed against anyone, it is a
revolution with no enemies.  If the BJP had any political acumen, it
would have taken a parliamentary initiative to amend Art.30, or
prominently raised the issue in some other way, in the months before the
1996 Lok Sabha elections.  This would have forced the other parties to
either come out in support of the equality principle, so that the BJP
could claim a major victory for Hindu interests; or to defend the
existing inequality, and in that case the BJP could go to the voter (and
to world opinion) with the unambiguous proof that it is not the BJP but
the other parties which stand for religious discrimination and
injustice. 

 

         In spite of all the benefits which such an amendment would have
for Hindu society as well as for the BJP, no attempt was made in that
direction.  The 1996 BJP Election Manifesto does not mention Art.30 in
the list of "Constitutional reforms" proposed on p.9-10.  The article is
mentioned only on p.64 in a two-line promise, fifth in a list of
fourteen points under the heading "Our minorities": "5. Ensure equality
for all and discrimination against none on grounds of religion in
matters of education by amending Article 30."  Note that the BJP does
not find the issue suffiently important for spelling out just what
amendment it proposes.  The record shows that the BJS/BJP
parliamentarians (including India's longest-serving parliamentarian,
A.B. Vajpayee) have never taken any initiative on this matter.  No
politician with whom I have spoken could give a credible explanation for
this decades-long negligence. 

 

         The VHP included the demand of an amendment to Art.30 in its
*Hindu Agenda* (a list of 40 demands presented to all political parties,
drawn up during the VHP National Board meeting in Mumbai in December
1995, which I attended), but not with due prominence.  A leading VHP
sadhu explained to me that he and his colleagues had found the temple
issue (liberation of the sacred sites in Kashi and Mathura) to be the
best mobilizer among the masses, while issues like Art.30 attracted
little attention among the people.  My suspicion is that he neither
questioned nor informed common people about Art.30, and that his finding
was perfectly circular: if you only think and talk about the disputed
temples, it is obvious that this is what people will respond to.  The
Hindutva activists attribute to the people their own narrow focus on
symbolic but inconsequential issues.  When you see how the small
Christian community can lobby and mobilize for its "Reservations for
Dalit Christians" demand, the claimed difficulty in mobilizing Hindus
against their second-class status in education sounds like sheer
laziness.  At any rate, leaders don't ask the masses for motivation,
they motivate.   

 

         Among BJP spokesmen, it was only Rama Jois, the lawyer
representing the BJP before the Supreme Court in connection with the
Ayodhya dispute (1993-94), who agreed with conviction that the BJP
should take up the issue and showed that he had even given some thought
to the formulation of the required amendment.[\[3\]](#_edn3)  The only
Member of Parliament who has formally proposed an amendment to Art.30,
extending minority privileges to the majority, is Syed Shahabuddin
(April 1995).  His ostensible reason was that every linguistic or
religious community which is in a minority at some level, is bound to
also be the majority at some other level (say, national versus
provincial or local).  His Bill never made it to the voting stage, but
it showed how Shahabuddin is aware of the mobilizing potential of the
Art.30 issue: he tried to defuse it before the BJP could acquire the
brains to perceive and exploit this potential.   

 

         If anti-Hindu leaders like Shahabuddin can see the importance
of this issue, how come the BJP leadership is ignoring it?  Is it sheer
brain paralysis, as Hindu critics of the BJP allege, that the BJP spurns
manageable and important issues in favour of unmanageable and
unimportant ones?  In this case, I really don't know even the beginning
of an explanation.  It is typical of Sangh mores to put on a clever face
and pretend there is a secret long-term strategy which will take care of
everything, but I am skeptical.

 

         Article 30 is the Constitutional bedrock of a considerable list
of similar anti-Hindu discriminations.[\[4\]](#_edn4)  Among them is the
unequal treatment of Hindu and non-Hindu places of worship.  Muslims
have full control of their mosques, Christians have full control of
their churches, but Hindus are systematically deprived of the control of
their temples.  Recently the authorities tried (unsuccessfully) to have
the Shirdi Sai Baba temple in Hyderabad declared a Hindu temple, because
that would allow them to take it over and do what they have been doing
everywhere to Hindu temples: siphon the income off to their own pockets
or to other non-Hindu purposes.  This is a major factor in the dire
poverty which Hindu temple priests (whose wages have not been adjusted
for decades) and their families suffer. 

 

         Injustice to Hindus in education and temple management: here
are two problems with deep and painful effects on the life and the
future of Hinduism, and what is the BJP doing?  If the BJP does not take
up these issues, if it does not present a short-term plan to remedy this
injustice, if its state governments do not do everything within their
power to give at least partial solutions to these problems with
immediate effect, then the party does not deserve to get a single Hindu
vote. 

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  The attempts of the RK Mission and
of an Arya Samaj faction to get recognition as a religious minority
prove several things: that Hinduism is a dirty word and many Hindus are
ashamed to be called Hindu; but also that Hindus under threat do not
count on the BJP to defend them, and prefer the safety exit to minority
status.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)                  \[2\]  I remember M.J. Akbar arguing to
this effect against any tampering with Art.30, on the assumption that
this would mean bringing the position of the minorities down to that of
the Hindus, rather than adjusting the Hindu position upward.  Among
foreign India-watchers too, the impression exists that the BJP would
take away these rights from the minorities rather than extend them to
the Hindus; this may be due to disinformation by the M.J. Akbars of this
world, but unfortunately, it cannot be excluded that some Hindutva
spokesman has indeed been stupid enough to interpret "amending Article
30" in this sense, unmindful of the terrific agitation which this would
provoke among the minorities.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(             \[3\])  Interview, December 1995, Vadodara. 
Jois's comment on the Supreme Court verdict (rejecting a request by the
Narasimha Rao government to pass judgment on the historical question
whether the Babri mosque had indeed been built in forcible replacement
of a Hindu temple) is in Swapan Dasgupta et al.: *The Ayodhya Reference*
(Voice of India 1995), p.96-106. 

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref4)^(             \[4\])  Discussed in Abhas Chatterjee: *The
Concept of Hindu State*, p.33-44.

 

**   [NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section17.html)**

**   [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section15.html)**

</div>

</div>
