+++
title = "21 21. Know the truth, and the truth shall make you free"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**21. Know the truth, and the truth shall make you free**

 

         The struggle against Islamic aggression cannot be won without
taking issue with the basic doctrines of Islam, i.e. explaining to the
Muslims that they have no reason to stay with the refuted dogmas of
Islam.  The same is true for Christianity.  The Sangh Parivar has made
much ado about the Christian demand for reservations for "Christian
Dalits", and about continuing Christian proselytization in tribal
areas.  It is, however, impossible to sustain this objection against the
strategies of evangelization as long as Christianity is accepted as a
valid religion qualified to enjoy the Hindus' *sarva-dharma-samabhava*. 
Why in the world should Indian citizens not embrace Christianity if it
is true, at least "equally true" with Hinduism?  Especially now that
Christianity in India has largely "indianized" itself in its cultural
expressions (e.g. by giving Hindu first names to their children), the
Sangh should not object to conversions to Christianity.  

 

         Being a Christian implies accepting a *creed*, i.e. an
unprovable truth claim.  The Christian denominations differ on some
points of detail, but crucial to any criterion for being a Christian is
the acceptance of the following item of belief: *Jesus was the
Christ/Messiah and saved mankind from original sin through his death and
resurrection.*  To my knowledge, all denominations with active missions
in India also teach that *Jesus Christ was God's only-begotten son, both
human and divine in nature*.[\[1\]](#_edn1)  However, modern Bible
scholarship, much of it carried out by Christians, has conclusively
refuted all the Christian fairy-tales about Jesus.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  For
example:

 

         \* Contrary to his own self-image, Jesus was not the messiah in
the original sense of the term, i.e. a scion of King David's clan who
restores the Davidic kingdom.  He never scored any political or military
victory for his country, and by the end of his career, Israel was still
under foreign domination.  For all we know, Jesus did not even belong to
the House of David; if he did, it is a mystery why the evangelists had
to indulge in such demonstrably false and contradictory stories about
Jesus' genealogy and birth.

         \* Jesus was not executed by the Jews but by the Romans because
of his entirely hollow but strictly speaking seditious claim that he was
the "messiah", i.e. the new king of the Jews, intrinsically a challenge
to Roman rule in his country (but not an act of blasphemy liable to the
death sentence under Jewish law, as wrongly alleged in the Gospel).  The
Gospel version that the Jews wanted him dead (when in fact they merely
held him in contempt as a useless and self-centred eccentric) was
invented when the Christians tried to be on the winning side during the
Roman crackdown on the Jewish revolt of ca. 70 AD.  This move set the
trend of two millennia of Church opportunism and it off-hand initiated
Christian antisemitism with its numerous pogroms culminating in the
Holocaust.

         \* Jesus was not the messiah in the Christian-theological
sense, i.e. the redeemer of mankind from original sin and from its
punishments (as per *Genesis*), viz. mortality, the need to work, and
painful childbirth.  Anyone can see that people have gone on sinning,
giving birth in agony, eating the fruit of their labour in the sweat of
their brows, and dying; just like they did before Jesus.

         \* Jesus was not resurrected, for if he had really "conquered
death", he would still be with us.  The apostles tried to get around
this simple logic by inventing his direct ascension to heaven, an
imaginary event totally incoherent with the whole narrative, rendered
necessary only by the fact that Jesus proved mortal like the rest of
us.  Fact is that the stories about the resurrection in the Gospels are
full of contradictions and absurdities, like most of the theologically
crucial episodes.

         \* Jesus was not God's only-begotten son, and for all his
megalomania, he never even claimed to be that.  The whole notion is a
mix-up of the worst in Hebrew monotheism (exclusivism) and Greek
paganism (idolizing of human beings as divine), and is absurd from the
viewpoint of both these traditions in their pure forms.  Like the
crucifixion, it was "a scandal to Jews, a nonsense to Greeks", and an
invention of the Church Fathers.[\[3\]](#_edn3)

         \* Jesus was not even a prophet, in the sense of being able to
predict the future.  Like his follower Paul, he predicted the impending
end of the world (even within the lifetime of his listeners),-- surely a
failed prophecy. 

         \* Jesus' ethics were mostly not his, but included classical
Jewish lore ("love thy neighbour") and general proverbs ("to him who
hath, shall be given").  Some of "his" words were put into his mouth
retrospectively by the evangelists, e.g. "Give unto Caesar what is
Caesar's", a diplomatic kowtow to the Romans.  The words which he really
spoke himself are either not original or not commendable.  Thus, the
humane doctrine of the relativity of the Law (i.e. that the need to save
a human life can overrule a commandment), always presented as a
revolutionary innovation, was taught by the very Pharisees against whom
Jesus is reported to have preached this doctrine.  As against the
Pharisees' balanced view of the Law, Jesus vacillated between a
pseudo-noble but inhuman hyper-adherence to the law ("even a man who
mentally lusts after a woman is guilty of adultery") and a nihilistic
dismissal of the Law and even of sheer common sense as having become
irrelevant in view of the impending Doomsday ("don't plan for the
morrow", like the lilies in the field).  Jesus' original contribution
lies mostly in the least commendable injunctions, e.g. in his very
un-Jewish anti-family and anti-sexuality statements, in the commandment
of surrender to the aggressor ("when slapped, turn the other cheek"),
and in the morbid Sermon on the Mount ("the meek shall inherit the
earth"), which teaches the weak to exult in their weakness instead of
exhorting them to become strong.

 

         This was merely a brief survey of the case against
Christianity, but Hindutva activists who are serious about countering
Christian subversion ought to familiarize themselves more throughly with
these findings.  Similarly, the case against Islam as marshalled in a
number of quality books is required reading for anyone who prefers India
not to become an Islamic state.[\[4\]](#_edn4)  Hindus may rightly feel
more drawn to critiques of Christianity and Islam from a spiritual
viewpoint, as those by Ram Swarup, than to purely rationalistic
critiques; yet, I feel that taking cognizance of the latter's very
thorough and comprehensive analysis of these religions would certainly
be worth the effort.  After properly digesting the hard scholarly facts,
they may add something which most scholars may be unaware of, and which
Hinduism offers: a comprehensive vision which allows for a meaningful
type of ritual and spiritual practice to continue after the creedal
religions have been discarded.

 

         If the Sangh is serious about saving Hinduism, it should make
sure that from now on, no one can get away with pious nonsense like
Jesus' Resurrection or Quranic Revelation.  Every time a wily secularist
or sentimental Ramakrishnaist stands up to praise Jesus or Mohammed,
every time an Indian President or Minister opens a Christian or Islamic
function with the injunction that "we should all put Jesus' (c.q.
Mohammed's) message of peace and tolerance into practice", Hindus should
push the facts under his nose.

 

 

 

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  One of the most bizarre disputes in
religious history is the fragmentation of the early Church in sects
divided by their doctrines concerning the nature of Jesus.  Some
"heresies" marginally surviving in the Middle East teach that Jesus was
but a non-divine human being, others that he was exclusively divine and
not human, but the mainstream (after bloody persecutions of the others)
decided that Jesus had two natures, divine and human.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(             \[2\])  For a start, I suggest all the
Hindutva workers dealing with Christian missionaries read Michael
Arnheim's excellent book *Is Christianity True?* (Duckworth, London
1984), and of course the Voice of India publications on Christianity.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(             \[3\])  According to the apocryphal *Acts of
Thomas*, the source of the Indian Church's claim that the apostle Thomas
came to India and was martyred near Chennai, Thomas was Jesus'
twin-brother, which ought to create a problem for the dogma of the
"only-begotten son".

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref4)^(             \[4\])  A truly great book in this class,
written by a born Muslim, is Ibn Warraq: *Why I Am Not a Muslim*
(Prometheus, New York 1995).

 

    **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section22.html)**

**    [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section20.html)**

</div>

</div>
