+++
title = "22 22. Hindu objections"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**22. Hindu objections**

 

         A Hindu policy of ideological confrontation with hostile
religions is necessary for the survival of India as an essentially Hindu
country.  After having flattered Christianity and Islam for several
centuries, Hindus inside and outside the Sangh may come up with many
objections against such a policy.  As a BJP man once told me: "When we
attack Christianity, it is not the Christians who leave us -- they are
not with us anyway --, it is the Hindus who won't vote for us."  This
much is certainly true, that the rotten sentimentalism of "equal truth
of all religions" has gone fairly deep into the Hindu psyche.  Before
explaining anything to Christians and Muslims, the true story must be
explained to Hindus, whose obstinate self-deception is the greatest
obstacle to Hindu liberation.  While Muslims consider it only logical
that non-Muslims disbelieve Islam's defining dogmas, Hindus can get
quite indignant when someone dares to say that the Islamic creed is
wrong (more than when he scolds and ridicules Hinduism).    

 

         One argument reluctant Hindus will come up with, is that it is
pretentious to tell other people that they are wrong, as if any of us
has a monopoly on the truth.  This is a case of Hindus getting angry at
the sliver in their own eye but ignoring the beam in the enemy's eye. 
It is not Hinduism but Islam and Christianity which have started the
game of telling others that they are wrong.  If Hindus must enter this
confrontation, it is because the confrontation is already taking place,
though with only one side actually fighting.

 

         The meaning of: "There is no God except Allah", is precisely
that all Hindus and all other non-Muslims are wrong when they worship
Shiva or Amon-Ra or Wodan.  Actually, it goes much farther than that:
its full doctrinal implication is that those who worship any other God
(or no God at all) are doomed: doomed to servility and rightlessness in
this world and eternal hellfire in the next.  By contrast, critics of
Islam merely assert that believers in Islam are mistaken, without any
further ado.  The ancient believers in a flat earth were mistaken too,
yet they are not suffering in hell for that.  Erring is human, the fact
of being proven wrong does not give your critics the right to take your
property, to enslave you, to deny you full citizenship or public display
of your religion.  Muslims should not be punished for being deluded
about Mohammed's megalomaniacal claims (the way their religion wants to
punish us with jihad and hellfire for not sharing this delusion), they
should on the contrary be helped to make a new start.

 

         Hindus are mistaken when they assume that proving someone wrong
implies a claim to final truth.  Look at it with the eyes of science. 
It is a fact that responsible scientists will hesitate to declare a
theory to be absolutely true.  Thus, Newton's mechanics seemed to be
fully proven, and it was, but only for objects moving at moderate
speed.  Once objects moving at extremely high speeds were taken into
account, the theory broke down and a more sophisticated theory was
required, viz. Einstein's relativity theory.  This way, with every
broadening of our horizon, even the most well-proven theory may
ultimately be shown to be deficient.  Instead of achieving truth, we
merely create milestones of better theories on the way to an
ever-distant goal of absolute scientific truth, possibly an unreachable
goal which we can only approximate asymptotically.  The exotic world of
quantum physics has even discovered phenomena which cannot be adequately
described by one theory, but need two seemingly contradictory theories
to describe their behaviour (as wave or as particle).  Granted, the
notion of objective truth has become more complex and more elusive than
optimistic but naïve Enlightenment philosophers thought.[\[1\]](#_edn1) 

 

         And yet, no matter how cautious and even relativistic
philosophers of science have become vis-à-vis the truth claims of
science, they still take for granted that we can prove a theory wrong,
definitively wrong.  The theory that dewdrops are tears fallen from the
moon cannot withstand empirical tests.  To assert that water when heated
becomes ice, would be wrong; it would not just be "different" or
"differently valid", but downright wrong, definitively disproven.  In
mathematics, certain equations can be formulated for which there is no
solution, or several solutions at the same time, but all the same, the
equation "2 + 2 = 3" is and remains unambiguously wrong.  Eventhough the
search for the truth will go on for a long time to come, any truth
claims proven wrong can now already be discarded.  Rightness may be
elusive, but wrongness is quite straightforward.  I may hesitate to
pronounce an opinion on whether Vedanta is right, but I can now already
say that the defining truth claims of Christian and Islamic doctrine
stand disproven.

 

         Christianity and Islam are wrong in their central truth claims
and can immediately be discarded.  Humanity has lived without these
pretentious doctrines for long, and it is a matter of mathematical
certainty that it will resume doing so.  The question is only how much
damage they will be allowed to add to their record before expiring.

 

         Gandhi used to compare Hinduism and Islam with an older and a
younger brother, respectively.  His effective interpretation of this
simile was that the older brother should passively suffer any whim of
the younger brother, which is neither realistic nor educationally
advisable.  The simile is alright, but its realistic implication is that
the older brother should help the younger brother to outgrow his
childish ways.  If he has wisdom and fellow-feeling, he will take into
consideration the difficulties attending all transition processes.  This
leads to a somewhat nobler kind of objection which I expect some Hindus
to raise: think of the complete revolution which de-islamization or
de-christianization will mean for the people concerned!  With their
commendable conservatism, Hindus are wary of the damage which
revolutions tend to cause.

 

         Jesus and Mohammed and their front soldiers never cared much
about the upheaval and destruction they wrought; but we need not stoop
to their level.  As much as possible, the emancipation of Muslims and
Christians from their belief systems should be an evolutionary rather
than a revolutionary process.  First of all, most customs and rituals
and other externals need not be tampered with, for they are not what
makes these religions objectionable.  Ex-Catholics can continue to
venerate the Madonna, who is but a christianized version of Isis with
babe Horus (and similar mother-goddesses) anyway.  Ex-Muslims can
continue to pray five times a day, to watch their handpalms while
praying, to go on pilgrimage to Mecca (a pre-islamic
institution)[\[2\]](#_edn2), to fast for a month per year (preferably
fixed in early spring)[\[3\]](#_edn3), and to wear goat-beards.  These
customs are as good as any other.  It should be made clear to them that
Hinduism has room for these customs and rituals, that its objection is
only to God's Only-Begotten Son and Allah's Final Prophet.  All they
have to do is get rid of Jesus and Mohammed, and the communal problem
will disappear.

 

         Many people have argued that Muslims cannot convert to Hinduism
because no one will want to marry their children: for Muslims, they are
apostates, and for Hindus, the fact that they have declared themselves
converts to Hinduism does not make them members of the appropriate
caste.  Christian missionaries used to have this problem in reverse when
they tried to lure individual Hindus into Christianity.  Their solution
was to convert entire communities within a short time, so that people
could go on intermarrying within their own community after conversion. 
To the extent that caste endogamy persists, this is indeed the most
practical solution; both the Arya Samaj and the VHP claim to have
achieved several communal conversions of this type.[\[4\]](#_edn4) 

 

         With the modern media and modern education, it should not be
difficult to reach the Muslims and Christians by the millions.  Once the
exodus has started, every emigrant from the faith will persuade his
friends and relatives, and it will become a mass movement, bringing
across whole communities.  In fact, now already there is a high number
of nominal Muslims who have become skeptical of the claims of Islam, but
who think it wiser in the circumstances to keep quiet about their
convictions.  Ultimately it is they themselves who have to break free,
but Hindus can certainly help in creating the proper climate.

 

         In spite of all the sensitivity which you can bring to this, a
certain amount of shock will remain unavoidable when Muslims or
Christians come to realize that they have believed in fairy-tales for
all these years.  Imagine you are a mullah, highly specialized in Sharia
jurisprudence, and suddenly you realize that this whole Sharia is based
on the "model behaviour" of an unimportant individual who lived in a
distant country long ago, and whose knowledge was far too limited to
guide us in the problems which we are facing today, even apart from the
mental problem which further distorted his already limited vision.  Your
status suddenly crumbles, you feel like you have wasted the best years
of your life, you come down to earth and you have to start from
scratch.  It is like the situation of professors of Marxism-Leninism in
the former Soviet Bloc, who in 1989 found that their knowledge had
become totally useless overnight.

 

         Dr. Herman Somers, the Flemish ex-Jesuit who made a
psychopathological analysis of both Jesus and Mohammed, relates how he
discovered through his pioneering Bible studies that "Christianity was a
mistake".[\[5\]](#_edn5)  It was a painful process to realize that he
had wasted so much time on Christian theology, a purely imaginary
science, and that he had sacrificed so much to his commitments as a
Jesuit.  At the same time, it was a liberation, which had come "better
late than never".  Millions of people in Europe can testify that
outgrowing Christian beliefs has been a liberation.

 

         I am afraid I sound like a Christian missionary when I say that
we should help Muslims and Christians out of their religions *because we
love them*.  The expression sounds patronizing, but there is nothing I
can do about it: the insight in the wrongness of the Christian and
Islamic dogmas just happens to be a more advanced stage of knowledge
than the belief in their rightness.  Therefore, we help Christians and
Muslims on the way forwards when we make them questions the dogmas of
their religion.  The unbelievers are the elder brother, the believers
the younger brother.  And it does show concern and love for our
fellow-men when we help them to outgrow their delusions. 

 

         What, then, is the difference with Francis Xavier who came to
free the Indian Pagans from Hinduism "because he loved them so much" (as
Catholic story-books claim)?  If we make abstraction from the violent
methods which Francis Xavier used and which I reckon Hindus will never
resort to, we may concede that subjectively, it is the same thing: he
thought he was doing something good for the Hindus when he converted
them to Christianity.  But objectively, the crucial difference remains
that he converted them into a delusion, while Dr. Somers (through his
demythologizing books) has converted people out of a delusion.

 

         Here again, we find that the question of truth cannot be
avoided.  It makes little sense to discuss relations with Christianity
and Islam without evaluating their truth claims.  When their
propagandists brandish the values with which superficial Hindus have
identified them (charity and egalitarian brotherhood, respectively), we
can readily concede the desirability of these values, but we must point
out that these values do not add up to being a Christian or a Muslim;
for that, assent to the dogmas is necessary.  Charity and brotherhood
have been in existence for a long time, and we need not fear for their
disappearance when the last believers free themselves from the religions
which falsely claim these virtues as their very own contribution.  No
matter how laudable charity is, that does not make Jesus Christ the
Messiah.  No matter how badly Hindus need an increased sense of
brotherhood, that does not make the Quran a divine revelation.         
Another objection could be that religion, any religion, is bound up with
ethics, and that people will lose their ethics once they lose their
religion.  In my lifetime I've heard this argument used any number of
times in defence of Christianity, yet the ex-Christians who make up the
majority of my generation in my country are generally not worse people
than their Christian grandparents were.  Yet, to support this argument,
people in India as well as in Muslim countries are sure to point to the
West as a resounding illustration of the kind of decadence which
inevitably follows the loss of religion.  It is true that many people
have been freed from their Christian inhibitions only to dive deeply
into hedonism and consumerism, and that some lost souls in the cities
have abandoned their civic sense, their respect for life and property,
and their sexual morality along with their Christian beliefs.  If anyone
should be blamed for this, we should not forget the responsibility of
Christian clerics who have propagated the notion that Christianity and
morality are equivalent (the identification of their new Christian
belief with age-old values being a trick to give Christianity more
respectability among prospective converts)[\[6\]](#_edn6), and that fear
of punishment in the hereafter is the only way to keep people on the
right path.

 

         The challenge before responsible people in regions where people
lose the faith in large numbers, is to guide the masses in rediscovering
their natural religiosity and their natural sense of ethics, to rebuild
what Christianity has destroyed but was unable to replace in the long
run.  To quite an extent, this is already happening, and it goes without
saying that Asian religions (Hinduism, Buddhism and Taoism) are
providing the main though not the only guiding light.  The loss of
belief in Christ or Mohammed does not mean the loss of the religious
feeling, on the contrary.  Indeed, the often rationalist argumentation
of the Arya Samaj's *shuddhi* activists was never meant to free Muslims
and Christians from religion altogether, but to make them more
accessible for the Vedic message.  Yes, there is life after Christianity
and Islam, even an ethical and religious life.  In the West right now,
there is a tremendous religious seeking, people groping in the dark but
usually ending up with the great traditions from Asia in a suitably
adapted form. 

 

         In the case of Indian Muslims and Christians, such a
development would be entirely logical, though I can imagine that many
Muslims who see themselves as the progeny of Central-Asian conquerors
would opt for alternatives to mainstream Hinduism, such as Buddhism or
Zoroastrianism (both of which are going through a remarkable revival in
the Altaic-speaking and Iranian-speaking parts of the former Soviet
Union).  That is quite alright, for what is needed is a struggle for
religious freedom against dogmatic belief systems; not trying to pull
them into your own shop but encouraging them to find out for
themselves. 

 

         A very optimistic objection could be that Hindu society need
not bother about Christianity and Islam, because the thrust of their
historical aggression against Hinduism is weakening and will weaken
further in the future.  It has happened before: while Communists were
plotting the death of Hinduism and the dismemberment of India, the
Hindutva movement did very little to counter Communism, yet Communism
collapsed under its own failures in its very stronghold.  Christianity
has suffered major losses in America and staggering losses in Europe,
and even Islam which now seems such a formidable steamroller may be
undermined by emerging freethinkers from among its own ranks.  One day,
Hindus may wake up and find that the missionaries have left, the
petrodollars gone, the mosques turned into *goshala*s, who knows? 

 

         Unfortunately, luck does not usually come to those who count on
luck to save them.  The circumstances in South Asia, barring a Hindu
awakening, are quite encouraging for anti-Hindu predators.  As the late
Girilal Jain once told me, "nothing ever dies in India", and I could
well imagine a situation of Islam and Christianity dying out in their
homelands while thriving in India (cfr. Communism which is more alive in
Calcutta and JNU than in Beijing let alone Moscow).  Of course, the
ultimate disappearance of untenable belief systems is a mathematical
certainty, but before they go, they can still do tremendous damage to
the continuity of Hindu tradition.  Look at Nepal, till recently
entirely Hindu-Buddhist, and how Islamic infiltrators and Christian
missionaries are fast changing the religious landscape there. 

 

         In Hindutva publications, I read triumphal reports about Hindu
reconversions in tribal areas, but to me they sound like the blustering
triumphalism of the Marathas before the battle of Panipat.  Indeed,
other people working in tribal areas tell me that the Vanavasi Kalyan
Ashram and like-minded initiatives, in spite of their sincere and
commendable efforts, just can't compete with the well-organized and
heavily financed Christian missions.  The *Organiser* itself recently
carried a headline: "Conversion assumes alarming
proportions".[\[7\]](#_edn7)  Whatever their problems in the West, the
missionaries can still do tremendous damage to the continuity of Hindu
tradition and to the fabric of the Indian state.

 

         Some people object that what we need is not the conversion of
Muslims and Christians to a native religion, but simply the dilution of
their fanaticism.  They point to a few Christian theologians who follow
the vogue in certain Western theological faculties, which is to assert
that all religions are part of God's salvation plan.  In practice: let's
leave them to their deluded faith in imaginary divine revelations and
only-begotten sons, as long as they stop attacking us. 

 

         First of all, I have my doubts about the acceptance of these
deluded faiths, even if they are not immediately harmful to third
parties.  Though the Bahai sect is not persecuting people, the belief in
the Mohammed-like pretensions of its founders (along with the continued
belief in Jesus' and Mohammed's prophethood) remains a profoundly sad
mistake, one in which I cannot want my fellow-men to remain entrapped. 
In the Vedic phrase, "let us ennoble the world", let us not leave areas
of darkness shielded off against the light. 

 

         Secondly, I do not see much of this softening in the Indian
chapters of Christianity and Islam.  Apologists like Rafiq Zakaria and
Asghar Ali Engineer like to present a human face of Islam, but they do
so simply by lying and by concealing and denying the hard facts of
Islamic Scripture and history; they never make any concession or show
any sympthy for other religions and for the plight of the persecuted
Hindus in Islamic states and provinces.  Even those few Muslims who are
sincerely trying to redefine Islam as a tolerant faith carry no
conviction: their tolerant version of Islam can never be more than an
unstable transitory phase, either out of Islam altogether or back
towards the genuine intolerant Islam. 

 

         Among Christians, the trend towards genuine religious pluralism
does exist, but in India it concerns only a microscopic minority.  I
have heard Swayamsevaks assert that the Christians in South India have
become much less hostile, "for they are now giving Hindu first names to
their children".  But with my inside contacts and my close watch on
Christian media and scholarship, I know for fact that this change in
fashion does not represent a change of heart.  For a first test, how
many Christians who have named their children Rama or Sita have
supported the Ayodhya temple movement?  The historical fact that their
ancestors enjoyed the hospitality of the Hindus (as against the
persecution by rival Christian sects in the Roman Empire and by the
Mazdean state religion in Iran) only makes their animosity against
Hindus more bitter; people tend to hate those to whom they owe a debt. 
Moreover, even if we assume that dilution of Christianity and Islam down
to a non-offensive level of commitment is the desirable goal, history
testifies that this goal has been reached in Europe through a frontal
attack on Christianity itself.  It is no coincidence that Christianity
has mellowed in the last two centuries just when it was put to scrutiny
by scholars and driven from its political and educational power
positions by secularists (in the genuine sense).            

 

         If you flatter Islam, saying that it is a religion of peace and
brotherhood, this will not cure the believers of their
self-righteousness; rather, it will make them ask why you aren't
becoming a Muslim yourself.  But if you expose Islam, saying that it is
a deluded belief and intrinsically fanatical, it will make apologists
search the Quran for verses dimly alluding to tolerance, it will make
them write textbooks mendaciously proclaiming that Islam has always been
tolerant and for all their dishonesty, they will thereby implicitly be
extolling the virtue of tolerance.  This is indeed what we do see
happening with apologists like Wahiduddin Khan, Rafiq Zakaria or Asghar
Ali Engineer: even a small amount of writing about Islamic fanaticism by
Western scholars and journalists (while in those circles too, flattery
of Islam is the fashion) has sent them looking for proof that Islam is
tolerant.  If you are satisfied with mellowing Islam down, you have
every reason to join the project of a fundamental and uncompromising
criticism of Islamic doctrine and history.

 

         A more or less valid objection is that challenging the truth
claims of Islam and Christianity will provoke polemical attacks on
Hinduism and (even worse) genuine doubts among Hindus about their own
religion.  However, the anti-Hindu polemic is already there, Christian
missionaries have been very active at it ever since their arrival, and
secularists and Muslims have started their own variety since a few
decades; on that count, Hindus already have nothing to lose.  But I do
admit that a critical look at other religions may feel uncomfortable for
Hindus who are not used to critical thought.  If Mohammed who heard a
voice from heaven was just hallucinating, what shall we say about some
of the bhakti saints who dressed up like women to be united with the
divine lover Krishna, or who would hang in trees monkey-like to
impersonate Hanuman?         

 

         Hindu tradition is based on the experience of sages, sane men
and women who observed the world and explored consciousness.  As the
Hindu Renaissance spokesmen were fond of asserting, its basis is
scientific.  This does not mean that it is related to the latest
scientific theories in physics, many of which are bound to be superseded
by new theories, nor that the Vedas contain descriptions of modern
machines, as imaginative writers have tried to prove.[\[8\]](#_edn8)  It
means that its approach is scientific: the Vedic truths are verifiable,
universal and repeatable, not dependent on the views of privileged
individuals ("prophets") but *apaurusheya*, "impersonal".

 

         Hindus should get serious about the Constitutional injunction
to "develop the scientific temper", one of the few truly Hindu elements
in the secular Constitution.  If that means that some of the
superstitious deadwood which Hinduism has accumulated over the centuries
is doomed to fall by the wayside, so much the better.  The scientific
outlook is deadly to the core beliefs of Islam and Christianity, but
Hindus should welcome it as a somewhat neglected pillar of their own
tradition whose time has come once more.  It is not impossible that
mentally afflicted individuals have been attracted to the religious
role, particularly in the exaltation-prone Bhakti movement, and that the
talented ones among them have acquired some fame as poets, but this does
not affect the mainstream of *Sanatana Dharma*, which is not dependent
on any one individual authority. 

 

         Very imperfect individuals can find a meaningful place for
themselves in this tradition, but to assess the value of this tradition
it must be considered in its entirety, not just the viewpoints of
individual poets or gurus.  This ought to be an occasion to address one
of the most serious problems afflicting contemporary Hinduism:
sectarianism.  One of the additional reasons why many Hindus including
these travelling salesmen of enlightenment whom we get to see in the
West do not call themselves Hindu, is that their knowledge horizon does
not go beyond the teachings of their own guru.  It is high time that the
teaching of Hinduism is reoriented to a comprehensive view of the
tradition. 

 

         Some BJP men argue that it is not the task of a political party
to wage an ideological struggle.  I wonder what the Communists would say
about that.  At any rate, the Sangh is a family, a house with many
mansions, and it certainly has an appropriate department for this kind
of work.  Indeed, the VHP now already claims to do just this kind of
work, viz. to reconvert Muslim communities which have not lost touch
with their Hindu heritage entirely.  Some people even within the Sangh
are privately expressing doubts about these conversions, doubts which
are aggravated by the lack of reliable record-keeping; for all its
omnipresence, the Sangh and its affiliates are totally unable to provide
facts and figures about conversions into and out of Hinduism.

 

         Apart from the conversion business, facing and speaking the
truth about hostile religions is most of all an urgent necessity within
Hindu activist circles.  The BJP and every Sangh-affiliated
organizations has ideological training sessions for its own cadres, and
it is there, rather than in face-to-face talks with the minorities, that
the servile flattery of Islam and Christianity has to be flushed out
first.  It is inside the BJP office, with no Muslim or secularist
listening, that I heard BJP "ideologues" repeat the worn-out Congress
lies about the British being guilty of pitting Islam against Hinduism. 
The present situation is not -- as secularist media routinely allege --
that Hindus among themselves are facing the truth about these predatory
religions, only to flatter them in public out of tactical calculations. 
The secularists suspect that the BJP's public virtue of professed
secularism hides a private vice of communalism, I have noticed many
times that this public flattery of Christianity and Islam is very much
based on genuine convictions, on eager self-deception.  At this point, I
am not asking the BJP to speak boldly to the Muslims and the
secularists; for now, they will be doing their duty if they stop
deceiving their own cadres and voters. 

 

         At the same time, the BJP need not postpone a bolder stand
longer than necessary.  A look at the standard practice among non-Hindus
shows that there is nothing insupportable about a politician publicly
mocking a religion.  In Belgium, it is not uncommon that socialist or
liberal politicians openly express their anti-Christian convictions,
making jokes about Catholic superstitions, all while sitting in
coalition governments with the Christian-Democrats.  The Muslims openly
express their adherence to Islam, a doctrine which is intrinsically
hostile to Hinduism.  They openly testify that "there is no God but
Allah", meaning that Hindus are all profoundly wrong.  So what?

 

         At this point, the BJP spokesman will come out with his trump
objection: "But criticizing Islam is dangerous!  People have been
murdered for doing just that!"  This, I cannot deny.  One of these
murders, that of Arya Samaj writer Pandit Lekh Ram, was the reason for
British-imposed legal curbs on the freedom to criticize Islam; after
that, some Arya Samaj writers have been prosecuted under these laws,
others (most famously Swami Shraddhananda) have been murdered by Muslim
militants in the 1920s and 30s, to the applause of the whole Muslim
clergy.  Ever since, Arya Samaj polemic against Islam has become muted,
which proves the efficiency of terrorism.  But then, even in today's
atmosphere of Hindu *sarva-dharma-samabhava* and Islamic arrogance,
Islam-friendly Hindu activists including BJP men are already being
killed by Muslims, without any gain in return.  Swami Shraddhananda at
least died for something, for the freedom of Hindus to liberate their
estranged countrymen by informing them of the truth about Islam; if the
BJP abandons that right, its martyrs have died in vain.

 

         Moreover, the general opinion climate can be changed.  Naguib
Mahfouz has described how in his young days, more than fifty years ago,
Islam was seen by the Egyptian middle-class as a relic from the past. 
People could openly mock Islamic beliefs, there was no question of being
punished for that.  Since then, the pendulum has swung in the opposite
direction (after a near-mortal attack on his person in 1994, Mahfouz
himself had to go in hiding), but it will swing back.  Hindus including
BJP men can contribute to this change of climate by defying the
Emergency which Islam has clamped on India, and by publicly breaking the
taboo on criticism of Islam.  It will be shocking to the first speaker
to hear himself utter unspeakable things like: "I reject the belief in
Quranic revelation", but with time and practice, it will become easier.

 

         It should be kept in mind that ideological confrontation is the
best and ultimately the only way to prevent physical confrontation.  A
few hotheads may initially try to "punish" the questioning of Islamic
doctrine, but this is bound to remain a marginal problem.  The really
frightening prospect is the huge riots and the civil war which history
has in store for India if the predatory religions are allowed to grab
even more of India's population and territory for themselves. 
Therefore, they have to be exposed.

 

         Ultimately, the truth is unstoppable.  Heliocentrism and other
breakthroughs to modern science had their martyrs, such as Giordano
Bruno and, in a limited way, Galileo Galilei, but ultimately geocentrism
could not hold out against the intrinsic superiority of heliocentrism. 
Like snow before sunshine, like darkness before dawn, dogmatic beliefs
are bound to give way once they are exposed to the light of reason --
and of the Vedic vision.

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  It is precisely this modest and
mature view of truth which underlies Hindu pluralism.  As David Frawley
has convincingly argued, the central value of Hinduism is not
"tolerance" (as interested parties try to make Hindus believe) but
truth.  Yet, this does not lead to the quasi-monotheistic triumphalism
and intolerance which characterizes 19th-century-type positivism (e.g.
the ill-informed condemnation of Ayurveda and other traditional forms of
medicine by academic medicine), but to a sensitive respect for different
levels and expressions of truth.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(             \[2\])  Of course, they should restore the
proper direction of walking around the Kaaba.  The Pagan *parikrama* is
made in the direction of the planetary motions, i.e. (in the northern
hemisphere) clockwise, but Mohammed reversed it in order to prove his
non-Paganism.  A side-effect is that in contrast with the Pagans,
Muslims point their left hand to the Kaaba, the one which they consider
unclean because they wipe their bottoms with it.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(             \[3\])  Diet specialists advise early spring
as the best time for fasting, and this was also the Christian and
Pagan-Arab custom (*Ramadan/Ramzan* was the ninth month in a solilunar
year beginning ca. 1 July, roughly coinciding with March), but Mohammed
jeopardized this healthy custom by tampering with the calendar, so that
the month of fasting can fall in midwinter of summer as well.

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref4)^(             \[4\])  It may of course be an occasion to
rethink this practice.  Anyway, who has the facts and figure about caste
discrimination among Hindutva activists in their private lives?  Both
they and their enemies ought to be interested in these data.

</div>

<div id="edn5" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref5)^(             \[5\])  Dr. Somers' books are only available
in Dutch, but a summary of his Bible analysis is given in K. Elst:
*Psychology of Prophetism* (Voice of India 1992).  An English summary of
his findings on Mohammed is in preparation.

</div>

<div id="edn6" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref6)^(             \[6\])  In his Ten Commandments, Moses
already plays this trick by juxtaposing his own innovations (monotheism,
aniconic cult, taboo on God's name) with long-established norms (respect
for parents, chastity etc.).  The Quran too has many passages where
belief in Mohammed's message is mentioned in one breath with traditional
virtues, as if there were a necessary connection between the two.  Naïve
preachers deduce from such passages that Mohammed had been the first to
propagate these virtues and that the Pagan Arabs were bereft of
morality.

</div>

<div id="edn7" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref7)^(             \[7\])  Contributed by M.G. Vaidya,
*Organiser*, 2 March 1997.  It is significant that, as a close reader of
RSS publications since seven years, I have never come across any kind of
report listing actual data about gains and losses on the conversion
front.  Any modern organization going about such a serious and
large-scale project (e.g. the Christian missions) sets up fact-finding
missions and an information-gathering network so as to know exactly what
the challenges are and how the project is faring; not so the saviours of
Hinduism, who think they can do without this.

</div>

<div id="edn8" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref8)^(             \[8\])  All the same, it is relevant that
Vedic seers were pioneers in the sciences of astronomy, mathematics and
linguistics, just as some Taoists contributed to physical science and
technology, as a consequence of their conviction that these domains of
reality were pregnant with a transcendent quality.  This is much in
contrast with Jesus and Mohammed and their companions, who had nothing
to offer to science except incomprehension and persecution.

 

    **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section23.html)**

**    [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section21.html)**

</div>

</div>
