+++
title = "07 CHAPTER VI"

+++

Adventures of Maheput Sing of Bhowaneepoor--Advantages of a good road
from Lucknow to Fyzabad--Excellent condition of the artillery
bullocks with the Frontier Police--Get all that Government allows for
them--Bred in the Tarae--Dacoits of Soorujpoor Bareyla--The Amil
connives at all their depredations, and thrives in consequence--The
Amil of the adjoining districts does not, and ruined in consequence--
His weakness--Seetaram, a capitalist--His account of a singular
_Suttee_--Bukhtawar Sing's notions of _Suttee_, and of the reason why
Rajpoot widows seldom become _Suttees_--Why local authorities carry
about prisoners with them--Condition of prisoners--No taxes on mango-
trees--Cow-dung cheaper than wood for fuel--Shrine of "Shaikh Salar"
at Sutrik--Bridge over the small river Rete--Recollection of the
ascent of a balloon at Lucknow--End of the pilgrimage.


Poorae Chowdheree, of Kuchohee, held a share in the lands of the
village of Bhanpoor in Radowlee. He mortgaged it in 1830, to a co-
sharer, who transferred the mortgage to _Meherban Sing_, of
Guneshpoor. Poorae disliked the arrangement, and made all the
cultivators desert the village of Bhanpoor, and leave the lands
waste. Meherban attacked the village of Kuchohee in consequence,
killed Porae, and seized upon all the lands of Bhanpoor for himself.
Rajah Ram, one of the ousted co-sharers in these lands, attacked and
killed Meherban in 1832, and seized upon all the lands of Bhanpoor.

After the death of his first wife, Meherban had attacked the house of
Bhowanee Sing, Rajpoot, of Teur, carried off his daughter, who had
been affianced to another, and forcibly made her his wife. By her he
had one daughter and one son, named _Maheput Sing_, who now inherited
from his father a fifteenth part of one of the six and half shares
into which the lands of Guneshpoor were divided. He, by degrees,
murdered, or drove out of the village, all his co-sharers, save
Gunbha Sing and Chungha Sing, joint proprietors of a small part of
one of the shares, known by the name of the Kunnee Puttee. From the
year 1843, Maheput Sing became a robber by profession, and the leader
of a formidable gang; and in three years, by a long series of
successful enterprises, he acquired the means of converting his
residence, on the border of the town of Guneshpoor, into a strong
fort, among the deep ravines of the Goomtee river. This fort he
called _Bhowaneegur_, after Bhowanee, the patroness of the trade of
murder and robbery, which he had adopted.

I shall now mention, more circumstantially, a few of the many
atrocities committed by him and his gang, during the last few years
of his career, as illustrative of the state of society in Oude.
Bulbhudder Sing, a subadar of the 45th Regiment of Bengal Native
Infantry, resided at Rampoor Sobeha, in the Dureeabad district. By
degrees he purchased thirteen-sixteenths of the lands of these two
small villages, which adjoin each other, out of the savings from his
pay, and those of his nephew, Mugun Sing, havildar of the 43rd
Regiment Bengal Native Infantry. On his being transferred to the
invalid establishment, the subadar resided with his family in
Rampoor, and in May, 1846, his nephew, Mugun Sing, came home on
furlough to visit him. Gujraj, an associate of Maheput Sing's, held
the other three-sixteenths of the lands of these two villages; and by
the murder of the subadar and all his family, he thought he should be
able to secure for himself the possession of the whole estate in
perpetuity. The family consisted of the subadar and his wife,--Mugun
Sing, the son of his deceased brother, Man Sing, and his wife; and
his son Bijonath and his wife,--Dwarka Sing, son of Ojagur Sing,
another deceased brother of the subadar,--Mahta Deen, the son of
Chundun Sing, another deceased brother of the subadar, and his wife
and young son, Surubjeet Sing, seven years of age,--Kulotee Sing, son
of Gobrae, another deceased brother of the subadar,--Bag Sing, a
relative,--Bechun Sing, a servant,--Seo Deen, the gardener,--Jeeawun
Sing, the barber, and the widow of Salwunt Sing, another son of Mugun
Sing, havildar.

When the family were all assembled, Maheput Sing, with Gujraj and
other associates, and a gang of one hundred and fifty armed
followers, proceeded to the village at midnight, and carefully
reconnoitred the premises. It was, after consultation, determined to
defer the attack till daybreak, as the subadar and his nephews were
known to be brave and well-armed men, who kept watch till towards
morning, and would make a desperate resistance, unless taken by
surprise. They remained concealed within the enclosure of Gujraj's
house, till just before daylight, when they quietly surrounded the
subadar's house. As day dawned the subadar got up, opened the door
and walked out, as usual, to breathe the fresh air, thinking all
safe. He was immediately shot down, and on Mugun Sing's rushing out
to assist his uncle, he received a shot in the eye, and fell dead on
his body. The robbers then rushed in, cut down Jeeawun, the barber,
while attempting to shut the door, and wounded Kulotee Sing,* Bag
Sing, and others of the party. Finding that they could no longer
stand against the numbers, rushing in at the doors and windows, the
defenders climbed from the inside to the flat roof of the house, over
the apartments of the men, fired down upon the robbers, who were
still inside, and shot one of them. The robbers, finding they could
not otherwise dislodge them, set fire to that part of the house, and
the men were obliged to leap off to save themselves. In doing this,
Bag Sing hurt his spine, and Seo Deen sprained his ankle, and both
lay where they fell, pretending to be dead, till night. The others
all went off in search of succour.

[* Kulotee Sing was murdered, a few days afterwards, by Maheput and
Gujraj, as he was superintending the cultivation of his lands.]

The robbers found the boy, Surubjeet, lying sick on his bed, attended
by his mother. They seized him and dashed his head against the
ground; and when he still showed signs of life, Gujraj cut him to
pieces with his sword. They then seized and stripped the females
naked, and sprinkled boiling oil over their bodies, till they pointed
out all the property concealed in the house. Seventeen hundred rupees
were found buried in the floor; and the rest of the property in
clothes, gold and silver ornaments, and brass utensils, amounted to
about ten thousand rupees.

About noon, while the robbers were still in the house, the Amil of
Mohlara came with a large force and one gun, and surrounded them; but
stood at a safe distance, whence he kept up for some time a fire from
his gun and his matchlocks, which had no effect whatever. The robbers
fired in return from the house, merely to show that they were not to
be frightened from their booty in that way. This went on till after
dark in the evening, when the robbers all retired to the jungles with
their booty, unmolested by the Amil.

Byjonath, who had brought the Amil to the spot, urged him on as much
as he could to save the property and females, and avenge the death of
those who had fallen, and he killed one man and seized another, the
son of one of the leaders; but he was obliged to give him up to the
Amil as an hostage, for the recovery of the property, and a witness
to the robbery. The Amil kept him for six months, and then let him go
on the largest ransom he could get for him from his father. The
circumstances were all represented, through the Resident, to the
Durbar, and redress prayed for, but none was ever obtained.*

[* When the Resident visited this place, in his tour, in January,
1850, Dwarka Sing and other members of the family described all the
circumstances of this attack, and they were taken down; and have been
confirmed since by a judicial investigation.]

In May 1846, Maheput attacked the house of Seobuksh, a gardener, and
after plundering it, he seized and carried off to the jungle the
gardener's brother, Puroutee, and tortured him to death with hot
irons, because he could not raise the sum demanded for his ransom.

In August 1847, Maheput Sing and his gang attacked the house of
Meherban Tewaree, subadar of the Gwalior Contingent, in the village
of Hareehurpoor, in the district of Rodowlee. It was about ten at
night, and the whole family were asleep. The subadar lay on his cot
below, near the door, his brother, Angud Tewaree, slept on the upper
story. Some placed ladders and entered the upper story through a
window; Maheput, with others, broke open the door, near which the
subadar slept below. The brother got a sword-cut in the hand, and
called out from the upper story as loud as he could for help; but
their neighbours were all too much alarmed to come to their aid.
Maheput seized and bound the subadar with his own waistband, and
commanded his brother to come down, saying, that he need not call for
help, as the villagers all knew him too well to molest him; and if he
did not come down instantly he would set fire to the house. Seeing no
chance of help, he came down, and was bound with his own waistband in
the same manner. When the subadar remonstrated against this
treatment, Maheput struck him over the face. They then plundered the
house of all the property it contained, to the value of six hundred
and fifty rupees; and took the subadar and his brother to the
jungles; and, in the morning, demanded a ransom of one thousand
rupees. At last they came down to four hundred rupees and the horse,
which the subadar kept for his own riding. The subadar consented, and
his brother was released to get the money and horse. He borrowed the
money and sent it with the horse through Bhowanee Deen Tewaree,
landholder of Ladeeka Poorwa, and the subadar was released. He
presented three petitions, through the Resident, and orders were sent
from the Durbar to the local authorities, Hurdut Sing and Monna Lal,
but they were both in league with the robbers, and tried to get the
subadar made away with, to save further trouble, and he sought
security with his regiment.*

[* Meherban Tewaree, subadar, was present, as a witness at the
subsequent trial of Maheput and Gujraj, who were sentenced to
transportation beyond seas for life.]

In January 1847, Maheput and his gang attacked the village of
Bahapoor, in the Rodowlee district; and after plundering all the
houses, seized and carried off among others Seetul, the spirit-
dealer, and the two sons of Reehta, the widow of Bhosoo, one twenty-
two years of age, and the other eighteen. They tortured them with
red-hot irons, and tied bamboos round their necks every day for
fifteen days. Maheput then shot the eldest son, and cut his body to
pieces with his sword. The younger son, at night, made his escape
while they were asleep, and returned to tell the tale of his
brother's murder to his mother. Seetul, the Kalwar, got his uncle to
lend him twenty-eight rupees, for which he was released.

In April 1847, Maheput Sing and his gang attacked the house of
Ramoutar, Brahmin, of the Brahmin village of Guneshpoor, in Rodowlee;
plundered it of properly valued at one hundred rupees, and then bound
Ramoutar, his father and two sons, and took them off to the jungles;
and there tortured them all for seven days. He then had the two boys,
one nine years old and the other five, suspended to a tree and
flogged; and Ramoutar himself tied to a thorny tree and beaten till
the blood flowed down and drenched his waistband, because he could
pay nothing, and would not sign a bond to pay two thousand rupees.
His sufferings and the sight of those of his two sons made him at
last sign one for one thousand rupees. He was flogged again till his
friends brought four hundred out of the thousand, and Cheyt Sing,
Thakoor, a respectable landholder of Koleea, in Rodowlee, consented
to give security for the payment of two hundred and forty-two rupees
more. Ramoutar and his family were then released, after they had been
confined and tortured for thirty-six days, and they went off and
resided at Bookcheyna in Khundasa. A year after his house was there
attacked by Maheput Sing and his gang, and plundered of all it
contained; and his brother Seetul, and his youngest son were seized
and taken off to his fort at Bhowaneegur, and there tortured and
starved for six months. Ramoutar then borrowed one hundred and sixty
rupees, and obtained the release of his brother Seetul, and a year
after he was able to raise forty-seven rupees more, with which he
ransomed his son.

In May 1847, Maheput Sing attacked the house of Seolal Tewaree of
Torsompoor, in Rodowlee, at midnight; and after plundering it and
stripping his mother and wife, and the wife of his brother, Jurbundun
Sing, of all the clothes and ornaments they had, he bound and carried
off to the jungle the two brothers, Seolal and Jurbundun. They were
flogged, and had hot irons applied to their bodies every day for
twenty days, and had only a little flour to eat and water to drink,
once in three days. After twenty days they contrived to make their
escape one dark and stormy night, and got home; but three days after
he again attacked their house and burnt it to the ground, with all
they possessed. He, at the same time, burnt down the house of their
uncle, in the same village, and that of one of their ploughmen; and
two cows and one bullock were burnt to death in the flames.

In July 1847, Maheput Sing and his gang attacked the house of Chubbee
Lal, Brahmin, in the village of Bunnee, in the Rodowlee district, and
after plundering it of property to the value of five hundred rupees,
he bound and took the old Brahmin off to the jungles, and demanded
from him a ransom of eight thousand rupees. This sum the old man
could not pay, and he was flogged with thorns, and had red-hot irons
applied to his body every day. Maheput then sent a letter to the old
man's son, Dwarka, desiring him to send the eight thousand rupees if
he wished his father to live. The house having been plundered, the
family had nothing left, and could persuade no one to lend them. On
receiving a reply to this effect, Maheput had the old man's body
plastered all over with moist gunpowder, and made him stand in the
sun till it was dry. He then set fire to the powder, and the poor man
was burnt all over. He then cut off both his hands at the wrists, and
his nose, and sent them to his family, and in this condition be
afterwards sent the poor man to his home upon a cot. The son met his
father at the door, but the old man died as soon as his son had
embraced him.

Maheput carried off Pem, the son of Teeka, at the same time, and
tortured him till his family paid the ransom demanded. He was witness
to the tortures of the old Brahmin.

In August 1847, Maheput and his gang attacked the house of Bichook, a
Brahmin, in the village of Torsompoor, in Rodowlee, at midnight,
while he was sleeping, and bound and carried him off to the jungle.
The next day, when he was about to have him tortured for a ransom,
one of his followers interceded for him, and he was released. But a
month after, Maheput and his gang again attacked his house, and after
plundering it of all it contained, they burnt it to the ground.
Bichook had run off on hearing their approach, and he escaped to
Syudpoor.

In November, 1846, Maheput Sing attacked the house of Sook Allee, in
Guneshpoor, at midnight, with a gang of one hundred men; and, after
plundering it of all the property it contained, to the amount of four
hundred rupees, he burnt it to the ground, and bound and carried off
Sook Allee to the house of his friend, Byjonath Bilwar, a landholder
in the village of Kholee, eight miles distant. He there demanded a
ransom of five hundred rupees; and on his declaring that he neither
had nor could borrow such a sum, he had him tortured with hot irons,
and flogged in the usual way. He kept him for two months at Kholee,
and then took him to Tukra, in the Soorajpoor purgunnah, where he
kept him for another month, torturing, and giving him half a meal
every other day. At the end of three months, Akber Sing and Bhowanee
Deen, Rajpoot landholders of Odemow, contrived to borrow two hundred
rupees for Sook Allee, and he was released on the payment of this
sum. The marks of the hot irons, applied to his body by Maheput Sing,
with his own hands, are still visible, and will remain so as long as
he lives.*

[* I saw these marks on the sufferer.]

About the same time--the latter end of 1846--Maheput Sing sent to
Sheik Sobratee, of the same place, a message through a pausee, named
Bhowanee Deen, demanding twenty-five rupees. This sum was sent; but
six weeks had not elapsed, before Sheik Sobratee received another
demand for the same amount, through the same person. He had no money,
but promised to send the sum in ten days. At midnight, on the fourth
day after this, Maheput and his gang attacked his house, and
plundered it of all they could find, female ornaments, and clothes,
and brass utensils. Sobratee was that night sleeping at the house of
his friend Peree, the wood-dealer, in the same town. Maheput tried to
make his mother and wife point out where he was, by torturing them,
but they either would not or could not do so. After some search,
however, they discovered him, and bound and took him off, with
handcuffs, and an iron collar round his neck, to the Kurseea jungle,
in the Hydergur pergunnah. His son, a boy, had escaped. After
torturing him in the usual way for eight days, they sent a message to
his mother by Maheput's servant, Salar, to say, that unless she sent
a ransom of five hundred rupees, her son's nose and hands should be
cut off and sent to her as those of _Chubbee Lal_, Brahmin, of
Bunnee, had been. She prevailed upon Baroonath Gotum to lend the
money; and Maheput sent Sobratee to him, accompanied by one of his
armed retainers, with orders to make him over to the Gotum, if he
pledged himself in due form to pay. He did so, and Sobratee was made
over to him, and the next day sent home to his wife and mother. Some
months after, however, when he had completed his fort of Bhowneegur,
Maheput sent to demand two hundred rupees more from Sobratee, and
when he found he could not pay, he had his house pulled, down, and
took away all the materials to his fort. What he did not require he
caused to be burnt. He got from Sobratee, in ransom and plunder, more
than three thousand rupees; and he has been ever since reduced to
great poverty and distress.

In November 1847, Maheput Sing and his gang seized and carried off
Khosal, a confectioner, of Talgon, in Rodowlee, who had gone to his
sister at Buhapoor, near Guneshpoor, to attend a marriage--took him
to the jungle, and tortured and starved him in the usual way for five
weeks. He had him burnt with red-hot irons, flogged and ducked in a
tank every day, and demanded a ransom of two hundred rupees. At last,
his brother, Davey Deen, borrowed thirty-three rupees from Rambuksh,
a merchant of Odermow, and offered to pay it for his ransom. Maheput
sent Khosal, with his agent, Bhowanee Deen, to Rambuksh, and he
released him on getting the money. He still bears on his body the
marks of the stripes and burnings.*

[* These marks I have seen.]

In December 1847, Maheput and his gang attacked the house of Motee
Lal Misser, a Brahmin, in the village of------, and after robbing it
of all that it contained, he seized and carried off his nephew, Ram
Deen, a boy of seven years of age, and tortured him for a month in
the jungle. He then cut off his left ear and the forefinger of his
right hand, and sent them to the uncle in a letter, stating, that if
he did not send him one thousand rupees, he would send the boy's head
in the same manner. The boy's father had died, and his uncle, with
great difficulty, prevailed upon his friends and neighbours to lend
him two hundred and twenty rupees, which he sent to Maheput, and his
nephew was released. The boy declares to me that Maheput cut off his
ear and finger with his own hands.*

[* This boy was present, as a witness, at the trial of Maheput.]

In June 1848, Forsut Pandee, of Resalpandee-ka-Poorwa, in Rodowlee,
accompanied Girwar Sing, a Rajpoot of Bowra, in Rodowlee, to
Guneshpoor, on some business. They were smoking and talking together
at the house of Mungul Sing, Thakoor, a large landholder of that
place, when five of Maheput's armed men came up, and told Forsut
Pandee to attend them to their master. Girwar Sing remonstrated and
declared that his honour had been pledged for Forsut Pandee's
personal safety. Mungul Sing, Thakoor, however, told him, that he
must offer no opposition, as they seized all travellers who came that
way, and it was dangerous to oppose them. He was taken to Maheput
Sing, in his fort at Bhowaneegur, situated half a mile from
Guneshpoor. Maheput told him that he had heard of his having a good
flint gun, and a shawl in his house, and that he must have them.
Forsut Pandee swore on the Ganges that he had no such things. He then
had him tied up to a tree and flogged him with his own hands with
thorny bushes, the scars of which are still visible. He then demanded
a ransom of three hundred rupees, and had him flogged and tortured
every day for a month, while he gave him to eat only half a pound of
flour every two or three days. The prisoner's brother, Bhoree Pandee,
sold all the clothes and ornaments of his family, utensils, and
furniture, and their hereditary mango and mhowa grove, and raised two
hundred and six rupees, which he sent to Maheput, through Baldan
Sing, a landholder of Bharatpoor, two miles from Guneshpoor. On the
receipt of this Forsut Pandee was released.

In October 1848, Maheput Sing sent ten of his gang to seize a
cultivator, by name Khosal, who was engaged in cultivating his land
in a hamlet, one mile south of the town of Syudpoor. They seized and
bound him and took him off to their leader, Maheput, who had him
tortured for a month in the usual way. He had him tied up to a ladder
and flogged. He had red-hot irons applied to different parts of his
body--he put dry combustibles on the open palms of his hands and set
fire to them, so that he has lost the use of his fingers for life.
For the whole month he gave him only ten pounds of flour to eat; but
his friends contrived to convey a little more to him occasionally,
which he ate by stealth. He was reduced, by hunger and torture, to
the last stage, when his family, by the sale of all they had in the
world, and the compassion of their friends, raised the sum of one
hundred and twenty-six rupees, which they sent to Maheput, by Thakoor
Persaud, a landholder of the village of Somba, and obtained his
release. The tortures have rendered him a cripple, and the family are
reduced to a state of great wretchedness.*

[* This man was a witness at the trial of Maheput, and I saw the
signs of his sufferings.]

The village of Guneshpoor yielded a revenue to Government of twenty-
one thousand rupees a-year, and was divided into six and half shares
each, held by a different person. One belonged to Omrow Sing,
Rajpoot, the father of Hunmunt Sing, a corporal in the 44th Regiment
Bengal Native Infantry, and descended to Omrow Sing's eldest son,
Davey Sing. One share was held, jointly, by Maheput Sing and Chotee
Sing, when, in October 1848, Maheput assembled a gang of about two
hundred men, and attacked the house of Davey Sing, while his brother
Hunmunt Sing was at home on recruiting service. There were in the
house the corporal and his three brothers, and all mounted, with
their friends, to the top of the house, with their swords and spears,
but without fire-arms. The robbers, unable to ascend from the
outside, broke open the doors, but the brothers descended and
defended the passage so resolutely, that the gang was obliged to
retire and watch for a better opportunity.

Three months after, in January 1849, Maheput attacked the house
again, with a gang of five hundred men and good scaling-ladders. Some
ascended to the top on the ladders, while others broke open the doors
and forced their way in. The brothers and the other male members of
the family defended themselves resolutely. One of the brothers,
Esuree Sing, his uncle, Runjeet Sing, sipahee of the 11th Regiment
Bengal Native Infantry, his cousin, Beetul Sing, sipahee of the 8th
Regiment Bombay Native Infantry, were all killed, and hacked to
pieces by Maheput and his gang. No person came to the assistance of
the family, and the robbers retired with their booty, consisting of
five hundred and ten rupees in money, four muskets, and four swords,
and twelve hundred maunds of corn, and all the clothes, ornaments,
and utensils that could be found. They burnt down the house, and
dispossessed the family of their share in the estate, and plundered
all the cultivators. Davey Sine the eldest brother, went to reside at
Bhanpoor, in the neighbourhood. While he was engaged in cutting a
field of pulse, in the morning, about seven o'clock, in the month of
March following, Maheput Sing, with a gang of two hundred men,
attacked his house, killed his two brothers, Gordut and Hurdut Sing,
and their servant, Omed, and shot down his nephew, Gorbuksh Sing.
Ramsahae, the nephew of Maheput Sing, ran up to despatch him with his
sword, but Gorbuksh rose, cut him down, and killed him with his sword
before he himself expired.

The corporal, Hunmunt Sing, of the 44th Native Infantry, described
all these things in several petitions to the Resident, and prayed
redress, but no redress was ever obtained. Saligram and other
relatives of the corporal had been plundered and wounded by Maheput
Sing and his gang, and he describes many other atrocities committed
by the same gang. His petition of the 27th September 1849, was sent
to the King by the Resident, who was told, that the Amil of the
district of Dureeabad, Girdhara Lal, had been ordered to seize
Maheput Sing and his gang. This Amil was always in league with them.

In December 1847, Maheput Sing and his gang attacked the house of a
female, named Arganee, the widow of Sheik Rozae, in the village of
Pertab Pahae. It was midnight, and she was sleeping with her two
grandchildren, the sons of her son, who was a sipahee in the 66th
Regiment of Bengal Native Infantry. They bound her hands: and leaving
her young grandchildren alone, took her off to the jungle eight miles
distant. There Maheput demanded from her the seven hundred rupees
which she was said to have accumulated; and when she pleaded poverty,
and said that the sipahee's pay was their only means of subsistence,
he had her stripped naked and flogged in the usual way. For a month
he had her stripped and flogged in the same manner every day. She
then signed a bond to pay one hundred rupees on a certain day, and
was released. She sold all she had, and borrowed all she could, and
on the fourth day sent him fifty, and the other fifty on the
fifteenth day; but he afterwards had the poor widow's house pulled
down and all the wood-work carried to his fort of Bhowaneegur.

In April 1849, Maheput Sing and his gang attacked the house of
Seodeen Misser, sipahee of the 63rd Regiment Bengal Native Infantry;
and after plundering it, seized and carried off to the jungle his
brother and that brother's two sons--one seven years of age and the
other five--and his sister. He sold the two boys as slaves for two
hundred rupees to a person named Davey Sookul, of Guneshpoor; and
tortured the brother and sister till the sipahee and his friends sold
all they had in the world for their ransom, when he released them.

In the month of May 1849, Maheput Sing and his gang at midnight
attacked the house of Eseree Sing, a Rajpoot of the Chouhan tribe, in
the village of Salpoor, in Dureeabad; and after stripping his mother
and all the other females of the family of their clothes and
ornaments, plundering the house of all it contained, rupees, twenty-
five in money, two handsome matchlocks, two swords, two spears, and
two shields, and brass utensils, weighing one hundred and sixty
pounds, he bound Eseree Sing himself, and took him off with his
sister, four years of age, and his daughter, only three, to a jungle,
four miles distant. He there released Eseree Sing himself, but took
on the girls, and made over his daughter to Akber, one of his
followers, and his sister to Bechoo, another of his gang, to be
united to them in marriage. It was at their instigation, and for that
purpose chiefly, that he made the attack.*

[* Akber and Bechoo are now in prison, with Maheput, at Lucknow.]


In August 1849, Maheput and his gang attacked the houses of Seetul,
Gorbuksh, and Sook Lal, Brahmins, of Guneshpoor; and after plundering
them, he carried off Gorbuksh and his son, Ram Deen, and Bhowanee,
the son of Seetul, and Sook Lal, and murdered them. He carried off
and tortured, in a shocking manner, Benee, of the same place, till he
paid a ransom; and Ongud, son of Khunmun, an invalid Khalasie, of the
26th Regiment Native Infantry.

In September 1849, Maheput attacked and plundered the house of Ongud
Sing, sipahee of the 24th Regiment Bengal Native Infantry, and
confined the sipahee for some time. His petition was sent to the King
on the 11th November 1849.

On the 15th of December 1849, Monowur Khan, havildar of the 62nd
Regiment Bengal Native Infantry, complained that Maheput Sing had
seized him as he was walking on the high road, and extorted eleven
rupees from him. His petition was sent to the King, with a request,
that all local authorities might be urged to aid in his arrest; and
orders were again sent to the Frontier Police.

On the 24th December 1849, Madho Sing, sipahee of the 11th Regiment
Bengal Native Infantry, complained that Maheput Sing had attacked and
plundered his house twice, burnt it down, and cut down all the trees
which the family had planted for generations, and turned them all out
of the village--that in the second attack he had murdered his
daughter, a girl of only nine years of age. His petition was sent to
the King, who, on the 13th of February 1850, replied that he had
proclaimed Maheput as a robber and murderer, and offered a reward of
three thousand rupees for his arrest.

On the 16th of March 1850, Goverdhun complained, that Maheput had
attacked and plundered his house, and carried off his father to the
jungles, and extorted from him a ransom of one hundred and ten
rupees. His petition was sent to the King, who, on the 27th March,
replied, that he had given frequent and urgent orders for the arrest
of Maheput Sing.

Gunga Deen, a trooper of the Governor-General's body-guard,
complained to the Resident, on the 9th of August 1844, that Maheput
Sing had attacked and killed with his own hand his agent, Thakoor
Sing, while he was taking seven hundred and seventy-four rupees to
the revenue-collector. On the 11th of September 1849, he again
complained to the Resident, that Maheput Sing had plundered
Bhurteemow and other villages, in Dureeabad, of property to the value
of six thousand seven hundred and fifty-nine rupees, and murdered
five men, besides Thakoor Sing, his servant, and had committed
numerous robberies in other villages during the year 1848. Among them
one in Bhurteemow, in which he killed Ramjeet and four other men--
that he had soon after committed a robbery in which no less than
twenty-two persons were killed and wounded, and property to the value
of two thousand rupees was carried off. The King was frequently
pressed most earnestly to arrest this atrocious robber; and on the
9th of December 1849, the Frontier Police was, at the Kings request,
directed to do all in their power to seize him.

In July 1847, Maheput Sing and his gang attacked the house of Mungul
Sookul, a corporal of the 24th Regiment of Bengal Native Infantry, at
midnight, robbed it of property to the value of five hundred rupees,
and so rent the ears of his little son, by the violence with which he
tore the gold rings from them, that the boy was not likely to live.
The commanding officer of the regiment sent the corporal's petition
for redress, through the Resident, to the Durbar; and orders were
sent to the local authorities to afford it, but they were unable or
unwilling to do anything.

Gunga Aheer, of Buroulee, in the district of Rodowlee, had been for
three years a sipahee in the 48th Regiment of Bengal Native Infantry,
under the name of Mata Deen. Continued sickness rendered him unfit
for duty, and he obtained his discharge, and came home to his family.
In March 1850, having been long without employment, and reduced, with
his family, to great distress, he went to his relation, Ramdhun, of
the Intelligence Department, in the service of the King of Oude, and
then; on duty at Dureeabad, with the Amil. A reward of three thousand
rupees having been offered by the King for the arrest of Maheput
Sing, the Amil ordered Ramdhun to try his best to trace him out, and
he took Gunga Aheer with him to assist, on a promise of securing for
him good service if they succeeded. They went to a jungle, about two
miles from Guneshpoor, and near the foot of Bhowaneegur. While they
were resting at a temple in the jungle, sacred to Davey, Maheput came
up, with twenty followers, to offer sacrifice; and as soon as they
recognized the Harkara, Ramdhun, they seized both, and took them off
in the evening to a jungle, four miles distant. In the hope of
frightening Maheput, the Harkara pretended to be in the service of
the Resident at Lucknow; but as the reward for his arrest had been
offered on the requisition of the Resident, on the application of
injured sipahees of the British army, this did not avail him. Their
hands were tied behind their backs, and as soon as it became dark,
they took Ramdhun off to a distance of twenty paces from where
Maheput Sing sat, and made him stand in a circle of men with drawn
swords. One man advanced, and at one cut with his sword, severed his
right arm from his body, and it fell to the ground. Another cut into
the side, under the stump, while a third cut him across the left side
of the neck with a back cut, he all the time calling out for mercy,
but in vain. On receiving the cut across the neck he fell dead, and
the body was flung into the river Goomtee. Maheput sat looking on
without saying a word.

They then amused themselves for some time by flogging Gunga Aheer
with thorn bushes, while he in agony cried for mercy. The next day,
by Maheput's orders, they laid him upon a bed of thorns and beat him
again, while he screamed from pain, and they laughed at his cries.
One of the followers told Maheput, that they had been cautioned by
the outlaw, Jugurnath, the chuprassie, not to murder Ramdhun and his
companion, or the English would some day avenge them; but he laughed
and said that spies must be punished, to deter others from pursuing
them. One of his followers then sat on Gunga's chest while another
held his arms, and a third his legs, while a fourth cut off his nose,
and one of his hands at the wrist, and the fingers of the other hand.
He became senseless, and Maheput and his followers all left him in
this state. In the evening a servant of Seochurn Chowdheree, of
Bhowaneepoor, on his way to the jungle, saw him and reported his
condition to his master, who sent people and had him taken to him on
a litter. He had his wounds dressed by a village surgeon, and the
next day sent him home to his wife and mother. The landlord of the
village reported the case to Captain Orr, of the Frontier Police, at
Fyzabad, who had Gunga taken off to the hospital at Lucknow, where he
remained under the care of the Residency surgeon till he recovered.
This poor man had to support his mother, wife, and daughter by his
labour. His mother came in with him, and attended him in hospital,
while his wife and child remained at their village.

While in hospital recovering, Maheput Sing was brought before him, by
the Frontier Police, to be recognized. As soon as he saw him all the
terrible scene of Ramdhun's murder and his own torture came so
vividly before him, that he trembled from head to foot, like a man in
an ague fit, and was for some time unable to speak. At last, when he
saw the fetters on Maheput's legs, and the handcuffs on his wrists,
and armed Government servants around him, he recovered his senses;
and by degrees, recorded what he had witnessed and suffered at his
hands.

On the 25th March 1850, Rajah Maun Sing, under orders from the
Durbar, with all the force he could muster, invested the fort of
Bhowaneegur, while the force under Captains Weston, Thomas, Bunbury,
and Magness, attacked the three forts belonging to Rajah Prethee Put,
of Paska. Maheput Sing left the fort on the 27th, with eleven
followers, to collect reinforcements and harass the besiegers, and
the garrison was commanded by his nephew.

On the 28th, Maun Sing had three men killed and several wounded, from
the fire of the garrison, and wrote for reinforcements to Captain
Weston, who was at Dureeabad, twelve miles distant. As soon as he got
the letter, he mounted his horse, and leaving the force to follow,
rode with his Assistant, Captain Orr, to the place, which is half a
mile from Guneshpoor south, and two hundred yards from the left bank
of the Goomtee river north. They were attended by a few sowars, under
Seo Sing, and they reached the place before daybreak, on the 29th;
and as soon as day appeared, proceeded with Captain Magness, who had
galloped on in advance of his regiment to reconnoitre the fort, and
were fired upon by the garrison wherever they were seen. Maun Sing's
people had retired after the loss of a few men, to the distance of a
mile, and lay scattered over the jungle.

The Infantry came up before sunset, and the guns before it grew dark,
and all were placed in position, and a fire opened upon the fort till
it grew too dark to point the guns. The garrison soon after attempted
to escape by the west side, and were fired upon by the parties posted
on that quarter. Captain Weston, hearing the fire, collected all the
men he could, and getting with difficulty into the fort, found it
empty. In the attempt to cut their way through, the garrison had two
men killed and fifteen wounded and taken, and five managed to escape,
under cover of the night, into the thick jungle. Bikhai, one of the
most atrocious of Maheput's followers, was killed; but he killed two
of the besiegers, and wounded two more before he fell. Akber Sing,
the most atrocious of all the gang, had his arm taken off by a
cannon-shot, and was seized. Maheput's nephew, the commandant of the
garrison, was taken, with one of Maheput's secretaries and advisers.

Of Maun Sing's party, four were killed and thirteen wounded, and
Captain Magness had one havildar severely wounded. The fort was
levelled, and the jungle around cut down. The force then proceeded
and took possession of the forts of Futtehpoor, Oskamow, Sorrea,
Dyeepoor, and Etonja, all belonging to Jugurnath Chuprassie, another
leader of banditti of that district They were only a few miles
distant from Bhowaneegur, and were deserted by his gangs on their
seeing a British force and hearing the guns open upon Bhowaneegur.
Two hundred head of stolen cattle were found in the forts of
Jugurnath, and restored to their proper owners. Parties were sent in
pursuit of Maheput Sing, and two of his followers were secured; but
he himself escaped for the time. The forts were all destroyed.
Captain Orr, the Assistant Superintendent, in charge of the Frontier
Police at Fyzabad, had been long in pursuit of Maheput Sing, and his
parties, knowing all his haunts and associates, gave him no rest. His
subadar, Seetul Sing, became acquainted with Prethee Paul, tallookdar
of Ramnuggur, who had been deprived of his estate for defalcation,
and become associated with Maheput Sing. The subadar persuaded this
landholder that it would be to his advantage to aid in the arrest of
so atrocious a robber and murderer; and when Maheput next came to him
to seek some repose from his pursuers, and consult about future
plans, he sent intimation to Seetul Sing, whose detachment of
sipahees was at no great distance. On receiving the intimation, the
subadar marched forthwith, and reached the place at the dawn of day,
on the morning of the 1st of July 1850. Maheput Sing had just left
the house to perform his ablutions, but on seeing them, he suspected
their designs and re-entered the house. The subadar's party saw him,
immediately surrounded the house, and demanded his surrender, Maheput
Sing begged Prethee Paul to join him in defending the house or
cutting their way through; but Prethee Paul told him that he had
ruined himself by his atrocities, and must now submit to his fate,
since he could not involve himself and all his family in ruin merely
to assist him. Prethee Paul then took him by the arm, brought him
out, and made him over to Seetul Sing, who had threatened to set fire
to the house, forthwith unless he did so. He was then secured and
taken off, well guarded, and in all possible haste, to Captain Orr,
lest his gang might collect and attempt a rescue. Captain Orr sent
him off, under a strong guard and well fettered, to Lucknow, to
Captain Weston, the Superintendent of the Frontier Police.

Prethee Paul, the tallookdar, for the good service, got back his
estate from the Oude sovereign, and an addition of five hundred
rupees a-year to his nankar or personal allowance. Gunga Aheer is now
a pensioner on the Residency fund, and his family has been provided
for. Maheput Sing and his associate Gujraj were sentenced to
transportation beyond seas, and sent off in October 1851.

It is remarked by the people, that few of these baronial robbers ever
die natural deaths--that they either kill each other, or are killed
sooner or later by the servants of Government. More atrocious crimes
than those which they every month commit it is difficult to conceive.
In the Bangor district, through which we passed last month, this
class of landholders are certainly as strong and as much disposed to
withhold the just dues of Government, and to resist its officers and
troops, as they are here, but they do not plunder and burn down each
other's villages, and murder and rob each other's tenants so often as
they do here. The coalition has introduced among them a kind of
_balance of power_, which makes them respect each other's rights, and
the rights of each other's tenants, for the chiefs are dependent upon
the attachment and fidelity of their respective tenants. The above
list contains only a part of the leaders of gangs, by which the
districts of Dureeabad, Rodowlee, Sidhore, Pertabgunge, Deva, and
Jehangeerabad, are infested. We have seen no manufacture of any
exportable commodity in Oude, nor have we seen traffic on any road in
Oude, save that leading from Cawnpore to Lucknow.

In consequence of some bad seasons, a good deal of the grain required
at the Capital, and in the districts to the north-cast, comes from
Cawnpore over this road. Were the road from Fyzabad to Lucknow good
and safe, a good deal of land produce would, in ordinary seasons,
come over it from the Goruckpoor district, and those intervening
between Lucknow and Fyzabad. It would, however, be useless to make
the road till the gangs which infest it are put down. A good and
secure road from Lucknow through Sultanpoor to Benares, would be of
still greater advantage.

_February 25_, 1850.--Halted at Dureeabad. I here saw the draft-
bullocks attached to the guns, with Captain Orr's companies of
Frontier Police. They are of the best kind, and in excellent
condition. They have the same allowance of a seer and half of grain
a-day, which is drawn for every bullock attached to his Majesty's
artillery. The difference is that they get all that is paid for in
their name, while the others get one-third; and really got none when
on detached duty till lately. On Fridays, Captain Orr's bullocks get
only half; and this is, I believe, the rule with all the others that
get any at all. His bullocks are bred in the Nanpara, Nigasun,
Dhorehra, and other districts in the Oude Tarae, and are of an
excellent quality for work. They cost from 40 to 75 rupees a-pair. In
these districts of the Tarae forest, the cows are allowed to go
almost wild in large grass preserves, where they are defended from
tigers; and the calves are taken from them, when a year old, to be
taken care of at home, till sold for the dairy or for work. Captain
Orr's bullocks have no grazing-ground, nor are they sent out at all
to graze--they get nothing but bhoosa (chaff) and corn. Of bhoosa
they get as much as they can eat, when on detached duty, as they take
it from the peasantry without payment; but when at Lucknow, they are
limited to a very small quantity, as Government has to pay for it. On
the 15th of May, 1833, the King prohibited any one from taking bhoosa
without paying for it, either for private or public cattle; and
directed that bhoosa, for all the Artillery bullocks, should be
purchased at the harvests, and charged for in the public accounts;
but the order was disregarded like that against the murder of female
children.

_February 26_, 1850--Sidhore, sixteen miles, W.S.W. The country, a
plain, covered as usual with spring crops and fine foliage; but
intersected midway by the little river Kuleeanee, which causes
undulations on each side. The soil chiefly doomut and light, but
fertile. It abounds more in white ants than such light soil generally
does. We passed through the estate of Soorujpoor Behreylee, in which
so many of the baronial robbers above described reside, and through
many villages beyond it, which they had lately robbed and burnt down,
as far as such villages can be burnt. The mud-walls and coverings are
as good as bomb-proofs against the fire, to which they are always
exposed from these robbers. Only twenty days ago, Chundee Behraleea
and his party attacked the village of Siswae, through which we passed
a few miles from this--plundered it, and killed three persons, and
six others perished in the flames. They served several others in the
neighbourhood in the same manner; and have, within the same time,
attacked and plundered the town of Sidhore itself several times.

The boundary which separates the Dureeabad from the Sidhore district
we passed some four miles back; and the greater part of the villages
lately attacked are situated in the latter, which is under a separate
Amil, Aga Ahmud, who is, in consequence, unable to collect his
revenue. The Amil of Dureeabad, Girdhara Sing,* on the contrary,
acquiesces in all the atrocities committed by these robbers, and is,
in consequence, able to collect his revenue, and secure the favour of
the Court. Some of the villages of the estate, held by the widow of
Singjoo, late Rajah of Soorujpoor, are under the jurisdiction of the
Sidhore Amil; and, as she would pay no revenue, the Amil took a force
a few days ago to her twelve villages of Sonowlee, within the
Dureeabad district, and seized and carried off some three hundred of
her tenants, men, women, and children, as hostages for the payment of
the balance due, and confined them pell-mell, in a fort. The clamour
of the rest of the population as I passed was terrible, all declaring
that they had paid their rents to the _Ranee_, and that she alone
ought to be held responsible. She, however, resided at Soorujpoor,
within the jurisdiction, and under the protection of the Amil of
Dureeabad.

[* Girdhara Sing's patron is Chundee Sahaee, the minister's deputy,
whose influence is paramount at present.]

The Behraleea gangs have lately plundered the five villages of
Sadutpoor, Luloopoor, Bilkhundee, and Subahpoor, belonging to
Soorujbulee, the head Canoongo, or Chowdheree of Dureeabad, who had
never offended them. Both the Amils were with me for the latter part
of the road; and the dispute between them ran very high. It was
clear, however, that Girdhara Sing was strong in his league with the
robbers, and conscious of being able to maintain his ground at Court;
and Aga Ahmud was weak in his efforts to put them down, and conscious
of his being unable much longer to pay what was required, and keep
his post. He has with him two Companies of Nujeebs and two of
Telingas, and eight guns. The guns are useless and without
ammunition, or stores of any kind; and the Nujeebs and Telingas
cannot be depended upon. The best pay master has certainly the best
chance. It is humiliating and distressing to see a whole people
suffering such wrongs as are every day inflicted upon the village
communities and town's people of Dureeabad, Rodowlee, Sidhore, and
Dewa, by these merciless freebooters; and impossible not to feel
indignant at a Government that regards them with so much
indifference.*

[* Poor Aga Ahmud was put into gaol, for defalcation, at the end of
the season; but Girdhara Sing was received with great favour by the
Court. The government of the district, for the next season, was
confirmed, and the usual dress of honour was conferred upon him, but
the Resident deemed it to be his duty to interpose and insist upon
his not being sent out. The government of the district was, in
consequence, taken from him, and made over to Rajah Maun Sing.]

A respectable young agricultural capitalist from Biswa, Seetaram,
rode along by my side this morning, and I asked him, "over whom these
suttee tombs, near Biswa, and other towns were for the most part
raised."--"Sir," said he, "they are chiefly over the widows of
Brahmins, bankers, merchants, Hindoo public officers, tradesmen, and
shopkeepers." "Are there many such tombs in Oude, over the widows of
Rajpoot landholders?"--"I have not seen any, sir, and have rarely
heard of the widow of a Rajpoot landholder burning herself." "No,
sir," said Bukhtawar Sing, "how should such women be worthy to become
suttees? They dare not become suttees, sir, with the murder of so
many innocent children on their heads. Sir, we Brahmins and other
respectable Hindoos feel honoured in having daughters; and never feel
secure of a happy life hereafter till we see them respectably
married. This, sir, is a duty the Deity demands from us, and the
neglect of which we do not believe he can ever excuse. When the
bridegroom comes sir, to fetch our daughter, the priest reads over
the marriage-service, and the parents of the girl wash her feet and
those of her bridegroom; and, as they sit together after the
ceremonies, put into her arms a tray of gold and silver jewels, and
rich clothes, such as their condition in life enables them to
provide; and then invoke the blessing of God upon their union; and
then, and not till then, do they feel that they have done their duty
to their child. What can men and women, who murder their daughters as
soon as they are born, ever hope for in this life or in a future
state? What can widows, conscious of such crimes, expect from
ascending the funeral pile, with the bodies of their deceased
husbands who have caused them to commit such crimes?" "And you think
that there really is merit in such sacrifices on the part of widows,
who have done their duties in this life?"--"Assuredly I do, sir; if
there were none, why should God render them go insensible to the pain
of burning? I have seen many widows burn themselves in my time, and
watched them from the time they first declared their intention to
their death; and they all seemed to me to feel nothing whatever from
the flames: nothing, sir, but support from above could sustain them
through such trials. Depend upon it, sir, that no widow of a Rajpoot
murderer of his own offspring would ever be so supported; they knew
very well that they would not be so; and, therefore, very wisely
never ventured to expose themselves to the trial: faithful wives and
good mothers only could so venture. The Rajpoots, sir, and their
wives were pleased at the prohibition, because others could no longer
do what they dared not do!" "What do you think, Seetarum?"--"I think,
sir, that this crime of infanticide had its origin solely in family
pride, which will make people do almost anything. These proud
Rajpoots did not like to put it into any man's power to call them
_salahs_ or _sussoors_,* (brothers-in-law or fathers-in-law).

[* These are terms of abuse all over India. To call a man sussoor or
salah, in abuse, is to say to him, I have dishonoured your daughter
or your sister!]

"I remember an instance of a woman burning herself at Lasoora, six
miles from Biswa, when I was fifteen years of age, and I am now
twenty-five. She certainly seemed to suffer no pain. One forenoon she
told her husband that in a former birth she had promised him that
when he should be born a _maha brahman_ at Biswa, she would unite
herself in marriage to him, and live with him as his wife for twelve
years; that these twelve years had now expired, and that she had that
night received intimation from Heaven that her real husband, _Rajah
Kirpah Shunker_, of Muthura, had died without having been married in
this birth; that she was in reality his wife, and had already burnt
herself five times with his body, and would now mix her ashes with
his for the sixth time, and he must forthwith send her to the village
of Lasoora, where she would become a suttee. The husband was
astounded, for they had always lived together on the best possible
terms, and out of the four children they had had two still survived.
He and all their relations did all they could to dissuade her, but
she disregarded them, and ran off to the Sewala (temple) in Biswa,
which was built by my father. Thence she sent a Brahmin, by name
Gokurn, to call me and my elder brother, Morlee Munohur, then
seventeen years of age. We went, and she told us that she had been
our mother in a former birth, and wished to see us once more before
she died; she blessed us, and prayed that we might have each five
sons, and then told us to arrange for her funeral pile at Lasoora, as
all her former five suttees had been performed at that place.

"We thought she was delirious, and no one supposed that she would
really burn herself. She, however, left the temple and proceeded
towards Lasoora on foot, followed by a party of women and children,
and by her husband, who continued to implore her to return home with
him. He had a litter with him to take her, but she would not listen
to him or to any one else. We reached Lasoora about an hour and a
half before sunset, and she ordered the people to collect a large
pile of wood for her, and told them that she would light it with a
flame from her own mouth. They seemed to regard her as an inspired
person, and did so. She mounted the pile, and it soon took fire, how
I know not! Many people said they saw the flame come from her month,
and all seemed to believe that it did so. The flames ascended, for it
was in the month of March, and the wood was dry, and she seemed to be
quite happy as she sat in the midst of them, and was burnt to death.
Her husband told us, that she had lost one son some years before, and
another only four days before she burnt herself, and that she had
been much afflicted at his death. Whether there really had been such
a person as Rajah Kirpah Shunker, no one ever thought it necessary to
inquire. Her suttee tomb still stands at Lasoora among many others.
Our mother was alive, though our father had been dead many years, and
she used to say that the poor woman must have become deranged at the
death of her child. The people all believed that she told the truth,
and the husband was obliged to yield, though he seemed much
afflicted. Her two sons still live, and reside at Biswa." *

[* Moorlee Monowur, a very respectable agricultural capitalist, tells
me, that all that his younger brother, Seetaram, told me, about the
suttee, if strictly true, and can be proved by a reference to the
poor woman's husband and sons, who still survive, and to the people
of Bilwa and Lasoora.]

I asked the Amil, "How he fed, clothed, and lodged his prisoners?" He
said, "We always take them with us in our marches, secured in stocks
or fetters. We cannot leave them behind, because we have no gaols or
other places to keep them in, and require all our troops to move with
us. As to food and clothing, they are obliged to provide themselves,
or get their families or friends to provide them, for Government will
not let us charge anything for their subsistence and clothing in the
accounts."

"I understand that you and all other public servants who have charge
of prisoners not only make them provide themselves with food and
clothing, but make them pay for lamp-oil, whether they have a lamp
burning at night or not?"--"When they require a lamp they must of
course pay for it, sir; prisoners are always a source of much anxiety
to us, for if we send them to Lucknow, they are almost sure to be let
out soon, on occasions of thanksgiving, or on payment of gratuities,
and enabled to punish all who have assisted us in the arrest; and
with hosts of robbers around us, we are always in danger of an
attempt to rescue them, which may cost us many lives." "If the gaol
darogahs at Lucknow had not the power to sell his prisoners, sir,"
said Bukhtawar Sing, "how should he be able to pay so much as he does
for his place? He is obliged to pay five hundred rupees or more for
his place, and is not sure of holding it a month after he has bought
it, so many are the candidates for a place so profitable!" "But he
gets a share of the subsistence money, paid for the prisoners from
the Treasury, does he not?"--"Yes, sir; of the four pice a-day paid
for them by the King, he takes two, and sends them to beg through the
city for what more they require." "If they get more than what he
thinks they require from the public or their friends, he takes the
surplus from them, I am told?"--"It is very true, sir, I believe.
Fellows, sir, who have no substantial friends, and cannot and will
not beg, soon sink under this scanty supply of food."

_February 27_, 1850--Sutrick, sixteen miles west, over a plain of
muteear soil, tolerably well cultivated, and very well studded with
trees of the finest kinds, single, in clusters and in groves. The
mango-trees are in blossom, and promise well. The trees are said to
bear only one season out of three, but some bear in one season, and
others in another, so that the market is always supplied, though in
some seasons more abundantly than in others. A cloudy sky and
easterly wind, while the trees are in blossom, are said to be very
injurious. A large landholder told me that they never took a tax upon
any of the trees, not even the mhowa-trees, but the owner could not,
except upon particular occasions, dispose of one to be cut down,
without the permission of the zumeendar upon whose lands it stood. He
might cut down one without his permission for building or repairing
his house, or for fuel, on any occasion of marriage in his family,
but not otherwise. A good many fine trees were, he said, destroyed by
the local officers of Government. Having no tents, they collected the
roofs of houses from a neighbouring village in hot or bad weather,
cut away the branches to make rafters, and left the trunks as pillars
to support the roofs, and under this treatment they soon died. He
told me that cow-dung was cheaper for fuel than wood in this
district, and consequently more commonly used in cooking; but that
they gathered cow-dung for fuel only during four months in the year,
November, December, January, and February; all that fell during the
other eight months was religiously left, or stored for manure. In the
pits in which they stored it, they often threw some of the inferior
green crops of autumn, such as kodo and kotkee; but the manure most
esteemed among them was _pigs' dung_--this, he said, was commonly
stored and sold by those who kept pigs. The best muteear and doomut
soils, which prevail in this district, are rented at two rupees a
kutcha beegah, without reference to the crop which the cultivator
might take from them; and they yielded, under good tillage, from ten
to fifteen returns of the seed in wheat, barley, gram, &c. There are
two and half or three kutcha beegahs in a pucka beegah; and a pucka
beegah is from 2750 to 2760 square yards.

Sutrick is celebrated for the shrine of Shouk Salar, alias _Borda
Baba_, the father of Syud Salar, whose shrine is at Bahraetch. This
person, it is said, was the husband of the sister of Mahmood, of
Ghuznee. He is supposed to have died a natural death at this place,
while leading the armies of his sovereign against the Hindoos. His
son had royal blood in his veins, and his shrine is held to be the
most sacred of the two. A large fair is held here in March, on the
same days that this fair takes place at Bahraetch. All our Hindoo
camp followers paid as much reverence to the shrine as they passed as
the Mahommedans. It is a place without trade or manufactures; but a
good many respectable Mahommedan families reside in it, and have
built several small but neat mosques of burnt bricks. There is little
thoroughfare in the wretched road that passes through it.

The Hindoos worship any sign of manifested might or power, though
exerted against themselves, as they consider all might and power to
be conferred by the Deity for some useful purpose, however much that
purpose may be concealed from us. "These invaders, however merciless
and destructive to the Hindoo race, say they must have been sent on
their mission by God for some great and useful purpose, or they could
not possibly have succeeded as they did: had their proceedings not
been sanctioned by Him, he could at any moment have destroyed them
all, or have interposed to arrest their progress." These, however,
are the speculations of only the thinking portion. At the bottom of
the respect shown to such Mahommedan shrines, by the mass of Hindoos,
there is always a strong ground-work of _hope_ or _fear_: the soul or
spirit of the savage old man, who had been so well supported on
earth, must still, they think, have some influence at the Court of
Heaven to secure them good or work them evil, and they invoke or
propitiate him accordingly. They would do the same to the tomb of
Alexander, Jungez Khan, Tymour, or Nadir Shah, without any perplexing
inquiries as to their creed or liturgy.

_February 28_, 1850.--Chinahut, eleven miles west, over a plain
intersected by several small streams, the largest of which is the
Rete, near Sutrick. There is a good deal of kunkur-lime in the ground
over which we have passed today; but the tillage is good where the
land is at all level, and the crops are fine. The plain is cut up
here and there by some ravines, but they are small and shallow, and
render but a small portion of the surface unfit for tillage. The
banks of the small streams are, for the most part, cultivated up to
the water's edge.

We passed the Rete over a nice bridge, built by Rajah Bukhtawar Sing
twenty-five years ago, at a cost of twenty-five thousand rupees, out
of his own purse. He told me that one morning, in the rains, he came
to the bank of this river, on his way to Lucknow from Jeytpoor, a
town which we passed yesterday, and found it so swollen that he was
obliged to purchase some large earthen jars, and form a raft upon
them to take over himself and followers. While preparing his raft,
which took a whole day, he heard that from five to ten persons were
drowned, in attempting to cross this little river, every year, and
that people were often detained upon the bank for four or five days
together. He resolved to save people from all this evil; and as soon
as he got home set about building this bridge, and got it ready
before the next rains. It is a substantial work, with three good
arches. About two miles on this side of the bridge he pointed out to
me the single tree, near a mango-grove, where some eighteen or twenty
years ago he overtook a large balloon, which the King, Nuseer-od Deen
Hyder, had got made in the Dilkosha Park at Lucknow. It was made, he
tells me, by a tall and slender young English gentleman, who visited
Lucknow, with his uncle, for the special purpose of constructing and
ascending in this machine. "When it was all ready, sir, the young man
got into a small boat that was suspended under it, taking with him a
gun and some artificial fish. We asked him what he intended to do
with a gun in the clouds; and he told us, that in the sky he was in
danger of meeting large birds that might hurt the balloon, and the
gun was necessary to frighten them off. As the balloon began to
ascend the old gentleman's eyes filled with tears, and I asked him
why. He told me, that this young man's father had fallen into the
sea, and been drowned; and he was always afraid, when the son went
up, that he might never see him alive again.

"The King was sitting at the window in the upper story of the
Dilkosha house, with some English gentlemen, when the balloon passed
up close by, and the gentleman took off his hat and bowed gracefully
as he passed, at which the King seemed much pleased. I commanded a
regiment of Dragoons, and the King told me to take a party of my
boldest and best-mounted men and follow the balloon. I selected
seventeen, and we were all ready in our saddles. The balloon went
straight up, and we lost sight of the man and the boat in which he
sat. The machine, though it was sixty feet long, including boat and
all, and twelve feet wide, seemed at last to be no larger than a
small water-jug. Below we had no wind, but we soon saw the balloon
driven by an upper current to the eastward, along the Fyzabad road.
We followed as fast as the horses could carry us, crossed the Goomtee
river over the old stone bridge, and passed many travellers on the
road staring at the extraordinary machine, for they had heard nothing
about it, and we had no time to tell them. When we had gone about
seventeen miles, the balloon began to descend. It was in the month of
March, and the weather was hot, and I had lost three horses before it
came to the ground. The young man then began to let go his fish, and
they came fluttering down, while the oil-cloths about the balloon
made a noise like the growling of a wild beast. Seeing the enormous
machine going at this rate, followed by us at full speed, the people
along the road, who are always numerous in the morning, became so
panic-struck that a great many fell down senseless upon their faces,
and some of them could not be got to rise for some hours afterwards.

"We were not far from it when it approached the ground, and swept
along on the border of this grove, on our left. Fortunately for the
young man, it did not strike any trees. He was dressed all in black,
and a very tall, handsome young man he was. As soon as he found
himself near enough to the ground, he jumped out, holding one rope in
his hand, and tried to stop the balloon, calling out to the people on
the road, as loud as he could, _puckaro, puckaro!_--seize, seize! We
were then within two hundred yards of it, and at full speed; and,
instead of helping the young man, the people on the road, thinking
the order was to seize them, fell down flat on their faces, unable to
look upon the balloon, or utter a word. They all thought that it was
some terrible demon from above come to seize and devour them. When we
had headed it a little, we all sprang from our saddles, joined the
young man at the ropes, and lashed them round anything we could find,
as we were being dragged along. The young man took out his penknife,
and gave the balloon a gash in the side, to let out the _smoke_ that
inflated it, and it collapsed and stopped. The first thing, sir, that
the young man did was to call for fire, take a cigar from his
waistcoat pocket, and begin to smoke, while we went to the assistance
of the panic-struck travellers, many of whom were still lying
senseless on the ground. We got water, and threw it in their faces;
and when they were able to sit up, we mounted the young man upon one
of our horses, and took him back slowly to Lucknow. He told me that
it was so very cold above, that it gave him a severe headache, and
that he found a cigar a good thing to remove it. The King was very
glad when we brought him back, and he gave him several thousand
rupees over and above the cost of making the balloon, and providing
him and his uncle during their stay. They soon after left Lucknow for
Lahore, and what became of them I know not."

Passing a Mahommedan village, I asked some of the landholders, who
walked along by the side of my elephant, to talk of their grievances,
whether they ever used pigs' dung for manure. They seemed very much
surprised and shocked, and asked how I could suppose that Mahommedans
could use such a thing. "Come," said Bukhtawar Sing, "do not attempt
to deceive the Resident. He has been all over India, and knows very
well that Mahommedans do not keep or eat pigs; but he knows, also,
that there is no good cultivator in Oude who does not use the dung of
pigs for manure; and you know that there is no other manure, save'
pigeons' dung, that is so good." "We often purchase _manure_ from
those who prepare it," said the landholders, "and do not ask
questions about what it may be composed of; but the greater part of
the manure we use is the cow-dung which falls in the season of the
rains, and is stored exclusively for that purpose. In the dry months,
sir, the dung of cows, bullocks, buffaloes, &c., is gathered, formed
into cakes, and stacked for fuel; but in the rains it is all thrown
into pits and stored for manure."

Chinahut is the point from which we set out on the 2nd of December,
and here I was met by the prime minister, Nawab Allee Nakee Khan, and
the chancellor of the exchequer, Maharajah Balkrishun, to whom I
explained my views as to the measures which ought to be adopted to
save the peaceful and industrious portion of his Majesty's subjects
from the evils which now so grievously oppress them.

Here closes my pilgrimage of three months in Oude; and I can safely
say that I have learnt more of the state of the country, and the
condition and requirements of the people, than I could possibly have
learnt in a long life passed exclusively at the capital of Lucknow.
Any general remarks that I may have to make on what I have seen and
heard during the pilgrimage I must defer to a future period.

At four in the afternoon, I left Chinahut, and returned to Lucknow.
At the old race-stand, about three miles from the Residency, I was
met by the heir-apparent, and drove with him, in his carriage, to the
Furra Buksh Palace, where we alighted for a few minutes, to go
through the usual tedious ceremonies of an Oriental Court. On the way
we were met by Mr. Hamilton, the chaplain, and his lady. Dr. and Mrs.
Bell, and Captain Bird, the First Assistant, and his brother and
guest. After the ceremony, I took leave of the Prince, and reached
the Resident at six o'clock. My wife and children had left me at
Peernuggur, to return, for medical advice, to the Residency, where I
had the happiness to find them well, and glad to see me. Having
broken my left thigh hone, near the hip joint, in a fall from my
horse, in April, 1849, I was unable to mount a horse during the tour,
and went in a tonjohn the first half of the stage, and on an elephant
the last half, that I might see as much as possible of the country
over which we were passing. The pace of a good elephant is about that
of a good walker, and I had generally some of the landholders and
cultivators riding or walking by my side to talk with.

END OF THE TOUR.




PRIVATE CORRESPONDENCE

RELATING TO THE ANNEXATION OF THE KINGDOM OF OUDE TO BRITISH INDIA.


                 __________________________



                               Camp, Nawabgunge, 5th December, 1849.

My Dear Bird,

I had heard from Mahomed Khan what you mention regarding the
imposition practised on the King by the singers; but from his having
conferred a khilaut on the knaves, they supposed that he had, as
usual, pardoned all. If you have grounds to believe that the King is
prepared to punish them, or to acquiesce in their punishment, pray
ask an audience and ascertain his Majesty's wishes. When we last
went, I was in hopes that he would tell me that he wished to be
relieved of their presence, and did all I could to encourage him to
do so. If the King wishes to have them removed, encourage him to give
immediate orders to the minister to confine them; and offer any
assistance that may be required to take them across the Ganges, or
put them into safe custody. When it is done, it must be done
promptly.

As to the Taj Mahal, I went on an order by Richmond, "that the King
should put a Mahaldarnee upon her if he wished." I was told that such
was Richmond's order, and I give mine in consequence. I will refer to
the Dufter for his order. But you must at once insist upon all
sipahees being withdrawn from her house. This order was given by me
and should be enforced by you. I said that the Mahaldarnee might
remain, but it must be alone, without sipahees, &c.

On emergency, act of course on your own discretion I only wish that
the King may be induced to consent to the removal of all the singers,
and meddling eunuchs also.

                           Yours sincerely,
                  (Signed)             W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Captain Bird,
First Assistant.

Sadik Allee should be secured, and punished with the rest.




                  (Signed)             W. H. SLEEMAN.


                 __________________________


                             Camp, Bahraetch, 10th December, 1849.

My Dear Bird,

The conduct of the singers which exasperated the King had no
reference to public matters with which he was pledged not to permit
them to interfere; and my only request was, that you should offer
your aid in removing them should his Majesty indicate any wish for
it. The King said he would himself punish them for their conduct by
banishment across the Ganges, and he must be left to do so: it was
not from any demand made by us, but from resentment for a personal
affront, or an affront to his understanding. We cannot call upon the
King to do what he said he would do under such circumstances, but
must leave it to himself. The removal of two out of a dozen fellows
of this description will be of no use--their places will soon be
filled by others. Any attempt on your part to supply their places by
better men will only tend to indispose the King towards them; and it
is no part of our duty to dictate to his Majesty with whom he shall
associate in his private hours.

I have had abundant proof that, to reduce the influence of the
present favourites, has no tendency to throw the power into better
hands--no authority of any kind taken from them has, by the minister,
been confided to better men; the creatures of one are not a whit
better than the creatures of the other. If his Majesty were to rouse
himself, and apply his own mind to business, we might hope for some
good, and I see little chance of this.

You are not to order that the King fulfil his promise, because, as I
have said, it was no pledge made on the requisition of our Government
on the Resident. If he does not fulfil it, it is only one proof more
added to a hundred of his exceeding weakness. There are at least a
dozen worse men now influencing all that the King and minister do
than Kotab Alee and Gholam Ruza. The last order given regarding Taj
Mahal by me was, that she should admit a Mahaldarnee from the King,
but that no sipahees should be forced upon her. I wrote to the King
to this effect, and my order must be enforced. I am told by the
moonshee, that when the King expressed a wish to have such guardians
upon many, Richmond replied that he might have one upon Taj Mahal,
who had given such proof of profligacy. It was not a judicial
decision, to be referred to as a guide under all circumstances, but a
mere arrangement which might any day require to be altered. Taj Mahal
is so profligate and insolent a woman, that if she refuses to obey my
order, and receive the King's Mahaldarnee, I shall withdraw the
Residents.

After what the Governor-General had told the King in November, 1847,
regarding what our Government would feel itself bound to do, unless
his Majesty conducted the duties of a sovereign better than he had
hitherto done; and after the experience we have since had of his
entire neglect of those duties, you should not, I think, have said
what you mention having said to him, that our Government had no wish
to deprive him of one iota of the power he had. It was a declaration
not called for by the circumstances, or necessary on the occasion,
and should have been avoided, as it is calculated to impair the
impression of his responsibility for the exercise of his power. No
sovereign ever showed a greater disregard for the duties and
responsibilities of his high office than he has done hitherto, and as
our Government holds itself answerable to the people of Oude for a
better administration, he should not be encouraged in the notion that
he may always show the same disregard with impunity--that is,
continue to retain every iota of his power whether he exercised it
properly or not. No man, I believe, ever felt more anxious for the
welfare of the King, his family, and country, than I do; but unless
he exercises his fearful power better, I should be glad, for the sake
of all, to see the whole, or part of it, in better hands.

The minister has his Motroussil with me, and I have daily
communications of what is done or proposed to be done, and you may be
sure that I lose no occasion of admonition. I did not mention
anything you said regarding your interview with the King in your
letter to Mahomed Khan; but in a few hours after your letter came he
got the whole from the minister, and reported it to me. He wants us
to undertake the work of turning out the King's favourites, that he
may get all the power they lose, without offending his master by any
appearance of moving in the matter.

We go hence to-morrow; hope to be at Gonda on the 14th, and Fyzabad
on the 18th. I have requested the post-master to send all our letters
to Fyzabad by the regular dawk from Thursday next, the 13th. From
Fyzabad I will arrange for their coming to my camp.

                           Yours sincerely,

                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Captain Bird,
   &c. &c.


                 __________________________


                             Camp, Ghunghole, 12th December, 1849.

My Dear Bird,

I got your letter of the 9th instant last night, at our last ground.
In what you have done, you have not, I think, acted discreetly. You
asked me whether, in any case of emergency, you should act on your
discretion, and I told you in reply that you might do so; but surely,
whether the King should have a dozen singers or only ten could not be
considered one of such pressing emergency as not to admit of your
waiting for instructions from me, or, at least, for a reply to your
letter. The King has told you truly, that the matter in which the
offenders had transgressed had reference to his house, and not to his
Government or ours. This is a distinction which you appear to have
lost sight of from the first. If I demand reparation from another for
wrong or insults suffered from his servants, and he promises to
punish them by dismissal from his service but afterwards relents and
detains them, I consider it due to myself and my character to insist
upon the fulfilment of his promise; but if I voluntarily visit any
friend who has at last become sensible of the impositions of his
servants which had long been manifest to all his neighbours, with a
view to encourage him in his laudable resolution to dismiss them from
his service, and to offer my aid in effecting the object should he
require it, and he promises me not to swerve from it, but afterwards
relents and retains the impostors, I pity his weakness, but I do not
consider it due to myself, or to my character, to insist upon his
fulfilling his promise. By considering two cases so very distinct,
the same, you have placed yourself in a disagreeable situation, for I
cannot support you; that is, I can neither demand that the
requisitions made by you be complied with, nor can I tell the King
that I approve of them. Had you waited for my reply, which was sent
off from Bahraetch on the 10th, you would have saved yourself all
this annoyance and mortification. It has arisen from an overweening
confidence in your personal influence over his Majesty; the fact is,
I believe that no European gentleman ever has had or ever will have
any personal influence over him, and I very much doubt whether any
real native gentleman will ever have any. He never has felt any
pleasure in their society, and I fear never will. He has hitherto
felt easy only in the society of such persons as those with whom he
now exclusively associates, and to hope that he will ever feel easy
with persons of a better class is vain. I am perfectly satisfied, in
spite of the oath he has taken in the name of his God, and on the
head of his minister, that he made to you the promise you mention;
and I am no less satisfied that the minister wished for the removal
of the singers, provided it should be effected through us without his
appearing to his master to move in the matter, and that he wished
their removal solely with a view to acquire for himself the authority
they had possessed. You should not have any more audiences with the
King without previous reference to me; nothing is likely to occur to
require it.

                           Yours sincerely,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Captain Bird,
   &c. &c.

                 __________________________


                                Camp, Fyzabad, 18th December, 1819.

My Dear Bird,

I send you the letter which you wish to refer to. As you quote my
first letter, pray let me see it. I kept no copy, but have a distinct
recollection of what I intended to say in it regarding this affair of
the singers. It shall be sent back to you. The term "indiscreet" had
reference only to your second visit, and demand from the King of the
fulfilment of his promise. I had no fault whatever to find with your
first visit. The term "private" must have had reference, not to the
promise or to the person to whom it was made, but to the offence with
which the singers stood charged. It was an affront offered to the
King's understanding that he took affront at, and whether he had made
a promise to resent it as such to me, or to you could make no
difference. If he did not fulfil it, we should pity this further
instance of his weakness, but could have no right to insist upon his
doing so. Even had the offence been an interference in public
affairs, and breach of the King's engagements, I should not have
demanded their banishment without a reference to the Governor-
General, because the delay of waiting for instructions involved no
danger or serious inconvenience; that is, I should not have demanded
it when the King was so strongly opposed to it. I must distinctly
deny that you demanded the King's fulfilment of his promise in
conformity to any instructions received from me, or in accordance
with my views of what was right or expedient in this matter. Your
second visit and demand were neither in conformity to the one nor in
accordance with the other. You must have put a construction upon what
I wrote which it cannot fairly bear. By "requisitions" I mean your
requirements that the two men should be banished by the King,
according to his promise. No notice has been made to me of your visit
by the Court, and I have therefore had no occasion to say anything
whatever about it in my communications to the Court, nor shall I have
any I suppose. In your letter of the 4th instant, you say, with
regard to the Taj Mahal's case, "Not knowing whether you do or do not
wish me to act in any sudden emergency during your absence, I
suppose, therefore, that had you had any such wish you would have
instructed me on the subject." In reply, I requested that you would
so act on your own discretion in any such sudden case of emergency.

                           Yours sincerely,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Captain Bird,
   &c. &c.
                 __________________________


                               Camp, Mahomdee, 2nd February, 1850.

My Dear Sir Erskine,

Had it not been too late for you to join my camp conveniently, I
should have asked you to run out and see a little of the country and
people of Oude, after you had seen so much of those of the Honourable
Company's dominions. A few years of tolerable government would make
it the finest country in India, for there is no part of India with so
many advantages from nature. I have seen no soil finer; the whole
plain of which it is composed is capable of tillage; it is everywhere
intersected by rivers, flowing from the snowy chain of the Himmalaya,
which keep the moisture near the surface at all times, without
cutting up any of the land on their borders into deep ravines; it is
studded with the finest groves and single trees, as much as the lover
of the picturesque could wish; it has the boldest and most
industrious peasantry in India, and a landed aristocracy too strong
for the weak and wretched Government; it is, for the most part, well
cultivated; yet with all this, one feels, in travelling over it, as
if he was moving among a people suffering under incurable physical
diseases, from the atrocious crimes every day perpetrated with
impunity, and the numbers of suffering and innocent people who
approach him, in the hope of redress, and are sent away in despair.

I think your conclusion regarding the source of the signs you saw of
beneficial interference in the north-west provinces a fair one. A
Lieutenant-Governor is able to see all parts of the country under his
charge every year, or nearly all; and while he is sufficiently
"monarch of all he surveys" to feel an interest in, and to provide
for the general good, he has a sufficient knowledge of the internal
management of particular districts to control the proceedings of the
local officers. He is also well seconded in a very efficient Board of
Revenue. But I must not indulge in these matters any further, till I
have the pleasure of meeting you where we can talk freely about them.

I trust that all at Lucknow will be conducted to your satisfaction
and that of Mrs. Erskine. I have this morning received a note from
Mr. Erskine, who left you, it appears, before the little heir-
apparent returned your visit. I expect to complete my tour and return
to Lucknow on the 20th, when I shall have seen all that I required to
see, to understand the working of the existing system, and the
probable effects of any suggested changes.

With kind regards to Mrs. Erskine,

                      Believe me,
                           Yours very sincerely,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Sir Erskine Perry.

P.S.--I must not omit to thank you for the expression of your
favourable opinion of the "Rambles." There is one thing of which I
can assure you, that the conversations mentioned in it are genuine,
and give the real thoughts and opinions of the people on the subjects
they embrace.
                                                    W. H. S.

                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 26th April, 1850.
My Dear Elliot,

I did not send Weston's letters with the other papers, because they
were not written in an official form. He was the senior officer with
the force, and had authority from the Durbar to call upon all local,
civil, and military authorities to co-operate in the work; but he did
not take upon himself the command, or write in official form. He
inspired all with harmony and energy, and brought the whole strength
of the little force to bear upon the right points at the right time.

The head of Prethee Put of Paska was cut off by Captain Magness's
sipahees after his death, to be sent to the King as a trophy, but
Captain Weston would not let it come in. The body was offered to his
family and friends for interment, but none of the family or tribe
(Kolhun's Rajpoots) would have anything to do with the funeral
ceremonies of a man who had murdered his eldest brother and the head
of his tribe. The body was, with the head, put into a sheet, taken to
the river Ghagra, and committed to the stream, to flow to the Ganges,
as the best interment for a Hindoo. These sipahees knew nothing of
the man's history; but the people who saw the affair from the Dhundee
Fort mentioned that the body was thrown into the river at the precise
place where he had thrown in that of his eldest brother, after
murdering him in the boat with his own hands, as stated in the
extract from my Diary; and all believe that this retribution arises
from an interposition from above. The eldest son of the murdered
brother will, I hope, be put into possession of the estate.

The Governor-General may like to peruse these letters, and I send
them. They give, perhaps, a fuller and better account of what was
done, and the manner in which it was done, than more studied
compositions, in an official form, would have given.

                           Yours sincerely,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Sir H. M. Elliot, K.C.B.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 8th July, 1850.

My Dear Sir James,

I feel that my Indian career, which has now lasted forty years, must
be drawing to a close, and I am anxious for the settlement in life of
my only son, now between seventeen and eighteen years of age. Having
no personal claims upon any member of the Home Government of India, I
solicit the insertion of his name on his Grace the Duke of
Wellington's list of candidates for a commission in the Dragoons; and
he is now preparing for his examination under the care of Mr.
Yeatman, at Westow Hill, Norwood, Surrey, near London. But he is
ambitious to obtain an appointment to Bengal, where his father has
served so long, and may, possibly, have friends and recollections
that might be useful to him in the early part of his career. It falls
to the lot of few to have the opportunities that I have had to carry
out the benevolent views of Government in measures of great and
general benefit to the people, and to secure their gratitude and
affection to their rulers. All the measures which I have been
employed to carry out have tended to display the benevolent
solicitude of the Government of India for the welfare of the people
committed to its charge; the object of all has been the greater
security of life and property throughout the country, the greater
confidence of the people in the wisdom and efficiency of our rule,
and their greater feeling of interest in this stability. These
measures, as far as they have been confided to my care, have all
succeeded; but, as I have stated (p. 79) in a printed report, a copy
of which will be sent to you, they have neither flattered the
vainglory of any particular nation, nor enlisted on their side the
self-love of any influential class or powerful individual, and they
have, in consequence, been attended with little _éclat_. They have,
however, tended to secure to the Government the gratitude and
affection of the people of India, and are measures of which that
Government may justly feel proud. The stability of our Government in
India must depend less upon our military victories than upon the
confidence and affection with which our civil and political
administration may inspire the great mass of the people. The general
belief is, that our object is their substantial good, and that we are
instruments in the hands of Divine Providence to effect that object.
In our military glory they can feel no sympathy, and in our
territorial acquisitions little interest; but they can and do
appreciate every measure which tends to improve the security of life,
property, and industry through the land--to restore the bond of good
feeling between the Government and governed, where it has for a time
been severed or impaired by accident--to provide the people with
works tending to improve their comfort and convenience--to mitigate
sufferings from calamities of season, and to encourage all to exert
themselves honestly in their proper sphere. In carrying out the views
of Government in such measures, and such only, has my life in India
been spent; and for doing so to the best of my humble ability I have,
I believe, done much to make its rule revered throughout India. It is
by such measures that the respect and confidence of the great mass of
the people have been secured, so as to enable Europeans, male and
female, to pass from one end of the country to the other with the
assurance, not only that they will suffer no personal injury, but no
mark of disrespect. Should anything occur to deprive us of this
confidence and respect among the great mass of the people, the
recollection of our victories, and assurance of our superior military
organization will avail us but little; and it is as one who has
zealously and successfully aided Government in securing them, that I
now venture to address you, in the hope that you will--if you can do
so consistently with your public duties and pledges to others--open
to my son the same career of usefulness by conferring upon him a
nomination to the civil service of India. He is now five months above
seventeen years of age; and by the time he is eighteen, he will, I
hope, under Mr. Yeatman's judicious care, be able to pass his
examination for Haileybury, should he, through your means, obtain
this the utmost object of his ambition. Over and above the desire to
follow his father's footsteps in India, he is anxious to avoid the
necessity of encroaching so much upon the small means I have to
provide for his four sisters, by entering so expensive a branch of
the public service as the Dragoons. I know the great nature of the
favour I ask from you. It is the first favour that I have ever asked
from any member of the Home Government of India; and I solicit it
from you solely on the ground of service rendered to the Government
and people of India. I am told that I must address my application to
an individual; and I address it to you, under the impression that you
are the member with whom such ground is likely to meet with most
consideration;--not that I think any member of the Honourable Court
would disregard it; for I believe, after long and varied experience
in public affairs, and much thought and reading, that no body
intrusted with the Government of a distant possession ever performed
their duties with more earnest solicitude for its welfare than the
Court of Directors of the Honourable East India Company; but because
your public career has inspired me with more confidence than that of
any other member of the Court as now constituted. If you cannot grant
me the favour I ask, you will, I know, pardon the liberty I have
taken in asking it.

            And believe me, with great respect,
                           Yours faithfully,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Sir James Weir Hogg, Bart.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 20th September, 1850.

My Dear Sir Charles,

The papers give us reason to hope that it is your intention to visit
Lucknow on your way down from the hills, and if you can make it
convenient to come, I shall be rejoiced to have the opportunity of
showing you all that is worth seeing, and be able to afford all who
come with you, ladies and gentlemen, accommodation.

The only road to Lucknow for carriages is from Cawnpore, and if you
come that way, I will have carriages sent for you. If you come by any
other road, I will have elephants sent to whatever place you may
mention, and tents if required. It has been usual, when the
Commander-in-chief visits Lucknow, for Government to intimate the
intention to the King through the Resident in Oude, that preparation
may be made for his reception in due form.

I mention this that you may make known your wish or intention to the
Governor-General, in time for me to prepare the King and his Court.

From Cawnpore to this is only a drive of six hours, the distance
being fifty miles, and the road good. All officers, &c., will be glad
to have an opportunity of paying their respects to their
distinguished Chief.

                     Believe me,
                           Yours very faithfully,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To his Excellency
Sir Charles Napier, G.C.B.,
     &c.  &c.  &c.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 7th November, 1850.

My Dear Allan,

In the "Englishman" of the 28th, and the "Hurkara" of the 29th, there
are some strictures on Oude affairs. The editors of both papers are,
I believe, sturdy, honest men; but their correspondents are not
acquainted with the merits of the particular case referred to, or
with Oude affairs generally. I vouch for the truth of everything
stated in the enclosed paper, and shall feel obliged if you will give
it to the one most likely, in your opinion, to make a fair use of it.
There can be no harm in putting an editor in possession of the real
truth in a question involving not only individual but national
honour; for he must be anxious to make his paper the vehicle of truth
on all such questions.

I do not like to address either of the editors, because Government
expect all their servants will abstain from doing so in their own
vindication, and will leave their honour in their keeping. I have
done so since 1843, and should now do so were I alone concerned in
this affair. You may mention my name as authority for what is stated,
but pray let it be mentioned confidentially. Government has been
informed of the truth, and it is well that the public should be so.

                           Yours sincerely,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN

To J. Allan, Esq.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 17th November, 1850.

My Dear Sir James,

I thank you for your very kind letter of the 7th ultimo: my son is
preparing for his examination, and expects his commission in some
regiment of cavalry very soon. He has not only become reconciled to
it, but would, I believe, now prefer remaining at home as a cavalry
officer to coming to India in any capacity. As I have only one son,
and he has four sisters to look after, I should be unwilling to have
him sent out to India as a cadet, were he anxious to be so. A good
regiment is an excellent school for a young man, but no school could
be worse than a bad regiment; and among so many, there must always be
some bad. I have seen some of the sons of my old friends utterly
ruined in character and constitution by being posted to such
regiments when too young to think for themselves. I feel, however, as
grateful to you for your very kind offer as I should be, were I to
avail myself of it.

If I return to England, I shall take advantage of the earliest
opportunity to pay my respects and become personally acquainted with
you; but I have no intention to leave India as long as I feel that I
can perform efficiently the duties intrusted to me.

I had a few days ago, in referring to Government an important
question that must some day come before you, occasion to mention an
important and interesting fact. During the last collision with the
Seiks, I found that the Government securities kept up their value
here, while in Calcutta they fell a good deal; and the merchants here
employed agents in Calcutta to purchase largely for sale here. Paper
to the value of more than three millions sterling, or three crores of
rupees, is held by people residing in the city of Lucknow, and the
people had never the slightest doubt that we should be ultimately
triumphant. The question was whether heirs and executors of persons
domiciled here and leaving property in Government securities, should
apply to Her Majesty's Supreme Court in Calcutta, for probates to
wills and letters of administration, or whether an act should be
passed to render the decision of the highest Court at Lucknow,
countersigned, by the Resident, as valid as the certificate of a
judge in our own provinces, as far as such property in Government
securities might be concerned. A provision of this sort had been
omitted in Act 20 of 1841, which was considered applicable to all
British India, of which the kingdom of Oude was held to form a part.

We have now a fair prospect of long peace, during which I hope our
finances will improve. The lavish life-pensions granted after wars in
Central and Southern India will be lapsing with the death of the
present incumbents, many of whom are becoming old and infirm, and our
means of transit and irrigation will increase with the new works
which are being formed, and we shall always have it in our power to
augment our revenue from indirect taxation, as wealth and industry
increase.

                   Believe me, My Dear Sir James,
                Very faithfully and obligedly yours,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Sir James Weir Hogg, Bart.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 2nd March, 1851.

My Lord,

The mail of the 24th January has just come in, and I find my only son
Henry Arthur gazetted for the 16th Dragoons. He told me by the last
mail that he was to be so if he passed his examination on the 10th of
that month, which he hoped to do; but I deferred writing to thank you
for your kind exertions in his behalf till his name should appear in
the "Gazette." I pray your Lordship to accept my most grateful
acknowledgments for this act of kindness, added as it has been to the
many others which I have received at your hands. It is not the less
valuable that it is the only favour I have received from England
since I left it more than forty years ago, though, I believe, few
have done more to benefit the people of its eastern dominions, and to
secure for it their esteem and affection.

I trust that my son will never do anything to make your Lordship
regret the favour conferred upon me and him on this occasion. He is,
I believe, in disposition, manners, and education a little gentleman;
and in time he will, I hope, become a good officer.

If I might take the liberty, I would pray your Lordship to offer, in
such terms as may appear to you suitable, my grateful acknowledgments
for the consideration I have received, to his Grace the Duke of
Wellington, and to Lord Fitzroy Somerset. My London Agents, Messrs.
Denay, Clark, and Co., of Austin Friars, have been instructed to pay
for my son's commission and outfit, and to provide him with the funds
indispensably necessary in addition to his pay.

We shall now look with much interest to the Parliamentary discussions
on Indian affairs, for we must expect some important changes on the
renewal of the Charter. Whatever these changes may be for the home or
local Government, I trust the benefit of the people of India will be
considered the main point, and not the triumph of a party. The
statesman who shall link India more closely with New Zealand will be
a benefactor to both England and India, and that colony also. It
might, with advantage to itself, take those children of Indian
officers who cannot find employment of any kind in India, and ought
not to be thrown back upon the mother-country. With this view, it
might be useful to transfer our orphan institutions to that island,
to direct that way our invalid and pensioned officers, who, while
subsisting upon their pensions or stipends, would be able to
establish their children in a climate suitable to the preservation of
their race, which that of India certainly is not.

India is at present tranquil, and likely to remain so. We have no
native chiefs, or combination of native chiefs, to create uneasiness;
and if we continue to satisfy the great body of the people that we
are anxious, to the best of our ability, to promote their happiness
and welfare, and are the most impartial arbitrators that they could
have, we shall have nothing to fear. The moment that this mass is
impressed with the belief that we wish to govern India only for
ourselves, or as the French govern Algiers, from that moment we must
lose our vantage ground and decline. We may war against the native
chiefs of India, but we cannot war against the people--we need not
fear what may be called political dangers, but we must guard
carefully against those of a social character which would unite
against us the members of all classes and all creeds.

But I must no longer indulge in speculations of this sort, in which
you can now feel little interest amidst the important changes which
are now taking place in the institutions and relations of European
nations. With grateful recollections of kindness received, and great
respect,
          I remain,
              Your Lordship's obedient servant,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To the Right Hon.
the Earl of Ellenborough.

P.S.--Since writing the above, I have received your Lordship's letter
of the 18th of January, and have been much gratified with the
favourable opinion you entertain of the commandant and officers. It
is the best assurance I could have of my boy being safe. Nothing
could be more auspicious than the opening of the lad's career, and I
trust he will profit by the advantage.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 18th March, 1851.

My Dear Sir Erskine,

I have read over with much interest the two small works you have done
me the favour to send me, the one on Buddhism, and the other on Law
Reform; but I have not ventured upon the Seventh Report of the Board
of Education yet, because I have had a good deal to do and think
about; and a good deal of it is in small print, very trying for my
eyes, which are none of the strongest. I shall, however, soon read
it.

I concur in all your views about the necessity of throwing overboard
the whole system of special pleading, and have been amused with Sir
J. P. Grant's horror of your proposed innovations. It is not less
than that which he expressed at the little Macaulay Code, intended to
blow up the whole pyramid raised by "the wisdom of our ancestors," in
which so many illustrious characters he entombed. He was, indeed, as
you say, "a great _laudator temporis acti_;" but the number of those
like him at all times in England and its distant possessions is
fearful. One likes to look to America in this as in all things
tending to advancement; but there the "damned spot" stares us in the
face, blights our hopes, and crushes our sympathies--hideous slavery
--hideous alike in the recollection of the past, the contemplation of
the present, and the anticipation of the future. I wish two things--
1. That you would write a work on the subject less "sketchy and
perfunctory," as you call it, so that any one not versed in English
law and procedure might be able to understand it and appreciate it
thoroughly. 2nd. That you would, when relieved from your present
office, come out as our law member of council, to press your views on
our Government with effect. With these law reforms, as with
railroads, there were less impediments in India than in England; but
there is one thing that I would observe. In our own Indian Courts our
judges would--for a time at least--want the aid of honest _masters_
to condense and report upon cases under trial. Such men would be made
in time; and in considering such things, we must recollect that
almost the only persons in India who can send agents into all parts
of it, with a perfect assurance of honest dealing, are the native
merchants and bankers. But I won't dwell on this subject. I can't
find amongst the numerous Buddhists here, one who knows anything
about "Kapila vasta," which you place near to Lucknow. I should like
to visit the birth-place of a man who did so much for mankind as
Sakeen Gantama.

He would hardly have done as I have, placed my only son in the 16th
Lancers. However, I may console myself, for he may be in it a long
time without doing much mischief, for I do hope that the people of
the nations of modern Europe are too strong and too wise to let their
sovereigns and ministers play such fantastic tricks as they were
"wont to play," when George the 3rd, and Edward the 3rd, and Henry
the 5th were kings. Property, good sense, and good business have
greatly increased and spread, and are every day producing good
fruits.

                     Believe me,
                           Yours very trusting,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Sir Erskine Perry,
     &c.  &c.

                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 31st March, 1851.
My Dear Sir,

I grieve to say that I can do nothing whatever for the son of my late
friend Colonel Ouseley, and have been obliged to write to him to that
effect, as to many other sons of old and valued friends whom I should
be glad to aid if I could.

Tens of thousands of the most happy families I have seen in India owe
all they have to the able and judicious management of the late
Colonel Ouseley when in the civil charge of the districts of
Houshengabad and Baitool, in the Saugor territories; and no man's
memory is more dear to the people of those districts than his now is.
The family of a man who had done so much to make his government
beloved and respected over so large a field should never want if I
could prevent it; but I have no situations whatever in my gift, nor
have I any influence over any persons who have such situations to
bestow.

                    Believe me,
                           Yours truly,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Captain Harrington.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 24th November 1851.

My Lord,

Lucknow affairs are now in a state to require the assumption of the
entire management of the country; and the principal question for your
Lordship's consideration is, whether this shall be done by a new
treaty or by simple proclamation. Treaties not only justify but
enjoin the measure; our pledges to the people demand it; and all
India are, I believe, satisfied of its justice, provided we leave the
revenues for the maintenance of the royal family in suitable dignity,
and for the benefit of the people.

We may disencumber our Government of the pay of two regiments of Oude
Local Infantry, and incorporate them with the Oude force to be
raised, and of that of the officers of the residency, altogether
about two lacs and a-half of rupees; and when things are settled down
a little, the brigade now here--of three infantry regiments and a
company of artillery, costing some four lacs more--may be dispensed
with, perhaps.

If I may be permitted to give an opinion as to the best mode of the
two, I should say proclamation, as the more dignified.

I have prepared all the information I believe your Lordship will
require, and am ready to wait upon you with it when and where it may
seem most convenient.

The treasury is exhausted, and fifty lacs are required to pay the
stipendiaries of the royal family and establishments; and assuredly
all the members of that family, save the King's own household, are
wishing for some great measure to place them under the guarantee of
the British Government. The people all now wish for it, at least all
the well-disposed, for there is not a man of integrity or humanity
left in any office. The King's understanding has become altogether
emasculated; and though he would not willingly do harm to any one, he
is unable to protect any one. He would now, I believe, willingly get
rid of his minister; and, having exhausted the treasury, the minister
would not much dislike to get rid of him. I shall do my best to
prevent his being released from the responsibility of his misdoings
till I meet your Lordship. I should like, if possible, to meet your
Lordship where there is likely to be the least crowd of expectants
and parade to take up your time and distract your attention. If at
Cawnpore, I hope you will permit me to have my camp on the Oude side
of the river, with a tent in your camp for business during the day.
With your Lordship's commands to attend, it will be desirable to have
an order to make over my treasury to the First Assistant, to prevent
delay. Should you desire any memoranda to be sent, they shall be
forwarded as soon as ordered. If any further public report upon the
state of Oude affairs appears to be required, I must pray your
Lordship to let me know as soon as convenient. I shall not propose
any native gentlemen for the higher offices; but it will be necessary
to have a great many in the subordinate ones, to show that your
Lordship wishes to open employment in all branches of the new
administration to educated native gentlemen.

                      I remain,
            Your Lordship's obedient servant,
                 (Signed)         W. H. SLEEMAN.

To the Most Noble
The Marquis of Dalhousie,
Governor-General,
   &c. &c. &c.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 18th March, 1852.

My Lord,

I was favoured with your Lordship's letter of the 24th ultimo in due
course, and did not reply immediately as I had stated, or was about
to state, in a public form, all that seemed to be required about
Captain Bird and Dr. Bell. Dr. Bell had apologised for indiscretions
in conversation, but denied ever having authorised Mr. Brandon to
make use of his name; and pretended utter ignorance of the intrigues
which he was carrying on at the time that he was doing his utmost to
convey wrong impressions to the Durbar. I feel grateful for the
support your Lordship has given me. I cared nothing about the
intrigues of these very silly men while under the impression that it
was your intention to interpose effectually for the benefit of the
people of Oude, because the new arrangements would have rendered them
harmless; but when I found that you could not do so at present, it
became necessary, for my own dignity and that of the Government, to
do my best to put a stop to them. Most assuredly Captain Bird had
been trying hard to persuade the King and his minister that our
Government could not interfere, and that all the threats of the
Governor-General would continue to be what they had hitherto been,
and might be disregarded.

I find that your Lordship has departed slightly from your original
plan in regard to Burmah, by sending a detachment to make a
demonstration upon Rangoon and Martaban. There is no calculating upon
the result of such a demonstration in dealing with a Government so
imbecile, and so ignorant of our resources. The places are too far
from the capital, and the war party may succeed in persuading the
King that in this demonstration we put forth all our strength. I can
appreciate your motive--the wish to avoid, if possible, a war of
annexation, which a war upon any scale must be. We should have to
make use of a vast number of suffering people, whom we could not
abandon to the mercy of the old Government.

In the last war our great difficulties were the want of quick transit
for troops and stores by sea, the want of carriage cattle, and
sickness. These three impediments will not now beset us. Our own
districts on the coast will supply land-carriage, steam-vessels will
carry our troops and stores, and subsequent experience will enable us
to avoid sources of endemial diseases. I have no map of the country;
but some letters in the papers about the Busseya river interested me
much. Our strong point is steam; and the discovery of a river which
would enable us to use it in getting in strength to the rear or flank
would be of immense advantage. There must be healthy districts;
indeed Burmah generally must be a healthy country, or the population
would not be so strong and intelligent as they are known to be. In
religious feeling they are less opposed to us than any other people
not Buddhists. Indeed, from the people we should have nothing to
fear; and the army must be insignificant in numbers as well as
equipments. I am very glad to find that so able and well-trained a
statesman as Fox Maule has been put at the head of the Board of
Control; and trust that your Lordship will remain at our head till
the Burmah affair is thoroughly settled.

The little affair of the Moplars, on the Malabar coast, may grow into
a very big one unless skilfully managed. A brother of the Conollys is
the magistrate, I believe. We can learn nothing of the cause of the
strong feeling of discontent that prevails among this fanatical
people. No such strong feeling can exist in India without some
"canker-worm" to embitter the lives and unite the sympathies of large
classes against their rulers or local governors, and make them think
that they cannot shake it off without rebelling and becoming martyrs.
I must pray your Lordship to excuse this long rambling letter, and

          Believe me, with great respect,
                         Your obedient servant,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To the Most Noble
The Marquis of Dalhousie,
Governor-General,
Calcutta.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 4th April, 1852.

My Dear Sir James,

Your present of the cadetship for her son made the poor widow's heart
glad, and I doubt not that she has written to express her grateful
feelings. The young man will, I hope, prove himself deserving of the
favour you have conferred upon him so gracefully. The Court has
called for a copy of my Diary of the tour I made through Oude soon
after I took charge of my office; and I have sent off two copies, one
for Government and the other for the Court. I purchased a small press
and type for the purpose of printing it in my own house, that no one
but myself and the compositor might see it. I will send home two
copies for yourself and the chairman as soon as they can be bound in
Calcutta. The Diary contains a faithful picture of Oude, its
Government, and people, I believe. I have printed only a few copies,
and they will not be distributed till I learn that the Court consider
them unobjectionable. In spirit they will be found so. I intend, if I
can find time, to give the history of the reigning family in a third
volume. My general views on Oude affairs have been given in my
letters to Government, which will, I conclude, be before the Court. A
ruler so utterly regardless of his high duties and responsibilities,
and of the sufferings of the people under his rule, as the present
King, I have never seen; nor have I ever seen ministers so
incompetent and so unworthy as those whom he employs in the conduct
of his affairs. We have threatened so often to interpose for the
benefit of the poor people, without doing anything, that they have
lost all hope, and the profligate and unprincipled Government have
lost all fear. The untoward war with Burmah prevents our present
Governor-General from doing what he and I believe the Honourable
Court both wish. We certainly ought not any longer to incur the odium
of supporting such a Government in its iniquities, pledged as we are
by treaties to protect the people from them. I do not apprehend any
serious change in the constitution of the Court of Directors in the
new charter. No ministers would hazard such a change in the present
state of Europe. The Court is India's only safeguard. No foreign
possession was ever so governed for itself as India has been, and
this all foreigners with whom I have conversed, admit. The Governor-
General of the Netherlands India was with me lately on his way home.
He is a first-rate statesman, and he declared to me that he was
impressed and delighted to see a country so governed, and apparently
so sensible of the benefits conferred upon it by our paternal rule.
He will tell you the same thing if you ever meet him. His name is
Rochasson. The people appreciate the value of the Court of Directors,
and no act, as far as it is known to them, has tended more to
strengthen their confidence in it than that which has brought
retribution on the great sinner in Scinde, Allee Murad. No punishment
was ever more just or merited. Scinde, however, is too remote for the
people in general to feel much interest in its affairs or families.
Our weak points in the last Burmese war were:--1. The want of
transport for troops and stores; 2. The want of carriage by land, for
arms and stores; 3. Sickness. All these things have been remedied,
and the war, when begun in earnest, can last but a short time. We
know more of the country and shall avoid the sources of endemial
disease; our steam provides for the rapid transport of troops and
stores; and draft-cattle will be supplied from our own districts on
the coast. Where our Government has no representative as Resident or
Consul, all Europeans should be told that they remain entirely on
their own responsibility. Unless this is done, the Governments must
be eternally in collision. If war be carried on in earnest, it must
be one of annexation: we must make use of persons whom we cannot
abandon to the mercy of the Burmese Government. We have nothing to
fear from the people: they have no religious feeling against us,
being all Buddhists; and they have seen too much of the benefits
conferred by us on the territories taken during the last war to have
any dead of our dominion. Lord Dalhousie has, I believe, been most
anxious to avoid a war--it has been forced upon him.

                      Believe me,
                           Yours very faithfully,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Sir James W. Hogg,
Deputy Chairman,
India House.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 6th April, 1842.

My Dear Mr. Halliday,

We are all wrong here in the Martinière institution, and you have now
an admirable opportunity of setting all right and doing an infinite
deal of good with little trouble. I know how little you have of time
and attention to devote to such things, and conclude that Mr.
Devereux cannot have much more, and you may feel assured that I shall
do all in my power to assist you. We are here attempting to give the
education of gentlemen to beggar-boys, who must always depend upon
their daily work for their daily bread. The senior boys are in
despair, for they find that they have learnt hardly anything to fit
them for the only employments open to them, and this tends to
discourage the younger ones. The Roorkee Civil Engineering School
seems to have been eminently successful, and a fine field is open to
all who are taught in it. We shall no doubt have a similar field open
in Oude when Government interposes in behalf of the suffering people,
and we might prepare for it by converting the Martinière into a
similar school or college. The committee has just expressed to you a
hope that Mr. Crank, the officiating principal, may be able to pass
an examination in the native languages. This hope can never be
realised; and if he does I shall have to record my opinion that he is
otherwise unfitted. The power of nominating a principal rests
entirely with the trustees; and if you concur in my views you might
at once prepare for the change by getting a man from England or
elsewhere, such as Mr. Maclagan, the late superintendent of the
Roorkee school, fitted to teach civil engineering in all its
branches. You have the command of funds to provide him with
assistants of all kinds; and we have accommodations and funds to
raise more, and provide machinery, books, &c. The thing might be set
going at once, after you send a competent man to superintend it; and
the work will be honourable to our Government and ourselves, and of
vast benefit to the boys brought up at this Martinière, and to their
parents and families. If you think favourably of the proposed change,
and will direct the committee to take it into consideration, I will
do my best to make it respond cordially to your call; or if you
direct the measure to be adopted at once, I will see that it is
worked out as it should be. Mr. Crank has a good knowledge of
mathematics and mechanics, and will make a good second under a good
first; but he would be quite unfit for a first. Mr. Maclagan intended
going home, via Bombay, as soon as relieved by Captain Oldfield, and
has embarked by this time. He might be written to, to send out a
competent person and the required machinery. Constantia is admirably
adapted for such an establishment; the river Goomtee flows close
under it; the grounds are ample, open, and level, and the climate
fine. It would interest the whole of the Oude aristocracy, and induce
them to send their sons there for instruction. It would be gratifying
to the Judges of the Supreme Court to know that the funds available
were devoted to a purpose so highly useful; and you would carry home
with you the agreeable recollection of having engrafted so useful a
branch upon the almost useless old trunk of the Martinière.

                           Yours very truly,
                 (Signed)         W. H. SLEEMAN.

To F. J. Halliday, Esq.
Secretary to Government,
Calcutta.

Mr. Maclagan is a Lieutenant of Engineers, and lives in Edinburgh.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow. 10th April, 1852.

My Lord,

In September 1848, I took the liberty to mention to your Lordship my
fears that the system of annexing and absorbing native States--so
popular with our Indian service, and so much advocated by a certain
class of writers in public journals--might some day render us too
visibly dependent upon our native army; that they might see it, and
that accidents might occur to unite them, or too great a portion of
them, in some desperate act. My only anxiety about Burmah arises from
the same fears. Our native army has been too much _petted_ of late;
and they are liable to get into their heads the notion that we want
them more than they want us. Had the 38th been at first ordered to
march to Aracan, they would, in all probability, have begged their
European officers to pray Government to permit them to go by water.

We committed a great mistake in not long ago making all new levies
general service corps; and we have committed one not less grave in
restricting the admissions into our corps to high-caste men: and
encouraging the promotion of high-caste men to the prejudice of men
equally deserving but of lower caste. The Brahmins in regiments have
too much influence, and they are at the bottom of all the mischief
that occurs. The Rajpoots are too numerous, because they are under
the influence of the Brahmins, and feel too strong from their
numbers.

We require stronger and braver men than the Madras Presidency can
afford, with all their readiness for general service. The time may
not be distant when England will have to call upon India for troops
to serve in Egypt; and the troops from Madras, or even from Bombay,
will not do against Europeans. Men from Northern or Western India
will be required, and, in order to be prepared, it would be well to
have all new corps--should new corps be required--composed of men
from the Punjaub or the Himmalayah chain, and ready for any service.
Into such corps none but Seiks, Juts, Goojurs, Gwalas, Mussulmans,
and Hillmen should be enlisted. Too much importance is attached to
height, merely that corps may look well on parade. Much more work can
be got out of moderate sized than tall men in India. The tall men in
regiments always fail first in actual service--they are fit only for
display at reviews and on parades: always supposing that the
moderate-sized men are taken from Western and Northern India, where
alone they have the strength and courage required.

No recruit should henceforward be taken except on condition of
general service; and by-and-by the option may be given to all
sipahees, of a certain standing or period of service, to put their
names down for general service, or retire. This could not, of course,
be done at present. No commanding officer can say, at present, what
his regiment will do if called upon to aid the Government in any way
not _specified in their bond_. They have too commonly favourites, who
persuade them, for their own selfish purposes, that their regiments
will do anything to meet their wishes, at the very time that these
regiments are watching for an occasion to disgrace these favourites
by refusal. I have known many occasions of this. None but general
service corps or volunteers should be sent to Burmah from Bengal
during this campaign, or we shall hazard a disaster. There are, I
believe, several that your Lordship has not yet called upon. They
should be at hand as soon as possible, and their present places
supplied by others. In the mean time, corps of Punjaubies and Hillmen
should be raised for general service. Not only can no commanding
officer say what his corps will do under circumstances in which their
religion or prejudices may afford a pretext for disobedience, but no
officers can say how far their regiments sympathise with the
recusant: or discontented, corps, and are prepared to join them.

In case it should ever be proposed to make all corps general service
corps, in the way I mention, a donation would, of course, be offered
to all who declined of a month's pay for every year of past service,
or of something of that kind. A maximum might be fixed of four, five,
or six months. It would not cost much, for but few would go. I must
pray your Lordship to excuse the liberty I take in obtruding my
notions on this subject, but it really is one of vital importance in
the present state of affairs in India, as well as in Europe.

                 With great respect, I remain, &c.,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To the Moat Noble
The Marquis of Dalhousie, K.T.
Governor-General of India,
Calcutta.




                 __________________________


_Memorandum_.

In the year 1832 or 1833 the want of bamboos of large size, for yokes
for artillery bullocks, was much felt at Saugor and the stations of
that division; and the commissariat officer was authorised to form a
bamboo grove, to be watered by the commissariat cattle, in order to
supply the deficiency for the future. Forty beegas, or about twenty
acres of land, were assigned for the purpose, and Government went to
the expense of forming twelve pucka-wells, as the bamboos were
planted upon the black cotton-soil of Central India, in which kutcha-
wells do not stand. The first outlay was, therefore, greater than
usual, being three thousand rupees. The establishment kept up
consisted of one gardener, at five rupees a month, and two assistants
at three rupees each. The bamboos were watered by the artillery
bullocks and commissariat servants.

In a few years the bamboos became independent of irrigation, and no
outlay has since been incurred upon them. The bamboos are now between
forty and fifty feet high, and between four and five inches in
diameter. They are used by the commissariat and ordnance departments
at Saugor, but are not, I believe, required for yokes for the
artillery bullocks.

There is a grove of sesum trees near the Lucknow cantonments formed
in the same way, but with little or no outlay in irrigation. The
trees were planted, and all the cost incurred has been in the people
employed to protect them from trespass. In a dryer climate they might
require irrigation for a few years. Groves of saul, _alias_ sukhoo
trees, might be formed in the same manner in the vicinity of all
stations where there are artillery bullocks; and the bullocks
themselves would benefit by being employed in the irrigation. The
establishments kept up for the bullocks would be able to do all the
work required.

The complement of bullocks for a battery of 6 guns, 6 waggons, and 2
store carts, is 106. The number yoked to each gun and waggon is 61,
[transcriber's note, should be 6], and to each cart 4, leaving a
surplus of 26 for accidents. There would, therefore, be always a
sufficient number of bullocks available for the irrigation of such
groves where such a battery is kept up. These bullocks are taken care
of by 4 sirdars and 59 drivers; and an European sergeant of artillery
is appointed as bullock-sergeant to each battery, to superintend the
feeding, cleaning, &c. &c. The officer on duty sees the bullocks
occasionally, and the commanding officer sometimes. Such groves might
be left to the care of the commandant of artillery at small stations,
and to the commissariat officer at large ones.

At every large station there might be a grove of sesum, one of
sakhoo, and one of bamboos, each covering a hundred acres; and at all
stations with a battery, three groves of the same kind, covering each
twenty acres or more. For the convenience of carriage by water, such
groves might be formed chiefly in the vicinity of rivers, or in that
of the places where the timber is most likely to be required; but no
battery should be without such groves. The men and bullocks would
both benefit by the employment such groves would give them. The men,
to interest them, might each have a small garden within the grove
which he assists in watering.

Such groves would tend to improve the salubrity of the stations where
they are formed, and become agreeable and healthful promenades for
officers and soldiers. In most stations, kutcha-wells, formed at a
cost of from 20 to 50 rupees, would suffice for watering such groves.
They might be lined, like those of the peasantry, by twisted cables
of straw and twigs; and the men who attend the bullocks might be
usefully employed in weaving them, as all should learn to make
fascines and gabions. Willows should be planted near all the wells,
to supply twigs for making the cables for lining the wells, and the
manure of the artillery draft-bullocks should be appropriated to the
groves.

[Submitted to the Governor-General through the Private Secretary, in
March, 1852, with reference to a conversation which I had with his
Lordship in his camp.]


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 23rd August, 1852.

My Lord,

Permit me to offer my congratulations, not only on the success which
has hitherto attended your Lordship's arrangements in Burmah, but on
the very favourable impression which that success has made upon the
Sovereign and people of England. It has enabled you to show that the
war is not with the people of Burmah, but with a haughty, insolent,
and incompetent Government, with whom that people has no longer any
sympathy; and that, should circumstances render the annexation of any
portion of its territory necessary, the people of that portion would
consider the measure a blessing, and be well pleased to live in
harmony under the efficient protection of the new rule.

They are not in any way opposed to us from either religions or
political feelings, for they seem to consider Christianity as a
branch only of their own great system of Buddhism, which includes
almost half of the human race; and they are evidently weary of the
political institutions under which they now live, and which have
ceased to afford them protection of any kind. In the annexation of
Pegu--should it be forced upon your Lordship--there would be nothing
revolting to the feelings of its people or to those of the people of
England; on the contrary, both would be satisfied, after the
disposition the people of Pegu have manifested towards us, that the
measure was alike necessary to their security and to the honour and
interest of our Government.

Nor do I think that there would be any ground to apprehend that the
resources of the territory taken would not, after a time, be
sufficient to defray the costs of the establishments required to
retain and govern it. Among the people of Pegu we should find men
able and willing to serve us faithfully and efficiently in both our
civil and military establishments, and the drain for the maintenance
of foreigners would not be large. I have heard the mental and
physical powers of the men of Pegu spoken of in the highest terms by
persons who have spent the greater part of their lives among them;
and a country which produces such men cannot be generally
insalubrious. This early demonstration has enabled your Lordship to
ascertain and expose the determination of the Government of Ava not
to grant the redress justly demanded for wrongs suffered, so as to
enlist on our side the sympathy of all civilized nations, and at the
same time to discover the real weakness of the enemy and the
facilities offered to us, in their fine rivers, for the use of our
strong arm--the steam navy. Not a single "untoward event" has yet
occurred to dispirit our troops, or give confidence to the enemy, or
to prejudice the people of Burmah against us: and there certainly is
nothing in this war to make us apprehend "that our political
difficulties will begin when our military successes are complete." It
is not displeasing to perceive the strong tendency to an early onward
move, while your Lordship has so prudent a leader in General Godwin
to restrain it within due bounds.

                       I remain, &c.,
                 (Signed)         W. H. SLEEMAN.



To the Most Noble
The Marquis of Dalhousie, K.T.
Governor-General of India.
Calcutta.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, September, 1852.

My Lord,

The longer the present King reigns, the more unfit he becomes to
reign, and the more the administration and the country deteriorate.
The State must have become bankrupt long ere this, but the King, and
the knaves by whom he is governed, have discontinued paying the
stipends of all the members of the royal family, save those of his
own father's family, for the last three years; and many of them are
reduced to extreme distress, and without the hope of ever getting
their stipends again unless our Government interferes. The females of
the palaces of former sovereigns ventured to clamour for their
subsistence, and they were, without shame or mercy, driven into the
streets to starve, beg, or earn their bread by their labour. This
deters all from complaining, and they are in a state of utter dismay.
No part of the people of Oude are more anxious for the interposition
of our Government than the members of the royal family; for there is
really no portion more helpless and oppressed: none of them can ever
approach the King, who is surrounded exclusively by eunuchs,
fiddlers, and poetasters worse than either; and the minister and his
creatures, who are worse than all. They appropriate at least one-half
of the revenues of the country to themselves, and employ nothing but
knaves of the very worst kind in all the branches of the
administration. The King is a crazy imbecile, who is led about by
these people like a child, and made to do whatever they wish him to
do, and to give whatever orders may best suit their private
interests. At present, the most powerful of the favourites are
Decanut od Doula and Husseen od Doula, two eunuchs; Anees od Doula
and Mosahib od Doula, two fiddlers; two poetasters, and the minister
and his creatures. The minister could not stand a moment without the
eunuchs, fiddlers, and poets, and he is obliged to acquiesce in all
the orders given by the King for their benefit. The fiddlers have
control over the administration of civil justice; the eunuchs over
that of criminal justice, public buildings, &c. The minister has the
land revenue; and all are making enormous fortunes. The present King
ought not certainly to reign: he has wilfully forfeited all right to
do so; but to set him aside in favour of his eldest, or indeed any
other son, would give no security whatever for any permanent good
government A well-selected regency would, no doubt, be a vast
improvement upon the present system; but no people would invest their
capital in useful works, manufactures, and trades, with the prospect
of being handed over a few years hence to a prince brought up
precisely in the same manner the present King was, and as all his
sons will be. What the people want, and most earnestly pray for is,
that our Government should take upon itself the responsibility of
governing them well and permanently. All classes, save the knaves,
who now surround and govern the King, earnestly pray for this--the
educated classes, because they would then have a chance of
respectable employment, which none of them now have; the middle
classes, because they find no protection or encouragement, and no
hope that their children will be permitted to inherit the property
they may leave, not invested in our Government securities; and the
humbler classes, because they are now abandoned to the merciless
rapacity of the starving troops, and other public establishments, and
of the landholders, driven or invited into rebellion by the present
state of misrule. There is not, I believe, another Government in
India so entirely opposed to the best interest's and most earnest
wishes of the people as that of Oude now is; at least I have never
seen or read of one. People of all classes have become utterly weary
of it. The people have the finest feelings towards our Government and
character. I know no part of India, save the valley of the Nurbuddah,
where the feeling towards us is better. All, from the highest to the
lowest, would, at this time, hail the advent of our administration
with joy; and the rest of India, to whom Oude misrule is well known,
would acquiesce in the conviction, that it had become imperative for
the protection of the people. With steamers to Fyzabad, and a
railroad from that place to Cawnpore, through Lucknow, the Nepaul
people would be for ever quieted, with half of the force we now keep
up to look after them; and the N. W. Provinces become more closely
united to Bengal, to the vast advantage of both. I mentioned that we
should require a considerable loan to begin with; but I think that an
issue of paper money, receivable in Oude in revenue, and payable to
public establishments in Oude, might safely be made to cover all the
outlay required to pay off odd establishments and commence the new
work. Little money goes out of Oude, and the increased circulating
medium, required for the new public works and new establishments,
would soon absorb all the paper issued. It might be issued at little
or no cost by the financial department of the new administration.
Though everybody knows that the King has become crazy and imbecile,
it would be difficult to get judicial proof that he is so, where the
life and property of every one are at his mercy and that of the
knaves who now govern him. His every-day doings sufficiently manifest
it. There is not the slightest ground for hope that he will ever be
any other than what he now is, or that his children will be better.
There are too many interested in depriving them of all capacity for a
part in public affairs that they may retain the reins in their own
hands when the children come of age to admit of their ever becoming
better than their father is. I have not lately made the reports which
Lord Hardinge directed the Resident to make periodically, but shall
be prepared to resume them whenever your Lordship may direct. I
suspended them on account of hostilities with Burmah. I have printed
eighteen copies of the establishments, as they are and were last
year, and as I proposed for the new system. I shall not let any one
have a copy till your Lordship permits it, and they are all at your
disposal if required. This, and the "Substantive Code," are the only
papers connected with Oude, except the Diary that I have had printed,
or shall have printed, unless ordered by you.

             I remain, with great respect,
                  Your Lordship's obedient servant,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

P.S.--I believe that it is your Lordship's wish that the whole of the
revenues of Oude should be expended for the benefit of the royal
family and people of Oude, and that the British Government should
disclaim any wish to derive any pecuniary advantages from assuming to
itself the administration.

                 (Signed)         W. H. SLEEMAN.

To the Most Noble
The Marquis of Dalhousie, K.T.
Governor-General,
  &c. &c. &c.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 21st September, 1852.

My Dear Sir,

I will reply to the queries contained in your letter of the 16th
instant to the best of my recollection. I was in Calcutta in January,
1838, when the late Dyce Sombre was there, and about to embark for
England. I had seen a good deal of him at Sirdhanah, in March 1836,
soon after the Begum Sumroo's death, and he afterwards spent a short
time with me at Mussoorie, and consulted me a good deal on the
subject of a dispute with his father.

Colonel James Skinner and Dr. Drener were, I believe, executors to
his will. Colonel Skinner was at Delhi, and Dr. Drener had either
gone home or was going, I forget which, and Dyce Sombre asked me to
consent to become one of his trustees, for the conduct of his affairs
in this country. I consented, and I think the circumstance was
inserted in a codicil or memorandum added to his will or deed; but my
recollection on this point is not distinct.

I had, however, nothing to do with the conduct of his affairs in this
country until the death of Colonel James Skinner, which took place in
December, 1841, when Mr. Reghilini, the overseer or agent at
Sirdhanah, got my sanction to the outlay for establishments, &c. At
this time I corresponded with Dyce Sombre, and continued to do so
until his affairs were thrown into Chancery. I then sought a lawyer's
opinion as to my proper course, and refused to give Mr. Reghilini any
further orders. The opinion was, "that my only safe course was to do
nothing whatever in the conduct of his affairs;" and I never
afterwards did anything. I never heard of any Colonel Sheerman, and
his name may have been inserted by mistake for mine; but I was then
(1838) only a major, and was not promoted until 1843. I never heard
of any desire on the part of Dyce Sombre, or the Begum Sumroo, to
found a college other than as an appendage to the Sirdhanah church,
nor of his having given the residue of his property for the purpose;
at least, I have no recollection of having heard of such desire. I
always hoped, and expected, until I heard of his marriage, that he
would return and reside at Sirdhanah.

Dyce Sombre always spoke to me of Mrs. Troup and Mrs. Soloroli as his
sisters: he regarded them alike as such, and so did the Begum Sumroo.
I always understood them to be the children of the same mother; but
the question was never mooted before me, and I have always heard that
Mrs. Troup was very like Dyce Sombre in appearance, and that Mrs.
Soloroli was not so.

Mr. Reghilini, who is, I believe, still at Sirdhanah, may know
whether a Colonel Sheerman was appointed executor or not. Dr. Drener
must know. The notes which passed between me and Dyce Sombre, after
he left India, were on the ordinary topics of the day, and were
destroyed as soon as read. I have none of them to refer to, nor would
they furnish any confirmation on the matter in question if I had.

             Believe me, yours, very truly,
                 (Signed)         W. H. SLEEMAN.

Charles Prinsep, Esq.,
Barrister-at-Law,
Calcutta.


                 __________________________


_To Messrs. Molloy, Mackintosh, and Poe, Calcutta_.

Dear Sirs,

In reply to your letter of the 16th instant, I enclose the copy of a
letter addressed by me on the 21st ultimo to Mr. Charles Prinsep, in
reply to similar queries. To what I stated in that letter I can add
but little.

Dyce Sombre always spoke to me of Mrs. Soloroli and Mrs. Troup as his
sisters, and of the former as the eldest of the two; and Mrs. Troup
spoke of Mrs. Soloroli as her eldest sister. They were always treated
by the Begum Sumroo as his sisters; and when Dyce Sombre went to
England I think he left the same provision for both in addition to
what they had received from the Begum.

I was introduced to Mrs. Troup by her husband as an old friend on my
way back from Mussoorie in November, 1837, but I did not see Mrs.
Soloroli, though she and her husband were at the same place,
Sirdhanah, at that time. They both lived under the curtain, secluded
from the sight of men, after the Hindoostanee fashion, as long as
they remained in India, I think; and I was introduced to Mrs. Troup
as a friend of the family, whom all might require to consult. Her
husband only was present during the interview. Dyce Sombre had left
the place for Calcutta. I never heard a doubt expressed of their
being sisters by the same mother and father till the new will came
under discussion at the end of last year.

I may refer you to pages 378 and 396 of the second volume of a work
by me, entitled "Rambles and Recollections," in which you will find
it mentioned that the grandmother of Dyce Sombre died insane at
Sirdhanah in 1838. She must have been insane for more than forty
years up to her death. Her son Zuffer Yab Khan was a man of weak
intellect, and he was the father of Dyce Sombre's mother, of whom I
know nothing whatever.

Dyce Sombre, showed no symptoms of derangement of mind while I knew
him; but he inherited from his grandmother a predisposition to
insanity, which I apprehended might become developed by any very
strong feelings of excitement; and I urged him to return and settle
at Sirdhanah, when he had seen all he wished to see in Europe.

He saw a good deal of English society in India, and understood well
the freedom which English wives enjoy in general society; but I
doubted whether he could ever thoroughly shake off his early
predilections for keeping them secluded. It would, I thought, be
always to him a source of deep humiliation to see his wife mix with
other men in the manner in which English married ladies are
accustomed to do. Since his affairs were put into Chancery I have
always felt persuaded that this must have been the principal
"exciting cause" acting upon the predisposition derived from his
grandmother, which led to it. I have never had the slightest doubt
that he suffered under an aberration of mind upon this point, though
he never mentioned the subject in any of his short letters to me from
England, nor did he in any of them show signs of such aberration.

             Believe me, yours, faithfully,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

26th October, 1852.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 28th October, 1852.

My Dear Sir James,

Your letter of the 6th ultimo reached me by the last mail, and I
trust we shall see your hopes of an early renewal of the Charter with
few alterations realised. I entirely concur with you in opinion that
the power of recall is indispensable to the due authority of the
Court; and was much surprised to find Maddock opposed to it. Many
thinking men at home have been of opinion that the Ministers would
secure for the Queen the nomination of a certain number to the
Direction, on the ground that many of the best men from India are
deterred from becoming candidates by the time and pledges required in
the canvass. The late elections, however, seem to have come in time
to increase the Jealousy of ministerial influence, and prevent such a
measure.

Hostilities with Burmah have prevented my making public periodical
reports to Government about Oude affairs since I submitted my Diary.
I took the liberty to send, through my London agents copy to yourself
and the Deputy Chairman. Things have not improved since it was
written. The King is as regardless of his high duties and
responsibilities as ever: he is, indeed, an imbecile in the hands of
a few fiddlers, eunuchs, and poetasters, and the minister, who is no
better than they are, and obliged to provide for all these men out of
the revenues and patronage of the country, and sundry women about the
Court, also, to secure their influence in his favour.

The King contrives to get the stipends of those immediately about
him, and of his mother, brothers, and sisters, paid out of the
revenues; but is indifferent about those of his more distant
relatives, and hardly any of them have had any stipends for the last
two and even three years. Those who happen not to have a little
Company's paper given to them by former Sovereigns, or pensions
guaranteed by our Government and paid out of our Treasury, are
starving, and pray for the day when our Government may interpose in
the administration. The expenditure is much above the income, and the
reserved treasury is exhausted; but the King has his jewels and some
personal property in Government notes, derived from his father and
grandmothers. He thinks himself the best of kings and the best of
poets, and nothing will induce him willingly to alter his course or
make room for a better ruler or better system.

If our Government interpose, it must not be by negotiation and
treaty, but authoritatively on the ground of existing treaties and
obligations to the people of Oude. The treaty of 1837 gives our
Government ample authority to take the whole administration on
ourselves, in order to secure what we have often pledged ourselves to
secure to the people; but if we do this we must, in order to stand
well with the rest of India, honestly and distinctly disclaim all
interested motives, and appropriate the whole of the revenues for the
benefit of the people and royal family of Oude. If we do this, all
India will think us right, for the sufferings of the people of Oude,
under the present system, have been long notorious throughout India;
and so have our repeated pledges to relieve the people from these
sufferings, unless the system should be altered. Fifty years of sad
experience have shown to us and to all India, that this system is
incapable of improvement under the present dynasty; and that the only
alternative is for the paramount power to take the administration
upon itself.

Under the treaty of 1801, we took one-half of the territory of Oude,
and that half yields to us above two crores of rupees; though, when
taken, it was estimated at one hundred and thirty-three lacs. The
half retained by the Oude Sovereign was estimated at the same; but it
now yields to the Sovereign only one crore. The rest is absorbed by
the knaves employed in the administration and their patrons at Court.
All that is now so absorbed would come to the Treasury under us, and
be employed in the maintenance of efficient establishments, and the
construction of useful public works; and we should have ample means
for providing for all the members of the royal family of Oude.

We should derive substantial benefit from the measure, without in any
degree violating our declaration of disinterestedness. We now
maintain five regiments of Infantry, and a company of Artillery, at a
cost of from five to six lacs a-year. We maintain the Residency and
all its establishments at a cost of more than one lac of rupees a-
year. All these would become fairly chargeable to the Oude revenues
under the new administration; and we might dispense with half the
military forces now kept up at Cawnpore and Dinapore on the Ganges,
as the military force in Oude would relieve us from all apprehension
as to Nepaul.

Oude would be covered with a network of fine macadamised roads, over
which the produce of Oude and our own districts would pass freely to
the benefit of the people of both; and we should soon have the river
Ghagra, from near Patna on the Ganges, to Fyzabad in Oude, navigable
for steamers: with a railroad from Fyzabad, through Lucknow to
Cawnpore, to the great benefit of the North-West Provinces and those
of Bengal.

Were we to take advantage of the occasion to _annex_ or _confiscate_
Oude, or any part of it, our good name in India would inevitably
suffer; and that good name is more valuable to us than a dozen of
Oudes. We are now looked up to throughout India as the only impartial
arbitrators that the people generally have ever had, or can ever hope
to have without us; and from the time we cease to be so looked up to,
we must begin to sink. We suffered from our conduct in Scinde; but
that was a country distant and little known, and linked to the rest
of India by few ties of sympathy. Our Conduct towards it was preceded
by wars and convulsions around, and in its annexation there was
nothing manifestly deliberate. It will be otherwise with Oude. Here
the giant's strength is manifest, and we cannot "use it like a giant"
without suffering in the estimation of all India. Annexation or
confiscation are not compatible with our relations with this little
dependent state. We must show ourselves to be high-minded, and above
taking advantage of its prostrate weakness, by appropriating its
revenues exclusively to the benefit of the people and royal family of
Oude. We should soon make it the finest garden in India, with the
people happy, prosperous, and attached to our rule and character.

We have at least forty thousand men from Oude in the armies of the
three Residencies, all now, rightly or wrongly, cursing the
oppressive Government under which their families live at their homes.
These families would come under our rule and spread our good name as
widely as they now spread the bad one of their present ruler.
Soldiers with a higher sense of military honour, and duty to _their
salt_, do not exist, I believe, in any country. To have them bound to
us by closer ties than they are at present, would of itself be an
important benefit.

I can add little to what I have said in the latter end of the fourth
chapter of my Diary (from p. 187*, vol. ii.), on the subject of our
relations with the Government of Oude; and of our rights and duties
arising out of those relations. The diaries political, which I send
every week or fortnight to the Government of India, are formed out of
the reports made every day to the Durbar, by their local or
departmental authorities. The Residency News-writer has the privilege
of hearing these reports read as they come in; and though the reports
of many important events are concealed from him, they may generally
be relied upon as far as they go. The picture they give of affairs is
bad enough, though not so bad as they deserve.

[* Transcriber's note. From the text "By the treaty of 1801 we bound
ourselves......."--to the end of the chapter IV in vol. ii]

There are so many worthless and profligate people about the Court,
interested in smothering any signs of common sense and good feeling
on the part of the heir apparent to the throne, in order to maintain
their ascendancy over him as he grows up, that he has not the
slightest chance of becoming fit to take any part in the conduct of
public affairs when he comes of age. The present King has three or
four sons, all very young, but it is utterly impossible for any one
of them to become a man of business; and it would be folly to expect
any one of them to make a better Sovereign than their father. He is
now only twenty-eight or twenty-nine years of age; but his
understanding has become quite emasculated by over-indulgencies of
all kinds. He may live long, but his habits have become too
inveterate to admit of his ever becoming better than he now is or fit
to be intrusted with the government of a country.

I shall recommend that all establishments, military, civil, and
fiscal, be kept entirely separate from those of our own Government,
that there may be no mistake as to the disinterestedness of our
intentions towards Oude. The military establishments being like
Scindiah's contingent, in the Gwalior state, or the Hydrabad
contingent in the Nizam's. I estimate the present expenditure at,
civil and fiscal establishments, and stipendiaries, 38 lacs. Military
and police, 55. King's household, 30. Total, 123 lacs. Establishments
required for an efficient administration--civil and fiscal--at 22
lacs. Military, 26 lacs. Families and dependents of former Sovereigns,
12 lacs. Household of the Sovereign, his sons, brothers, and sisters,
15 lacs. Total, 75 lacs.

This would leave an abundant store for public works, military stores,
contingent charges, pension establishments for the civil and military
officers employed under us, &c. To pay off all the present heavy
arrears of stipends, salaries, to provide arms, ammunition, and
stores, and to commence upon all the public works, our Government
would have either to give or guarantee a loan; or to sanction the
issue of a certain amount of paper money, to circulate exclusively in
Oude, by making it receivable in the Oude Treasuries in taxes.

The revenues would be at once greatly increased, by our taking for
the treasury all that is now intercepted and appropriated by public
officers and Court favourites for their own private purposes, by our
making the great landholders pay a due portion of their assets to the
state, and by our securing the safe transit of raw produce and
manufactured goods to their proper markets.

By adopting a simple system of administration, to meet the wishes of
a simple people, we should secure the goodwill of all classes of
society in Oude; and no class would be more pleased with the change
than the members of the royal family themselves, who depend upon
their stipends for their subsistence, and despair of ever again
receiving them under the present Sovereign and system.

I hope a happy termination of the present war with Burmah will soon
leave Lord Dalhousie free to devote his attention to Oude affairs. As
far as I am consulted, I shall advocate, as strongly as may be
compatible with my position, the measures above described, because I
think they will be found best calculated to benefit the people of
Oude, to meet the wishes of the home Government, and to sustain his
Lordship's own reputation, and that of the nation which he represents
throughout our Eastern empire.

You are aware of some of the difficulties that I have had to contend
with, in carrying out important measures beneficial to the people,
and honourable to the Government of India; but in no situation in
life have I ever had to struggle with so many as here, in pursuing an
honest and steady course of policy, calculated to secure the respect
of all classes for the Government which I represent. Such a scene of
intrigue, corruption, depravity, neglect of duty, and abuse of
authority, I have never before been placed in, and hope never again
to undergo; and I have had to contend with bitter hostility where I
had the best right to expect support. I have never yet failed in the
performance of any duty that Government has intrusted to me, and,
under Providence, I hope that I shall ultimately succeed in the
performance of that which I have committed to me here.

Lucknow is an overgrown city, surrounding an overgrown Court, which
has, for the last half century, exhausted all the resources of this
fine country; and so alienated the feelings of the great body of the
people that they, and the Sovereign, and his officers, look upon each
other as irreconcileable enemies. Between the city, the pampered
Court and its functionaries, and the people of the country beyond,
there is not the slightest feeling of sympathy; and if our troops
were withdrawn from the vicinity of Lucknow, the landholders and
sturdy peasantry of the country would, in a few days, rush in and
plunder and destroy it as a source of nothing but intolerable evil to
them.

Though I have written a long letter, I may have omitted many things
which you wished me to notice. In that case I must rely upon your
letting me know; and in the mean time, I shall continue to write
whenever I have anything to communicate that is likely to interest
you.

                Believe me, dear Sir James,
                           Yours very faithfully,
                                W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Sir James Weir Hogg, Bart.
    &c.     &c.     &c.

P.S. By treaty, we are bound to keep up a certain force near the
capital for the protection of the Sovereign; and we should be
obliged, till things were quite settled under the new system, to
retain the brigade we now have of our regular troops in the
cantonments, which are three miles from the city.

                                W. H. SLEEMAN.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 20th November, 1852.

My Dear Sir James,

To be prepared for accidents, I deem it right to send a duplicate of
the letter which I sent to you by the last mail, addressed to the
care of my London agents, Messrs. Denny and Clark, Austin Friars. I
have nothing new or interesting to communicate from Oude. The Burmese
war seems likely to divert the Governor-General's attention from Oude
and Hydrabad affairs for some time to come; and the death of the Duke
of Wellington, and probable changes in the ministry at home, may
prevent him from venturing upon any important change in the Oude
administration when that war closes.

The war is an "untoward event," arising from a very small cause; and
it should prevent our ever guaranteeing British subjects in countries
where we have no accredited agents to conduct our relations with the
Government. All such subjects, and all the subjects of our European
and American allies, should in future be made to understand that they
enter such countries entirely upon their own responsibility. Without
some such precaution we must always be liable to be involved in war
with bordering countries by adventurers of one land or another; and
as war is almost always followed by annexation or confiscation, our
Indian empire, like that of the Romans, must soon sink from its own
weight. The people will think that we are perpetually seeking
pretexts for war in order to get new territories, and the general or
universal impression will be dangerous.

When the public press of England abuse those who have to conduct the
present war for delay, they do not sufficiently consider our
ignorance of the state of the rivers and of the military resources of
the country in which it was to be carried on when we entered upon it.
We did not know that the rivers were navigable, nor did we know how
they were defended; nor did we know what forces Burmah could muster,
nor how they were distributed. It was not intended to commence the
war till after the rains, when it would be safe to move troops over
the country; for it was not reasonable to suppose that the Government
of the country could be so haughty and insolent without military
force to support its pretensions, and we have often had sad
experience of the danger of underrating the power of an enemy. The
object of the earlier movement was merely to secure some points of
support, at which to concentrate our forces as they came up, and not
to advance at once on the capital or into the country at a season
when no troops could move by land.

Our strong arm was, no doubt, the steam flotilla; but it would have
been madness in us, with our ignorance of the rivers and resources of
the country, to have calculated upon conquering Ava by steamers
alone. With what we now know, people may safely say that General
Godwin has failed to make all the use he might of the flotilla, as
Lord Gough failed to make all the use he might of his "strong arm,"
the artillery, in the battles of the Punjaub; but Lord Gough was not
ignorant of the country in which he had to operate, nor of the
resources of the country he had to contend with. According to
previous calculations, the war ought not to have begun till this
month. The earlier movement has, however, been of great advantage--it
has taught us what the rivers and resources of the country are; and,
what is of still more importance, what the people and their feelings
towards their Government and ours are. It is manifest that they fully
appreciate the value of the protection which the people, under our
rule, enjoy; and that they have neither religious nor political
feelings of hostility towards us; and that the people of Pegu, at
least, would hail the establishment of our rule as a blessing.

You were so kind as to express a wish to see my son. He is now with
his regiment, the 16th Lancers, in Ireland, and has lately obtained
his Lieutenancy. He will be twenty years of age in January. I will
make known to him your kind wish, and doubt not that he will pay his
respects when he visits London.

                  Believe me, My Dear Sir James,
                            Yours very faithfully,
                                  W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Sir James Weir Hogg, Bart,
       &c.   &c.     &c.

P.S.--In page 217, line 4, vol. i., of my Diary, the printer has put
"months" for weeks. Pray do me the favour to have this corrected.--W.
H. S.


                 __________________________


My Lord,

Your Lordship's wishes in regard to the papers on Oude affairs shall
be strictly attended to. They are locked up in my box, and no one
shall see them. I had no wish to print any but those I mentioned in
my last letter, and they are locked up with the others, which I have
not looked at since I left your Lordship's camp; the Diary, excepted.

Things in Oude are just as they were; and the King's ambition seems
to be limited to the reputation of being the best drum-beater,
dancer, and poet of the day. He is utterly unfit to reign; but he is
himself persuaded that no man can be more fit than he is for
anything, and he will never willingly consent to make over the reins
of Government to any one. It would be impossible to _persuade_ him to
abdicate even in favour of his own son, much less to resign his
sovereignty in perpetuity. If our Government interpose, it must be by
the exercise of a right derived from the existing relations between
the two Governments, or from our position as the paramount power in
India.

Of this your Lordship will have to consider and decide when your mind
is relieved from Burmese affairs, which appear to be drawing very
_quietly_ to a close. I shall not write publicly about Oude affairs
generally till I have your Lordship's commands to do so. The Diary
will continue to be transmitted regularly; but the Periodical General
Report will be suspended.

Mr. Bushe remained a few days at Lucknow. He has since seen Agra,
Bhurtpoor, and other places, and is now on his way back to Calcutta,
well pleased with his tour.

          With great respect,
               Your Lordship's obedient Servant,
                                  W. H. SLEEMAN.

To the Most Noble
The Marquis of Dalhousie, K.T.,
Governor-General of India.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 2nd January, 1853.

My Dear Sir James,

I enclose two sets of Tables of Errata for the Diary, and must pray
you to do me the favour to have one set put into the two volumes of
the copy you have, and the other sent to the Deputy-Chairman for
insertion in his copy. I did not take the liberty to send a copy to
the President of the Board of Control, but if you think I should do
so, I will.

The King of Oude is becoming more and more imbecile and crazy, and
his servants continue more and more to abuse their power and neglect
their duty. The King, every day manifests his utter unfitness to
reign, in some new shape. He, on several occasions during the
Mohurrum ceremonies which took place lately, went along the streets
beating a drum tied round his neck, to the great scandal of his
family and the amusement of his people. The members of his family
have not been paid their stipends for from two to three years, and
many of them have been reduced to the necessity of selling their
clothes to purchase food. All classes, save the knaves who surround
him, and profit by his folly, are become disgusted with and tired of
him.

I do not interfere, except to protect our pledges and guarantees; and
to conduct the current duties of the Residency in such a manner as to
secure the respect of all classes for the Government which I
represent. While the present King reigns, or has anything whatever to
do with the Government, no interference could produce any substantial
and permanent reform. The minister is a weak man and a great knave;
but he has an influence over his master, obtained by being entirely
subservient to his vices and follies, to the sacrifice of his own
honour; and by praising all that he does, however degrading to him as
a man and a sovereign.

Though the King pays no attention whatever to public affairs or to
business of any kind, and aims at nothing but the reputation of being
the best dancer, best versifier, and best drummer in his dominions,
it would be impossible to persuade him that any man was ever more fit
to reign than he is. Nothing would ever induce him willingly to
abdicate even in favour of his own son, much less to make him
willingly abdicate in perpetuity in favour of our Government, or make
over the conduct of the administration to our Government. If,
therefore, our Government does interfere, it must be in the exercise
of a right arising out of the existing relations between the two
States, or out of our position as the paramount power in India. These
relations, under the Treaty of 1837, give our Government the _right_
to take upon itself the administration, under present circumstances;
and, indeed, imposes, upon our Government the _duty_ of taking it:
but, as I have already stated, neither these relations nor our
position, as the paramount power, gives us any right to _annex_ or to
_confiscate_ the territory of Oude. We may have a right to take
territory from the Nizam of Hyderabad in payment for the money he
owes us; but Oude owes us no money, and we have no right to take
territory from her. We have only the right to interpose to secure for
the suffering people that better Government which their Sovereign
pledged himself to secure for them, but has failed to secure.

The Burmese war still prevents the Governor-General from devoting his
attention to Oude and Hyderabad. In the last war we did not march our
armies to the capital because we were not prepared to supply a new
Government for the one which we should thereby destroy; and
insurrection and civil war must have followed. Our conduct in that
was wise and benevolent. When we moved our armies to Rangoon this
time, we upset one Government without providing the people with
another. The Governor-General could not provide for the Civil
Government, because he could not know that the Government of Ava
would force us to keep possession of any portion of its dominions;
and taking upon ourselves the civil administration would compromise
the people, should he have to give them up again to their old rulers.
The consequence has been great suffering to a people who hailed us as
deliverers. The folly of supposing that any country can be taken by
steamers on their rivers alone has now become sufficiently manifest.
The Governor-General has however, adopted the best possible measures
for securing ultimate good government to Pegu. It would have been
more easily effected had they been taken earlier, but this
circumstance prevented.

There is a school in India, happily not yet much patronised by the
Home Government nor by the Governor-General, but always struggling
with more or less success for ascendancy. It is characterised by
impatience at the existence of any native State, and its strong and
often insane advocacy of their absorption--by honest means, if
possible--but still, their absorption. There is no pretext, however
weak, that is not sufficient, in their estimation, for the purpose;
and no war, however cruel, that is not justifiable, if it has only
this object in view. If you know George Clerk or Mr. Robertson, both
formerly Governors of our North-West Provinces, they will describe to
you the school I mean. They, I believe, with me, strongly deprecate
the doctrines of this school as more injurious to India and to our
interest in it, than those of any other school that has ever existed
in India. Mr. George Campbell is one of the disciples of this
school.--See the 4th chapter of his "Modern India." The "Friend of
India" is another, and all those whom that paper lauds most are also
disciples of the same school. The Court of Directors will have to
watch these doctrines carefully; and I wish you would speak to George
Clerk and Mr. Robertson about them. They are both men of large views
and sound judgment.

               Believe me, My Dear Sir James,
                           Yours sincerely,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Sir James Weir Hogg,
    &c.   &c.   &c.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 12th January, 1853.

My Dear Sir James,

I wrote to you on the 23rd October, 20th November, and the 2nd of
this month; I mention this lest any of my letters miscarry; of the
first letter I sent a duplicate on the 2nd, but I shall not send
duplicates of the last two, or of this. I now write chiefly to call
your attention to a rabid article in the "Friend of India," of the
6th of this month, written by Mr. Marshman, when about to proceed to
England, to become, it is said, one of the writers in the London
"Times." Of coarse, he will be engaged to write the Indian articles;
and you will find him advocating the doctrines of the school
mentioned in my last letter of the 2nd of this month. I consider
their doctrines to be prejudicial to the stability of our rule in
India, and to the welfare of the people, which depends on it. The
Court of Directors is our only safeguard against these Machiavellian
doctrines; and it may be rendered too powerless to stem them by the
new arrangements for the Government of India. The objects which they
propose for attainment--religion, commerce, &c.--are plausible; and
the false logic by which they attempt to justify the means required
to attain them, however base, unjust, and cruel, is no less so. I was
asked by Dr. Duff, the editor of the "Calcutta Review," before he
went home to write some articles for that journal, to expose the
fallacies, and to counteract the influences of the doctrines of this
school; but I have for many years ceased to contribute to the
periodical papers, and have felt bound by my position not to write
for them. Few old officers of experience, with my feelings and
opinions on this subject, now remain in India; and the influence of
this school is too great over the rising generation, whose hopes and
aspirations they tend so much to encourage. Mr. Elphinstone, Mr.
Robertson, and George Clerk will be able to explain their danger to
you. India must look to the Court of Directors alone for safety
against them, and they will require the exertion of all its wisdom
and strength.

Mr. Robertson will be able to tell you that, when I was sent to
Bundelcund, in 1842, the feelings of the people of that province were
so strongly against us, under the operation of the doctrines of this
school, that no European officer could venture, with safety, beyond
the boundary of a cantonment of British troops; and their servants
were obliged to disguise themselves in order to pass from one
cantonment to another. In a brief period, I created a feeling
entirely different, and made the character of British officers
respected and beloved. In the Gwalior territories the same result was
obtained by the same means. However impulsive on other occasions,
Lord Ellenborough behaved magnanimously after his victories over the
Gwalior troops; but in sparing the State, he acted, I believe,
against the feelings of his Council, amongst whom the doctrines of
the absorbing, annexing, and confiscating schools prevailed; and the
"Friend of India" condemned him, though the invasion was never
justified, except on the ground of expediency. Had I, on these
occasions, adopted the doctrines of the absorbing school, I might
have become one of the most popular and influential men in India; but
I should, at the same time, have rendered our rule and character
odious to the people of India, and so far have injured our permanent
interest in the country. I mention all this merely to show that my
opposition to the doctrines of this school is not new, nor in theory
only, but of long standing and practice, as far as my influence has
extended. I deem them to be dangerous to our rule in India, and
prejudicial to the best interests of the country. The people see that
these annexations and confiscations go on, and that rewards and
honorary distinctions are given for them, and for the victories which
lead to them, and for little else; and they are too apt to infer that
they are systematic, and encouraged, and prescribed from home. The
native States I consider to be breakwaters, and when they are all
swept away, we shall be left to the mercy of our native army, which
may not always be sufficiently under our control. Such a feeling as
that which pervaded Bundelcund and Gwalior in 1842 and 1843, must,
sooner or later, pervade all India, if these doctrines are carried
out to their full extent; and our rule could not, probably, exist
under it. With regard to Oude, I can only say that the King pursues
the same course, and every day shows that he is unfit to reign. He
has not the slightest regard for the duties or responsibilities of
his high position; and the people, and even the members of his own
family, feel humiliated at his misconduct, and grow weary of his
reign. The greater part of these members have not received their
stipends for from two to three years, and they despair of ever
receiving them as long as he reigns. He is neither tyrannical nor
cruel, but altogether incapable of devoting any of his time or
attention to business of any kind, but spends the whole of his time
with women, eunuchs, fiddlers, and other parasites. Should he be set
aside, as he deserves to be, three courses are open: 1. To appoint a
regency during the minority of the heir-apparent, who is now about
eleven years of age, to govern with the advice of the Resident; 2. To
manage the country by European agency during the regency, or in
perpetuity, leaving the surplus revenue to the royal family; 3. To
confiscate and annex the country, and pension the royal family. The
first plan was prescribed by Lord Hardinge, in case of accident to
the King; the second is what was done at Nagpore, with so much
advantage, by Sir Richard Jenkins in 1817; the third is what the
absorbing school would advocate, but I should most deprecate. It
would be most profitable for us, in a pecuniary point of view, but
most injurious, I think, in a political one. It would tend to
accelerate the crisis which the doctrines of that school must, sooner
or later, bring upon us. Which course the Governor-General may prefer
I know not.

                      Believe me,
                   My Dear Sir James,
                           Yours very faithfully
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN

To Sir James Weir Hogg, Bart.,
       &c.   &c.    &c.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 12th January, 1853.

My Dear Sir,

I shall send you by this mail a copy of my Diary under cover,
addressed, as you suggest, to Mr. Secretary Melvill. It is coarsely
bound, as I could find no good binder here. I printed eighteen
copies, and have sent one to Government, in Calcutta, for itself, and
one for the Court of Directors; one to the Governor-General, and one
each to the Chairman and Deputy-Chairman. I have also sent one to a
brother, and one to each of my five children. All to whom I have sent
it of my family have been enjoined to consider it as private and
confidential, and they will do so. Government may publish any portion
of it they please. A memorandum of errata has been added to the copy
to be sent to you.

Over and above what you justly observe as to the cultivation and
population not being much diminished, and the State not having
incurred any public debt, I may mention the fact noticed, I believe,
somewhere in the Diary, that the landed aristocracy of the half of
Oude, reserved in 1801, has been better preserved than that of the
half made over to us. Had they not combined generally against the
Government, they would all have been crushed ere this, as ours have
been. This makes me mention a school of too much influence in India,
of whose doctrines I have a great abhorrence. They are best expounded
by the so-called "Friend of India," in the last number of which (6th
January, 1851) there is a rabid article on the subject worthy of your
perusal, and that of all men interested in the welfare of India and
the stability of our rule over it. It is in the true Machiavellian
spirit, which justifies, or would persuade the world to justify,
every means, however base, dishonest, and cruel, required to attain
any object which they have persuaded themselves to be desirable for
ourselves. This school is impatient at the existence of any native
principality in India, however related to or dependent upon us. Mr.
George Campbell is a disciple of this school, almost as rabid as the
"Friend of India," as you will see in the fourth chapter of his book
on "Modern India." If Mr. Marshman is to write the Indian articles
for the "Times," as reports give out, you will see these doctrines
advocated in that influential journal. The Court of Directors is the
only safeguard of India, and of our stability in it, against those
doctrine which, in my opinion, tend strongly to the injury of both;
and its power may be rendered too powerless to shun them.

               Believe me,
                    My Dear Sir,
                           Yours sincerely,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Colonel Sykes,
Director Hon. East India Company,
London.

P.S.--I have felt much interested in the geology of Central and
Southern India; and if you have seen any satisfactory account of the
origin of the stratum which caps the basaltic plateau, shall feel
obliged if you will point it out to me.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 24th April, 1853.

My Dear Sir,

By the last mail I received from a friend in London two articles,
whose merits had been much canvassed at the clubs, one from the
London "Times," of the 9th February, and the other from the "Daily
News," a Manchester paper. The "Times" article must have been written
by Mr. J. Marshman, or one of the most rabid members of the school of
which he is the great organ, and whose chief characteristic is
impatience at the existence of any native territorial chief or great
landholder in India. The other article is a reply to it, and
generally supposed to have been written by Sir George Clerk. I feel
quite sure that it was written either by him or by Mr. T. C.
Robertson, who preceded him in the government of our North-West
Provinces. The article from the "Times" has been noticed in most of
the Indian papers--the "Friend of India," April 7th, 1853, and the
"Englishman," 15th April. But I have not seen that in the "Daily
News" noticed in any Indian papers, though admirably written. I
intended to send it to you, but have mislaid it. I think you can
advocate the cause it adopts more consistently, more powerfully, and
more wisely than any other editor now in India. I hope you will do
so; for I consider the doctrines of the "Times" disgraceful to our
morality, and dangerous to the stability of our rule. As I consider
the welfare of the people of India to depend upon the stability of
our rule, I am very anxious to see the fallacies of the atrocious
doctrines which endanger it ably exposed. In no publication are these
fallacies more obvious or more numerous than in Mr. George Campbell's
"Modern India," chapter fourth, with, perhaps, the exception of the
"Friend of India." With the "Friend," the theory of confiscation and
annexation has become a disease, and he cannot praise or even
tolerate any public officer or statesman who is not known to be a
convert to the doctrines of this school.

I forget the date of the "Daily News" in which Sir George Clerk's
article appeared, but it was immediately after the article appeared
in the London "Times" of the 9th February. I hope you will give the
article a prominent place in your paper, for it really deserves to be
printed in letters of gold. Though I feel that the character of our
nation, and our safety in India, are compromised by the open avowal
of such atrocious doctrines in our leading journals, still the orders
against officers in political employ writing in the papers are so
strict, that I dare not attempt to expose the fallacies on which they
are based, or express the indignation which they excite in me, in any
public paper. To my superiors, and in the discharge of my public
duties, I shall never cease to express my abhorrence of such
doctrines, for I look upon them as worse than any that Machiavelli
ever wrote.

                      Believe me,
                           Yours very sincerely,
                 (Signed)         W. H. SLEEMAN.

To G. Buist, Esq.

P.S.--Of course, this note will be considered as confidential.

                 (Signed)         W. H. S.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 24th April, 1853.

Dear Sir,

An article in your paper of the 15th instant, on the subject of the
international law of India, has interested and pleased me much. It
has reference to an article in the London "Times" of the 9th February
last; and I write to invite your attention to an article which
appeared in the "Daily News," a Manchester paper, in reply to it,
written by Sir G. Clerk, lately Governor of Bombay. Both these
articles have been much discussed at the London clubs, and the
morality of the "Daily News" article has been very favourably
contrasted with that of the article in the "Times." The article in
the "Times" is supposed to have been penned by Mr. J. Marshman
himself, or by one of the most rabid members of the school whose
Machiavellian doctrine he advocates.

These doctrines are considered by some of our wisest statesmen to be
as dangerous to the stability of our rule in India as they are
disgraceful to our morality; and as these statesmen consider the
well-being of the people of India to depend upon that stability, they
are always glad to see their fallacies exposed and their iniquities
indignantly denounced by the moat able and steady of our public
journalists. I hope you will be able to find the able article in the
"Daily News" to which I refer, and consent to give it a prominent
place in the "Englishman." It was sent to me by a friend in London,
but I have, unfortunately, mislaid it. This note will, of course, be
considered as confidential.

                           Yours sincerely,
                                  W. H. SLEEMAN.

To W. C. Harry, Esq.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 5th June, 1853.

My Lord,

I have read with great interest in the English journals your
Lordship's able Minute on the Burmese war, and am glad that it has
been published, as it cannot fail to disabuse the public mind at
home, and bring about a reaction in the feeling of the people excited
by some very unfair articles in the London "Times." I attributed
these articles to the Napiers, who, however talented, are almost
always wrong-headed.

I am persuaded that the new Sovereign will acquiesce in your
possession of Pegu, and that he would not have ceded it by treaty
under any circumstances. The old Sovereign might have done it, though
at great risk, but the new Sovereign could not dare to do it.

Our own history affords us instances enough of powerful ministers
anxious, for the public good, to get rid of conquered, but expensive
and useless possessions, but deterred from proposing the measure by
the dread of popular odium, which ambitious and factious rivals are
always ready to excite.

There is one argument against the advance which I do not think that
your Lordship has urged with the force of the rest. While the new
Sovereign remains undisturbed in the rest of his dominions he will
maintain his authority over them, and do his best to prevent our new
frontier from being disturbed, knowing that we can advance to his
capital and punish him if he does not. But, were he to be driven from
his capital, all the rest of his dominions would soon fall into a
state of anarchy, and our frontiers would soon be disturbed by
leaders of disorderly bands, anxious to carve out principalities for
themselves, and having no other means than plunder to maintain their
followers. For the acts of such men we could hold no one responsible,
after we had driven their Sovereign from his capital to the hills and
jungles; and half a century might elapse before order could be
restored. In the mean time, wealth would be growing up within our
border to invite their aggression, while they would become poorer and
poorer from disorders, and more and more anxious to seize upon it.

With regard to an advance upon Amarapoora, it will not be difficult
after the rains, if circumstances render it necessary. The Madras
cattle are much better for hard work and all climates than those of
Bengal, and sufficient could be collected for the occasion by sea.
Your Lordship's reasons for not trusting to steamers alone are
unanswerable, and it seems impossible for a land and river force to
act jointly. In this, we almost realize the contest between the winds
and the moschettoes before the court of the genii in the Arabian
tale: when the winds appeared, the moschettoes could not, and when
they appeared, the winds could not. For the prestige of our own name
in the rest of India, to advance to the capital and then give the
rest of the country to the Sovereign might, perhaps, be the best; but
for the security of our new acquisition, and that of the people of
the rest of Burmah, it would certainly be better to stay where we
are. The benefits of our rule might, by degrees, be imparted to that
of the rest of Burmah. The Government would be obliged to treat their
people better than they have done in order to keep them.

Here everything still is what I have described it to be so often;
that is, as bad as it can be. The King is the same, and the officers
and favourites whom he employs are the same. I shall not write public
reports on the state of affairs till I learn that your Lordship
wishes it, which will be, I conclude, when you have carried out your
arrangements in Burmah.

The terrible war of races in China, to which I have been looking
forward for some years, seems to be coming slowly on. I wrote to Sir
H. M. Elliot about it some two or three years ago, and recommended
him to write a better life than we have of Jungez Khan, in order to
show what the Tartars now really are. When he led his swarms of them
over China, Central Asia, and a great part of Europe, they worshipped
the god of war; they now worship the god of peace: but there are
millions of Lamas in Tartary who would change their crosiers for the
sword at the call of a kindred genius, and are now impatient to do
so, and prophesying his advent, just at the time that the rebels
threaten the capital of China and the extinction of the Tartar
dynasty. That dynasty will throw itself upon Tartary, and a new one
will be raised by the successful leader.

         Your Lordship's faithful and obedient servant,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To the Most Noble
The Marquis of Dalhousie, K.T.,
Governor-General.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 24th June, 1853.

Dear Sir,

Your letter of the 20th instant perplexes me a good deal. I have no
place in my own office to offer you, and I never recommended any one
for employment to the King. You cannot, according to rules laid down
for our guidance, act as an advocate in any case before the Resident
or his assistants. All landholders in Oude, except the few whose
estates are included in what is called the Hozoor Tuhseel, transact
their business through the Amils, Chuckladars, and Nazims of
districts, and have nothing to do directly with the Durbar at
Lucknow. Having nothing to do with their affairs, I cannot have
anything to say with the employment by them of wakeels, or advocates.
They, the landholders, generally employ native wakeels, who are
willing to bear a good deal of ill-treatment on the part of Durbar
officials for the sake of very small salaries. Your situation as a
wakeel on their part would be ill remunerated and exceedingly
humiliating.

If the son of Ghalib Jung has offered to introduce you to the
minister, and to assist in getting employment for you at Lucknow, he
must, I think, do so in the hope of being able to make use of you in
some intrigue; for those only who can aid in such intrigues are
fostered and paid at Lucknow. Honest men can get nothing, and find no
employment about the Court. If you secure employment about the Court,
I cannot hold any communication with you. I should compromise myself
by doing so. In your situation, I would rather be a section writer in
Calcutta, or at Agra, than hold any employment in the Oude Durbar
that you can get by honest means. One of the tasks imposed on you
would be, I conclude, to praise bad persons and things, and abuse
good, in the newspapers. This, of course, you would not do, and you
would be punished accordingly. I strongly advise you to have nothing
to do with Oude at present.

                           Yours very truly,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To G. Norton, Esq.,
Azimgurh.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 11th August, 1853.
My Dear Sir,

Your brother, the late Lieut.-Colonel Ouseley, was a valued friend of
mine. Before his appointment as Governor-General's Agent of the
south-eastern frontier districts, he had for many years held the
civil charge of different districts in the Sangor and Nerbudda
territories. I had for many years the civil charge of districts
bordering on those under his charge, and abundant opportunity of
seeing how much he had made himself beloved, and the character of his
Government respected, by the manner in which he conducted the duties
confided to him.

When I became Commissioner over those territories in 1844, I passed
through the districts which had so long been under his charge, and I
can honestly say that I have never known a man who had made himself
more beloved and revered by the people. Thousands of happy families
were proud to acknowledge that they owed all their happiness to the
careful and liberal revision of the settlement of the land-revenue
made by him, in which he had provided for the interests of the higher
and middle classes connected with the land, while he secured the
rights of the humblest.

I visited at the same time the districts of those territories which
bordered upon his then charge of the south-east frontier, and
communed with many people from that quarter. They all spoke of him as
beloved and respected by all classes as much in his then charge as he
had been in his old one. In a country where it is the duty of every
Englishman to make the character of his Government and his nation
respected and beloved, one cannot but feel proud to hear a countryman
and fellow-labourer spoken of by tens of thousands of respectable,
contented, and happy people as your brother was and still is. I know
no part of India where the people of all classes and all grades are
so attached to our character and our Government as that of the Saugor
and Nerbudda territories, and I believe that no man did more to
establish that fine feeling than your brother.

Your brother's temper was warm, and he was not always happy in
putting his thoughts and feelings to paper. Hence arose occasional
misunderstandings with his official superiors. But while those
superiors were men who could understand and appreciate his noble
nature, such occasional misunderstandings never led to serious
consequences. In the bitterness of his anguish, after his removal
from the south-east frontier, he wrote to me; and it was most painful
to me to feel that I was not in a position, or in circumstances, to
advocate his cause, and describe the value of such a man as the
representative of the Government and the national character among a
wild and half-civilized people like those over whom he had been
placed. I think it was on the representation of the late Mr.
Launcelot Wilkinson, one of the most able and estimable members of
the India Civil Service, that he was sent to the south-east frontier.
He had seen his value in the Saugor and Nerbudda districts while he
was political agent at Bhopaul, which bordered on the districts under
your brother's charge.

It has been to me a source of much regret that I have not had it in
my power to aid his son in getting employment in India.

                       Believe me,
                           Yours very truly,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Major Ouseley,
    &c.   &c.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 14th September, 1853.

Dear Sir,

The King of Oude will certainly not assist you to get up a newspaper
at Lucknow; and you will certainly be disappointed if you come in
expectation of such assistance from him. If you can get into his
service in any other capacity, I am not aware of any objections to
it, but as I have already told you and many others, I cannot
recommend any one for employment under him. The humiliations to which
honest and respectable Christians have to submit in his service, from
the jealousies of influential persons about the Durbar, are such as
few can or ought to submit to; and I certainly would not advise any
one to enter such a service. Under whatever pledge or whatever
influence they might enter it, their tenure of office and their pay
would be altogether precarious, and the Resident would be unable to
assist them in retaining the one or recovering the other.

                           Yours faithfully,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To G. Norton, Esq.

P.S.--The King of Oude and his family are in no danger from the
British Government, on whose good faith they repose. I only wish that
his honest and industrious subjects were as safe from the officers
whom he employs in all branches of the administration, and from whom
they are nowhere safe I fear.

                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 27th September, 1853.

My Dear James,

Under the circumstances you mention, I see but one course open to
you; and that is, to recommend to the Government of Bombay to do as
Lord William Bentinck did in the Bengal Presidency under similar
circumstances, appoint a special Commissioner for the trial of
offenders under Acts XX.[_sic_] of 1836, and XXIV. of 1843; or for
the revision of trials under these Acts, conducted by Sessions'
Judges.

The first would be the best if feasible; but the second would do,
since the Sessions' Judges seem now to be disposed to give their aid
to Government in putting down the evil, and the Sudder Judges do not.
Formerly, I believe, the Sudder Judges were so disposed, and the
Sessions Judges not. In my reply to the Government of Bombay, you
will see reference made to Lord William's appointment of Mr.
Stockwell as special Commissioner. He was at the time Commissioner of
the Allahabad division, and the work was imposed upon him in addition
to his other duties.

If the Bombay Government does not think it has authority to appoint
such a special Commission, they may apply to the Legislative Council
to pass an Act authorising the Government of every Presidency to
appoint such a Commission when circumstances may render it necessary.

This will be better and safer than to frame and enforce new rules of
evidence for the guidance of existing Judicial Courts. The one would
be for a special emergency, and temporary; and Government would not
be very averse to it; but the other they certainly would not venture
upon, particularly at this time. A great fuss would be made about it
here and at home; and lawyers are too influential in both places.

You can show that there is no alternative--that this system of crime
must be left to prosper in the Bombay Presidency, where alone it now
prevails, or such a Commission must be appointed; and as the Acts and
the machinery for giving effect to them have succeeded in putting it
down in all the rest, it would be hard to leave the people of Bombay
exposed to all the evils arising from the want of such a special
Commission. Such Commissions have been adopted to relieve the people
from the hardships of the resumption laws, which affected but a small
portion of the community; and you hope it would not be considered
unreasonable in you to propose one for the relief of the whole
community; for the life and property of no family will be safe an
hour, if these classes of offenders by hereditary profession are
assured that they may carry on their trade with impunity, as they
must be if your agency be withdrawn, and all the prisoners be
released.

If you make a forcible representation to the Bombay Government in
this strong case, they will adopt the measure if they have the power,
or ask the power from the supreme Government; and I think the supreme
Government will give it. I would say a special Commission for the
trial of commitments under XXX. of 1836, and XXIV. of 1843, or a
special Commission for the revision of trials under these Acts, as
may seem best to Government; but you can say that you think the first
would answer the purpose best in the Bombay Presidency. You may offer
to run down to Bombay and submit your views to the Government in
Council if required. They would not think it necessary, but would be
pleased with the offer. Where men are committed on the general
charge, it has always been thought necessary to show that the gang
committed a murder or a robbery, though it is not so to show what
part the prisoners took in them. If your assistant has not done this,
he has failed in a material point. He should be very cautious in
dealing with whole classes. The fault of our Bombay assistants has
always been a disposition to make offenders of whole classes, when
only some of the members are so.

You must make your best of the present case--show the necessity of
the remedy clearly, and urge it respectfully without pretending to
find fault with the Judges; merely say that their interpretation of
the laws of evidence laid down for their guidance, however
conscientious, forms an insurmountable obstacle to the conviction of
offenders by hereditary profession, whose system has been founded
upon the experience of their ancestors in the most successful modes
of defeating these laws, and the technicalities of ordinary Judicial
Courts. This is, I think, all that I can say on the subject at
present. The Moncktons leave us this evening, and Amelie intends to
set out for the hills on the 6th proximo.

                           Yours affectionately,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Captain J. Sleeman.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 28th September, 1853.
My Dear James,

On further consideration, I think that you should say nothing about
the second proposal of a special Commissioner to revise the trials of
offenders tried by Sessions Judges. You should suggest the first
proposal of a special Commissioner to try all prisoners committed for
trial under Acts XXX. of 1836, and XXIV. of 1843, and perhaps also
XI. of 1841. See my Printed Report, page 357.

You may mention that such Commissioner should be required to submit
his sentences for the consideration and final orders of Government,
as all political officers did till March, 1835; or merely for the
information of Government, as political officers did after that time.

On the 23rd of March, 1835, the Secretary to the Government of India
forwarded to the Resident of Lucknow, for his guidance, the copy of a
letter addressed on that date to the Agent of the Governor-General in
the Saugor and Nerbudda territories, requesting that he would carry
into execution his sentences on Thugs, and not make any reference to
Government for confirmation, but merely submit to Government abstract
statements of sentences; but desiring that the sanction of the King
of Oude should be required before any capital sentence was carried
into effect. No capital sentence was from that time passed. As all
prisoners will be tried on the general charge, no capital sentence
will ever be passed by the special Commissioner, and the Bombay
Government may be disposed to give him the same orders. But the
Governor in Council at Bombay will be the best judge of that.

Lord Falkland may possibly be deterred by apprehensions that late
events may have altered the tone of feeling at home towards him; but
I am persuaded that he would be glad to carry this measure into
effect. I will send you a copy of the Government letter to the
Resident here; and you may get from the agent's office a copy of that
sent on the same date to him, though you may not readily find that
office under the new arrangements. You will, I think, have a strong
case, and I wish you success in it.

                           Yours affectionately,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Captain Jas. Sleeman.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 4th November, 1853.

My Dear Malcolm,

I should recommend for the Baee a money stipend for life of five
thousand rupees a-month, with the understanding that if she adopted a
child she would have to provide for him out of her savings from this
stipend, and out of her private property. All the Rajah's private
property, save what he may will away to others, will of course be
left to her, to be disposed of as she may think fit. But this stipend
should be independent of those to be continued to the stipendiaries
of the Rajah. There are several who have nothing else to depend on
but the stipends which they now receive from the Rajah; and it must
be borne in mind that they have no longer Bajee Rao, Benaek Rao, the
Jhansi and Saugor chief, to go to. This will be the last of the
Brahmin dynasties founded in that part of the world by the Peshwas.
Our Government should therefore be liberal in taking possession of
the estate as an escheat.

The Mahratta language in accounts should at once be done away with;
but out of the revenues of the estate, Government should found a good
school for English and Hindoo, and Persian; and, above all, for a
very good hospital and dispensary, under well educated and tried
surgeons, native and European, capable of throwing out branches.

All the public officers of the Rajah should have stipends or
employment, or both, in proportion to their period of service and
respectability. If they take employment the stipends should be
deducted from their salaries while in office, as in our own service.

In the case of the Baee Regent at Saugor, we continued a small part
of her pension to her adopted son,--one thousand rupees a-month,--to
enable him to provide for her non-pensioned dependents. We took the
management long before her death, and left her only a private lady,
with a large pension of, I think, eight thousand rupees a-month;
besides pensions--too large--to the family of her manager, Benaek
Rao: this will be unnecessary at Jhansi. All the large hereditary
landholders of the Jhansi estate should have liberal settlements at
fixed rates. They are all from the landed aristocracy of Bundelcund,
and should be treated with consideration. The first settlement of the
land revenue should be very moderate. The lands will lose the most
valuable market for their produce in the breaking up of the Court and
establishment of the Rajah at the capital, and yield less money, &c.,
than before. This must be borne in mind.

You may freely use these my views as you think best on the Jhansi
question.

As to the management, I should make as little changes possible, till
the final orders arrive from the Court of Directors, that you may
have nothing to undo of what you have done. I would leave the
management to Ellis, under your supervision, and interfere only on
references in special cases, except, of course, on emergency. I know
not what the system is to be, or what system the Governor-General has
recommended, except that there is to be one head, as in Rajpootana;
and that all correspondence with Government is to go through that
head, In this state of the matter I know not what to suggest or say.

                           Yours sincerely,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Major Malcolm,
    &c. &c.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 11th November, 1853.
My Lord,

I feel grateful for your Lordship's letter of the 27th ult., but
cannot say that I have any hope of discovering the instruments
employed, or the employer, in the late affair. The whole power of the
Government is in the hands of men who are deeply interested in
concealing the truth, and making it appear that no attempt was really
made. The minister has, by his intrigues, put himself so much in the
power of the knave whom I suspect, that he dares not do anything to
offend him. The man could at once ruin him by his exposures if he
chose, and he would do so if he found it necessary for his own
security. The man is biding his time, as he has often done with
former ministers; and the time would have come ere this had not the
King, to save himself, married one of the minister's pretty
daughters.

The King's chief consort; was the niece of the minister, and her son
is the heir-apparent; so that it was her interest, and that of her
uncle, the minister, to get rid of the King as soon as possible. She
is a profligate woman, and the King's mother is supposed to have
given him a hint of his danger. He took a liking to one of the
daughters, and married her, in order to make it the minister's
interest to keep him alive as long as possible. He now contrives to
make the King believe that neither his life nor reign can be in any
danger as long as he is in his present position.

The night after this affair took place, a sipahee of the 35th Native
Infantry, standing sentry at one end of the house, fell asleep while
he was leaning with his right wrist on the muzzle of his musket. The
musket went off; the ball passed through his wrist, grazed a large
beam above him, struck against a stone in the roof of the portico,
and fell down flattened by the side of the sentry, as he lay
insensible and bleeding on the ground below. The wrist was
sahttered,[_sic_] and several of the arteries cut through. He bled
profusely, and when taken up he talked incoherently, declaring that
some man had fired at him from behind the railing, twenty paces off.
I have seen similar cases of incoherency, arising from a similar
cause. As soon as day appeared the ball was found, and its marks on
the beam and stone above showed the real state of the case. His right
knee was probably leaning on the lock of the musket when he fell
asleep. I have made no public or official report of this circumstance
to Government.

I have now before me a curious instance of the difficulty of getting
at the truth when it is the interest of the minister and others about
this Court to prevent it. A wanton attack was made in April last by
about one hundred armed men, led by one of the King's collectors, on
a native British subject coming from Cawnpore to visit a brother in
Oude. The man himself received a wound, from which he some days
afterwards died at Cawnpore; two of his attendants were killed, and
twenty thousand rupees were taken from him. I have investigated the
case myself, with the aid of my assistant, Captain Hayes, and with
the attendance of an assessor on the part of the King. The case is a
very clear one, but they have produced about thirty witnesses to
swear that no man of the poor merchant's party was hurt; and that,
instead of being attacked, he invaded the Oude territory with more
than one hundred armed followers, and wantonly attacked the King's
party of only fifteen unoffending men, while engaged in the discharge
of their duty in collecting the revenue. I have translated the
depositions with the prospect of having ultimately to submit the case
to Government, unless the King consents to punish the offenders and
afford redress. The assessor, an old man, bewildered by the
conflicting testimony, and anxious to escape from all responsibility,
slept soundly through the greater part of the inquiry, which has been
a very tedious one.

            I remain, your Lordship's
                 Most obedient and humble servant,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To the Most Noble
the Governor-General of India.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 28th December, 1853.

My Dear Mr. Colvin,

I was glad to see your handwriting again, and to find that time had
made so little alteration in it. Oude affairs are, as you suppose,
much as they used to be, save that the King is now persuaded by his
minister and favourite that, had his predecessors had men and women
about them so wise as they are, they never would have acted as if
they believed that the Government of India ever really intended to
carry into effect the penalty of misgovernment, so often threatened.
Our Government has cried "wolf" so often that no one now listens to
it. The King is an utter imbecile, from over-indulgences of all
kinds; and the knaves whom he employs in his administration contrive
to persuade him that the preservation of his life and throne depends
entirely upon their vigilance and his doing nothing. Had I come here
when the treasury was full, and Naseer-od Doon Hyder was anxious to
spend his money in the manner best calculated to do good and please
our Government, I might have covered Oude with useful public works,
and much do I regret that I came here to throw away some of the best
years of my life among such a set of knaves and fools as I have to
deal with.

I think you will do much good in your present charge in the subject
to which you refer. In the matter of discourtesy to the native
gentry, I can only say that Robert Martin Bird insulted them whenever
he had the opportunity of doing so; and that Mr. Thomason was too apt
to imitate him in this as in other things. Of course their example
was followed by too many of their followers and admirers; but, like
you, I have been delighted to see a great many of the elder members
of the civil service, in spite of these bad examples, treat the
native gentry with all possible courtesy, and show them that they had
their sympathy as long as they deserved it by their conduct.

It has always struck me that Mr. Thomason, in his system, did all he
could to discourage the growth of a middle and upper class upon the
land--the only kind of property on which a good upper and middle
class could be sustained in the present state of society in India.
His village republics and the Ryutwar system of Sir Thomas Munro had
precisely the same tendency to subdivide minutely property in land,
and reduce all landholders to the common level of impoverishment. The
only difference was that the impoverished tenants in the North-
Western Provinces were supposed to manage their own affairs, while
those at Madras had them managed by a very mischievous class of
native public officers. He (Mr. Thomason) would have forced his
village republics upon any new country or jungle that came under his
charge, and thereby rendered improvement impossible. I would have
introduced into all such new countries a system of paternal
government in imitation of our Government of India itself, which
would have rendered improvement certain, and the growth of a middle
and higher class no less so. He would have put the whole under our
judicial courts, and thereby have created a middle class of
pettifogging attorneys to swallow up all the surplus produce of the
land. I would have kept the whole of the land in the hands of our
fiscal courts, by making it all leasehold property, and maintaining
the law of primogeniture in all estates of villages. Mr. Thomason, I
am told, systematically set aside all the landed aristocracy of the
country as a set of middlemen, superfluous and mischievous.

The only part of our India in which I have seen a middle and higher
class maintained upon the land is the moderately-settled districts of
the Saugor and Nerbudda territories; and there is no part of India
where our Government and character are so much beloved and respected.
You have sent Mr. Read to that part; and if he be bigoted to Mr.
Thomason's system, he will upset all this, and, in my opinion, lay
the foundation of much evil. We found a system of paternal government
in every village, and maintained and improved it. They were all
little principalities; and by the printed rules of the Sudder Board
of Revenue, which are very good, all the sub-tenants were effectually
secured in their rights.

In making a tour through Oude in the end of 1849 and beginning of
1850 I had a good deal of talk with the people. Many of them had
sojourned in our territories in seasons of disturbance. The general
impression was that they would be glad to see the country taken under
British management, provided we could dispense with our tedious
procedure in civil cases. They all had a very unfavourable impression
of our civil courts, and of the cost and delay of the procedure.
Mills and Harrington, to whom the duty, which was to have devolved on
you, has been confided, may do much good, and I hope will, for there
really is nothing in our system which calls so much for remedy. I am
persuaded that, if it were to be put to the vote among the people of
Oude, ninety-nine in a hundred would rather remain as they are,
without any feeling of security in life or property, than have our
system introduced in its present complicated state; but that ninety-
nine in a hundred would rather have our Government than live as they
do, if a more simple system, which they could understand, were
promised at the same time.

In 1801, when the Oude territory was divided, and half taken by us
and half left to Oude, the landed aristocracy of each were about
equal. Now hardly a family of this class remains in our half, while
in Oude it remains unimpaired. Everybody in Oude believes those
families to have been systematically crushed. If by-and-by we can get
the people to take an interest in our railroads, and outlays upon
other great public works, it will tend to create the middle class
upon which I set so much value, and to give that feeling of interest
in the stability of our rule which we so much require. We shall then
have objects of common interest to talk and think about, and become
more united with them in feeling.

Maddock is in Ceylon, but intends to return by the steamer which is
to leave Calcutta on the 5th proximo. His speculations there have
been failures. Had he looked after his estates there instead of
joining the effete party of the Derbyites he might have done well. He
has made great mistakes, and he now suffers for them. His support of
Lord Torrington was his first.

                      Believe me,
                           Yours very sincerely,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Mr. Colvin.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 5th March, 1854.
My Dear Low,

I have to-day written to Government a letter, which you will of
course see, on the subject of a proposal made to me by Mr. B.
Government will, I have no doubt, consider the reason assigned by me
for refusing to permit him to send an European agent to Lucknow,
ostensibly to collect debts, sufficient; but whether it will consent
to adopt my suggestion, and empower the Resident to assure the King
that it will not again consent to permit Mr. B. to return and reside
at Lucknow, after he has been twice expelled for his misdeeds, I know
not. One thing is certain, that his residence at Cawnpore, under the
assurance from the minister that he shall come back and be made
wealthy if he can aid in getting rid of the Resident, is very
mischievous.

B., Wasee Allee, and the Minister, succeeded in persuading the King
that Shurfod Dowla, and all the most respectable members of the
Lucknow aristocracy, had signed a memorial to the Government of
India, praying that it would set aside the present King as an
incompetent fool, and put Mostafa Alee on the throne in his place.
All this was reported by me to Government on the 2nd of March, 1853.

The seals were all forged or filched here at Lucknow, but the papers
were written in Calcutta, under the agency, I believe, of Synd Jan,
Sir H. E.'s moonshee, from Bilgram, where his family have long
enjoyed an estate rent-free, for the aid he has given to the minister
in his intrigues. I have never been able to remove this delusion from
the mind of the imbecile King; and it is the "_raw_" on which these
knaves have been ever since acting; for it enables the minister to
persuade him that his vigilance-alone preserves his life and crown.

The minister is aware that I know all this, and may some day be able
to show the King how he has been deluded and befooled by him; and he
would give all he is worth to get rid of me in any way. He would give
any sums to B. and his other agents to bribe editors to write against
me; but the only editors who have yielded have been those of the
"Mofussilite," before Mr. C. took the management. Mr. B. complains at
Cawnpore, that he gave Mr. L. a large sum to do his dirty work at
home; but that he did nothing for it. This is not unlikely. That the
minister and Wasee Alee got up the attempt at the Residency, either
to make away with me, or to alarm me into going away, I am persuaded;
but to get judicial proof of it I shall not attempt. It would be vain
here, where the minister has all the revenues of the State to work
with.

All the native gentlemen whose seals were forged to this document,
look to me for protection; and they have been ever since in a state
of great alarm. It was to keep up this alarm that they tried to turn
Shurfod Dowla out of Oude. I had rarely seen him before that time;
and I have only seen him once since he went to the cantonments; and
then only for five minutes during my walk in the garden, to talk
about Mulki Jahan's affairs. They punish any one who ventures to
approach the King; and they would ruin any one who ventured to
approach the Resident if they could, lest he might open the eyes of
the King to the iniquities they commit. The troops are starved, and
almost all the old members of the royal family, who had no Government
paper or guarantees, have been already starved or driven out. Oude
has never before been afflicted by a Sovereign so utterly imbecile
and regardless of his duties and the sufferings of his people; nor
has there ever been a minister so utterly regardless of his own
reputation and that of his master. He bribes with money, power, and
patronage, every one who has access to the King, to sound his praise
in prose or verse; and the King is persuaded that his life and throne
depend upon his abstaining altogether, from interfering in the
conduct of affairs.

When I was in the Governor-Generals camp at Futtehgur, M. H., the son
of S. A. K., came there armed, I knew, with four lacs of rupees. He
was an old acquaintance of E.'s, and he (E.) told me that he had
asked for an interview, and asked me whether he ought to consent to
see him. I told him that, if he did see him, he must make up his mind
to the man's persuading the King that he had given him the greater
part of the money, though the man himself kept all that he did not
give to his moonshee. He refused to see the man; but he has ever
since been with Mr. L. at Allahabad, intriguing with his people to
chouse men out of their ancient possessions; or with the Oude people,
to keep up the _raw_ they have established on the King's mind. The
King, by over-indulgence, has reduced his intellect below the
standard of that of a boy of five years of age. It is painful to talk
to a man with a mind so utterly emasculated.

Our Government would be fully authorized at any time to enforce the
penalty prescribed in your treaty of 1837, and it incurs great odium
and obloquy for not enforcing it. But Lord D. has, no doubt, solid
reasons for not taking such responsibility upon himself at this time.
I do all I can to save the people, and the people are sensible of
what I do, and grateful for it; for the Resident is the only person
they can look up to with any hope. If Government can comply with my
wish to have the King assured that it will not permit Mr. B. to
return and reside at Lucknow again, it will be of great use to me and
to the people, for the hopes held out to him are like a premium
offered for my head, or for my ruin; and one never feels very
comfortable under such offers, at any time or in any country. The
reckless lies which this man gets adventurers at Cawnpore to write
for him, and careless or corrupt editors to publish, are apt to
stagger those who do not know the vile character of the individual,
or the true nature of the facts referred to.

I am glad you saw W. He is a man of high character and first-rate
ability, and has abundance of sagacity and energy. I miss him very
much. He will be a credit to his regiment if engaged on active
service.

                           Yours sincerely,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Colonel Low, C.B.

P.S.--I shall say nothing in this of your domestic bereavement,
though I have felt much for you.

                                  W. H. S.

In my public letter, I have referred to that of the Marquess of W. to
L., when he was Resident. Do refer to it Page 388, Vol. 1.,
"Despatches."


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 1st June, 1854.

My Dear Low,

In my letter of the 10th of November, 1853, I solicited permission to
retain Weston with me for reasons stated therein. In reply, I was
told, in Mr. Dalrymple's letter of the 2nd of December, "that the
Governor-General in Council had every wish to consult my views, but,
for the present at least, his Lordship in Council thinks that
Lieutenant Weston must in fairness be required to join his regiment,
like other officers."

I am so very anxious to have his services again in the office he
filled, that I have to-day ventured, in a public letter to the
Foreign Secretary, to request that he will submit my wishes to the
Governor-General in Council, should they deem the state of affairs in
Burmah at present to be such as to admit of his being withdrawn from
his regiment I have said, in my public letter, that should any
exigency arise he could, of course, quickly join his regiment on
service again.

If you can give me any assistance in obtaining his services, I shall
feel very much indebted to you, for I have that confidence in his
abilities and high-mindedness which I cannot feel in those of his
_locum tenens_; and I am very anxious to keep things in good train
here till the end of the cold weather, when I must go on leave to
recruit. I am really in a very difficult position here, not with
regard to the King, for he has, I believe, entire confidence in me;
but he has become so entangled with his minister, that he is afraid
of him; and the minister would give all he has (and he has all the
revenues of the country) to get me out of the way.

I carried the Government orders regarding Shurfod Dowla into effect,
and he is now, with his family, quiet and safe. The King behaved very
well, and resisted all the attempts of the minister to persuade him
to remonstrate. I am to-day to submit Shurfod Dowla's letter of
grateful thanks to Government. I hope Government will not write to
him in reply, as this might mortify and vex the King, since he is not
written to by the Governor-General.

I think I told you of the _raw_ the minister, Wasee Alee and Co., had
established on the King's mind--the belief that a party of the
members of the royal family and native gentlemen at Lucknow had been
trying to persuade Government to set him aside, and put his reputed
brother, Mostafa Alee, on the throne. Whenever they want to make the
King angry with any one, they tell him that he is a leader in this
cabal. But the King is, by degrees, growing out of this folly. There
never was on the throne, I believe, a man more inoffensive at heart
than he is; and he is quite sensible of my anxious desire to advise
him rightly, and see justice done in all cases. But I am a sad
stumbling-block to the minister and the other bad and incompetent
officers employed in the administration.

If you wish it, I will be more circumstantial about Weston's _locum
tenens_, Lieut. B., of the 1st Cavalry. For his own repute, and that
of the Government, I think the less he has to do with the political
department the better. He would be better in a military staff
appointment than a political one.

                           Yours sincerely,
                  (Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To the Hon. Colonel Low, C.B.


                 __________________________


                                       Lucknow, 11th September, 1854.

My Lord,

The post which this morning brought me your Lordship's letter of the
6th instant brought me also one from Bombay, which I enclose for your
Lordship's perusal. Should you think it worth while, Colonel Outram
will be able to sift the matter to which it refers. I have long been
aware of the intrigue, and have taken care to let the King know that
I am so; but as I knew, at the same time, that the object was merely
to get money out of him, and to strengthen his confidence in his
minister, which had begun to give way, I did not think it necessary
to trouble your Lordship with any reference on the subject. I knew
that letters had been forged as from the King of Persia to the King
of Oude, proposing to divide Hindoostan between them, and I thought
it to be my duty to tell him so, in order to warn him; but, as he
denied ever having received such letters, I told him that I should
take the word of a King, and say no more about it. He is certainly
not of sound mind, and things must, ere long, come to a crisis. His
mind may have been of an average kind when he was young, but it has
long become emasculated by over-indulgence; and the minister and his
minions can make him believe or do what they please. They know that
it cannot last long, and they have agents in Bombay and Calcutta to
assist them in fleecing the King of money on all manner of false
pretences.

The minister, a consummate knave, and one of the most incompetent men
of business that I have ever known, has all the revenues and
patronage of the country to distribute among those who have access to
the King exclusively--they are poets, fiddlers, eunuchs, and
profligate women; and every one of them holds, directly or
indirectly, some court or other, fiscal, criminal, or civil, through
which to fleece the people. Anything so detestable as the Government
I have nowhere witnessed, and a man less competent to govern them
than the King I have never known.

Had your Lordship left the choice of a successor to me, I should have
pointed out Colonel Outram; and I feel very much rejoiced that he has
been selected for the office, and I hope he will come as soon as
possible. There are many honest men at Lucknow, and a finer peasantry
no country can boast. But no honest man can obtain or retain office
under Government with the present minister and heads of departments.

But where the whole revenues of a fine country are available to
suborn witnesses to prove the King to be a _Solomon_, no Resident
would be able to find judicial proof of his being a fool; but that he
is so I have had abundance of, to me, satisfactory evidence ever
since I have been here. It must soon, however, become clear, without
the Resident's efforts to make it so. Where the Government of India
is so solemnly pledged to see justice done to the people of a
country, it cannot fairly permit them to be reigned over much longer
by so incompetent a Sovereign. Proofs enough of bad government and
neglected duties were given in my Diary; and a picture more true was,
I believe, never drawn of any country. The duty of remedying the
evils, and carrying out your Lordship's views in Oude, whatever they
may be, must now devolve on another.

No one of my present assistants knows anything whatever about Oude,
its Government, or its people; and Colonel Outram will, therefore,
labour under great disadvantages. I hope, therefore, that your
Lordship will pardon the liberty I take in suggesting that he be
allowed the aid of Captain Weston. He went over the whole of Oude
with me, and knows almost all who have made themselves prominent for
good or for evil within the last five years. I know that, as soon as
I go, some of the most atrocious villains whom I have kept out of
office will try to purchase their way back; and there is no man too
bad for the minister, provided he pays for his restoration.--The
murderer of the banker, mentioned in my Diary, vol. i., p. 131, and
the murderer of thousands mentioned in the same volume. Captain
Weston is high minded, sagacious, energetic, hard-working,
conciliatory and, to Colonel Outram, his services in the new charge
would be invaluable.

I have the honour to remain,
Your Lordship's faithful and obedient servant,
(Signed)        W. H. SLEEMAN.

To the Most Noble
The Marquis of Dalhousie, K.T.
Governor-General.






THE END.



LONDON: PRINTED BY W. CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET.





