+++
title = "16 Previous"

+++
DISTRICT AMRAVATI

**Abstract of applications received on tour of Amravati**

 

|                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Names (if legible) and number of signatories, place, etc.**                                            | **Nature of complaint and request**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| \(1\)                                                                                                    | \(2\)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| President, Bharativa Jansangh Nagar, Amravati.                                                           | Missionaries take advantage of the poverty and miserable condition of the people.  The converts begin to hate Hinduism.  They put obstacles in the work of adivasis.  Miss Cluth refused to pay sales tax saying that it was not her Government.  This shows anti-national tendencies.  If they want to really help Indians, they should send money to India Government.  Christian prayers are offered by school boys in Holy Cross Convert.  Why should institutions receiving fees from students and grants from local bodies be allowed to preach religious prayers?                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| John Rodd, Achalpur Camp.                                                                                | Complaint against Rev. Major, Superintendent, Kothara Leprosy Home, because he had discharged me on the ground that I was not doing spiritual, evangelistic and proselytising work.  He has victimised others and intends to treat some more similarly as soon as the Comrrjittee leaves Berar.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Prabhudas (Manikrao) Januji Hanote, Kothara, Achalpur.                                                   | I come from Nerpinglai, tahsil Morsi, district Amravati. 1 came to Kothara Leprosy Hospital in 1937, when I was 12.  Shri Widder was Superintendent then.  He used to preach and baptise those who desired.  They are never forced by anybody to become Christian.  When I was on death bed, I took baptism in 1947. The result was that I began to recover gradually. Now I am one of the panchas. In the panchas there is one pastor, one secretary and one preacher and about 100 patient members. Those who are willing are given baptisma after the panchas satisfy themselves. Children are not baptised without the consent of their parents. Funds required for religious purposes are raised by contribution and donations from foreigners.             |
| Shri T. H. Major, Superintendent, Kothara Leprosy Home.                                                  | Kothara is the property of the Mission to Lepers and the administration is by a Superintendent lent from the local mission (Central India Baptist Mission), financed by M. P. Government grant and annual graiit from the Mission to Lepers. There are 299 patients at present, whose records are properly maintained. Out of 300 about 35 patients attend the meeting. Preaching, conversions and baptisms have been all done by national christians chosen from among the patients and the healthy staff.  186 conversions of patients since 1947 to date at the leper home. Out of 299, 100 are Christians. There is agricultural programme at Kothara Leprosy hospital, occupational training programme for patients, and future plans costing Rs. 2,20,892. |
| Gyani Tarasingha, Pashim Wibhag, (Western Madhya Pradesh) Vidarbha Adiwasi Mukhya Karyalaya, Parat wada. | Though grant is received by the mission, there is no good arrangement of patients regarding food. They are given heavy work if they do not agree to be converted willingly. One instance of Bhikaji Sakharam of Ghule is quoted. Those who were not willing to be converted, were discharged from the hospital.  Most of the 30 boys in the boarding have been converted. Strong and stout patients are kept even for 15 years and given work. There is no good arrangement regarding food, etc.  With the result that there was strike by the patients in this leprosy home. Unqualified persons give medicines and injections.  Holidays are not given on important Hindu and national festivals in this home.                                                 |

**Shri Khaparde, ex-Minister, Amravati:** My main argument is that if a
man becomes Christian he feels that his, both blood and skin, are
outside the boundaries of this country.  It is in Europe, it is in
America, it is in Africa, but it is not in India. His brothers and
relations are all over the world outside India.  Therefore, his sympathy
goes outside the boundaries of India and if some day a war breaks out
between India and, any other western country he is likely to help those
foreigners rather than us.

My next argument is that by spreading Christianity he thinks that he
will be able to divide India on the basis of religion just like
Mohamedans divided India and secured Pakistan.  They have not secured
Pakistan on any other basis except religion.  It is division of India on
the basis of religion and they have got Pakistan not because that the
Mohamedans were in majority in particular provinces and that they wanted
this. They have done it and they are trying their best to oust from
these provinces all those who are not Muslims. This is history, which
has, to be borne in. mind.  Thus on the same lines our Christian
brothers are now thinking having Christian land of their own in India
itself.  They have not made a secret of it.  They have spoken it out in
a public meeting recently. I do not know the name of the village. 
Probably it may be at Gondia where the President of the Christian
Society declared that some day he hopes to have a Christiansthan in
India, just as there is Pakistan there is to be Christiansthan,
Budhistnan, Jainisthan and how many more sthans I do not know.  It is
all open thing and open challenge to Hindus and Hinduism.  This has
appeared in most of the papers, which you will be able to find out
within no time through the Government machinery, which is at your
disposal.  This is a matter of alarm.  We think that if the Christians
conceive the idea of Christiansthan, then there is a great danger to the
land being split and divided into small pieces and, thus, we are going
to lose our integrity, independence, self respect, religion, culture and
all our past history.

Then the third point is that it is argued that the Christian
missionaries have been doing good work in India.  They have started
schools, hospitals, etc., in our country.  But if that good work is
going to keep power here, we are going to endanger the freedom and
integrity of our country.  I am, therefore not prepared to have all this
good work for me.  If there are no such good workers in us for the
present to come forward for the work, they will come forward later.  It
does not mean that it would he difficult for us to prosper without these
foreign missionaries.

**Shri V. D. Brahma, Advocate:** As a citizen of a Secular State, I
believe in freedom of religious worship and religious preaching and as
saviour of human sufferings I make no distinction in the teachings of
great prophets whether they be Hindus, Muslims or Christians.  Each has
shown a way of life, which all or any should be free to adopt.

2\. If the activities of Christian Nations and Missionaries had been
confined to the teachings of their own prophets, there could be no
objection.  But their activities are not so confined. In the pre-freedom
they followed the British flag as soldiers of cultural invasion.
Similarly, the British merchant and factory owners followed the flag for
the economic exploitation of the country under subjection.  The economic
exploitation of our country by foreign capital still continues and so
also the cultural invasion by the foreign Christian Missionary.

3\. Instead of appealing to intellect or educated sentiments, they take
undue advantage of the poverty, ignorance, suffering and need of the
poor, specially the Aboriginals and almost always force these people to
become Christians.  It is interesting to see the competition between the
various Missions. Catholics and Protestants, and how they succeed in
converting the converts to become Protestants or Catholics.

4\. In their method of propaganda and preaching, specially by the
foreign missionary, there can be seen a definite barred and bitterness
against everything, i.e., Asian, Colour, or East Oriental. It is their
attempt to bring everything Indian into contempt and disrepute and try
to impress the coloured people that they are sub-human, low and inferior
and also convince Indians that they have no escape unless they follow
and obey the white races. They seem to be keen on propagating the
American way of life and the American lead to save the world. They do
not even ail to suggest that Indian freedom is a short-lived affair and
the Christians should await their resurrection.  Then again the whites
will come into their own.  The whole idea of the foreign missionaries,
who almost always receive their funds from interested foreign nations,
is to carry out the propaganda in favour of the foreign pay-master in
the name of and under the cloak of Christianity and medical relief.

5\. It is my own experience that the White Missionaries of Chikalda did
not want black Indians, like myself, to come and build houses at or near
or even in the towns where they have Christian missions.  Some of the
Missionary women even visited our women folk and abused Hindu Gods and
Hindu way of life under my very roof.  My father-in-law had to explain
to them politely that it is a sign of bad culture, that they should
abuse anyone under his very roof.

6\. The Missionaries do considerable humanitarian work but, more often
than not, this work is tinted by a desire to compel people to become
Christian.  Though it is difficult to prove political motive, the
political effects that the cultural invaders tried to bring about are
evident and it can be seen that the converted Christians specially the
mass of people are not allowed, or are not so willing, to join the
general movements of the people in the people's struggle for better
life.  These converted Christians are tried and trained to work and
remain as a separate group with allegiance to something that is not
Indian.

7\. In the Community Project.  American influence, due to the aid they
have given, is obvious.  These foreign missionaries are often allowed to
make use of these activities to preach politics of American type, which
amounts to interference in Indian political affairs.  In these community
projects they try to tell you that American way of life and American he
alone can save you and that China and Russia are your enemies.  Such
propaganda is also undertaken in the schools.

8\. If Indian and Asian freedom is to be consolidated and reconstructed
to its full economic and cultural stature, it is necessary to keep a
careful watch on the activities and the resources of these foreign
missionaries or their Indian hirelings so that the possible danger of
the Christians as a class becoming anti-national, indifferent or even
hostile pockets could be avoided.

9\. To those missionaries who are doing good and honest humanitarian
work, it should be definitely told that their good work and their
sincerity is admirable and that they should render the humanitarian
service to all.  They should be told that even Christ would not like the
idea that his followers should take mean and undue advantage of other
people’s poverty to convert them to Christianity.

**Shri Amritkarl, Pleader:** The main reason for the entry of
missionaries in our country is that there is caste system, social
inequality, lack of education, ignorance of the people and disease.
People took to Christianity because of the obligations felt by them for
the services rendered by missionaries.  The missionaries had not the
object of converting them. The missionary problem will be solved only if
institutions are started to fight out inequality, ignorance,
untouchability, etc., and Government should encourage people to start
such institutions by rendering necessary help.

**Shri Gokhale, Hindu Mahasabha:** In one village in Pusad taluq, it was
said by missionaries at one dinner time that Pandit Nehru is misleading
the people and in any case there will be missionary raj here. 
Advantage, is taken by missionaries of the ignorance of people and the
number of conversions has increased after independence.  Government does
not pay as much attention towards this as it deserves.  Therefore,
necessary action should be taken immediately.

**Shri B. V. Marathe:** Missionaries interfere with political affairs,
e. g., they have opened three centres where there are Government
community projects and development scheme centres.  They take leading
part in explaining Government schemes to visitors and create the
impression that all the development is being made simply because of the
help received from America.  I had this experience in Morsi taluq.  They
say “Russia and China are enemies of democracy and even though America
is helping a lot to India, Nehru is influenced by those countries.” Such
sort of language is used by the missionaries in their prachar.

**Dr. S. G. Patwardhan:** There are no workers in our society who have
the same enthusiasm and zeal as the missionaries.  People are likely to
be converted because of the zeal and treatment meted out to them by
missionaries.  Unless there are such workers in our society, it is
difficult to check missionary prachar.

**Shri Jaiswal:** He quoted an instance in which a small girl of a poor
Hindu family was taken to a hospital.  On recovery of the girl, she was
not made over to her parents. He gave another instance of anti-national
tendency of missionaries.  A missionary refused to pay sales tax on a
radio, which lie wanted to purchase.  He told the shop-keeper that the
sales tax recovered by him now would go to the Indian Government and,
therefore, he would not pay it. He will gladly pay the tax when his
Christian Raj comes.

**Shri Khedkar:** Missionaries take advantage of the poverty, miserable
condition and ignorance, particularly of the backward and untouchable
people. They run schools, hospitals, religious institutions and spread
their religion through them.  They hate Hindu religion and their Gods
and explain the importance of Christian religion.  An example of
Kholapur was quoted, where Krishna was called bad names in a prachar
meeting in bazar. A check should be put to the activities of
missionaries immediately. Otherwise, we may have to face a great danger.

------------------------------

**Visit to institutions at Amravati**

R. C. CONVENT SCHOOL

There is no trouble from non-Christians or Government officers.  Out of
500 students in the girls’ school at Amravati, 350 or 400 are Hindus. 
Recently, I heard that the quota of cloth for the nuns has been
reduced.  They do not get any pay.  There are no complaints for the last
42 years of compulsion, etc., against the school authorities. There is a
special prayer every Sunday for the Republic of India.  We offered
prayers for the British when they were in power.  We obey the law of the
land and the rulers.  From 1880, there is a free hospital, which gives
medicine to everybody.  They have got a primary school.  There is not a
single conversion since 1880 till now.  There was a Parsee girl who was
determined to become Christian (Catholic).  She was advised to take the
consent of her parents.  She has not converted.  The teachers are mostly
sisters.  The annual expenditure of this institution must be between 50
to 60 thousand.  We get grant from Government.  The Archbishop has
nothing to do with this institution.  We get a portion from the Holy
Childhood (contributions made all over the world for children).  We
received Rs. 2,000 once from America. There are contribution and
Government grants.  There is religious teaching only for Christians. 
There is a lesson on moral and manners. That is outside school hours. 
Only general instructions are given.  Mother Superior is in India for
over 53 years.  She left France and come to India when she was 19 years
of age.  She did not go to her land because she wants to save money for
the poor.  Majority of the sisters are Indians. In diocese Archbishop is
the head so far as spiritual matters are concerned, but in ordinary
matters he has not to do anything.

------------------------------

ACHALPUR

*The 11th August 1954.*

Catholics are operating here.  There are 399 patients in leper asylum. 
There are no Indian doctors.  It is a very old institution started in
1904.  Agriculture schemes are also undertaken by the mission.

**Dr. Major:** I have baptised one person in seven years.  Conversions
are done by national Christians. I have done no preaching, no
conversions, etc. Leper patients have been disowned by their own family
members.  Leper asylum helps them as a humanitarian work, regardless of
what a man’s religion is. I help a man because I love him. We tell them
about the Christian religion.  Jesus Christ is a historical figure.
Belief in Jesus Christ is a matter of faith and there are evidences,
which support it. I have been harassed by certain people, though not by
Hindus in general.  I have discharged certain members of the staff
(Christian) because they were incompetent. They have published the news
in Marathi papers of Nagpur and they have also brought a C.I.D. to my
doors. I have no Complaint against Government officers. They are
helpful. Since 1947, over 157 leper patients have been converted.  They
belong to all communities-Brahmins, Harijans, etc. There have been some
cases where baptism has been refused.  We give training to persons in
the leper home so that they should be able to get their bare living
after discharge.  Grant received from Government to the leper home in
Rs. 36,000 a year. We get money from America through our missions.
Patients in leper home are given free meals, cloth, etc. Everybody is
required to work. We have religious worship in the hospital every
morning at 7 in the Church. About 35 out of 300 patients attend the
prayers. There are 100 Christians and 199 non-Christians. Total budget
expenditure is Rs. 33,000 from the Mission and Rs. 39,000 from Indian
Government and also from agriculture. No contribution from Government.

**Tarasing:** The main object of these people in running the mission
hospital is to convert people (reads out a written statements).

**Dr. Major:** Bhikaji did not work well with the tractor.  He was
warned three to four times.  Therefore, his services were dispensed
with. Six Christians out of 39.  These boys are baptised.  According to
my denomination, we give baptisma when a man is in a position to
understand things for himself.

**Roman Catholic Father:** There is no trouble from Government officers
and from non-Christians.  We have a boarding school and a primary school
for girls. Non-Christians also come there. There is not a single
conversion. We do not even speak to them about God and religion. We
celebrate Independence Day and sing National anthem. Every Sunday we
pray expressly for the Republic.

**Gunwantrao Tayade:** Roman Catholic, Protestant and C.M.S. Missions
are working here. They have converted mostly Mahars, Gonds and Korkus.
Small centres created in 1905. I have a case of Roman Catholic Mission
in Naigaon Bordi. His name was Chip. Rev. Fr. Guyer was here. Persons
not attending the Church were also beaten by this Father.  Even now
there are several small centres where they abuse Hindu Gods.  All the
missions are of particular nations.  They have affiliations for
particular nations and not for religion. Roman Catholics live in poor
people and call themselves bachelors (Kapustalani and Achalpur). I have
got very bad Experience of these bachelors. This is my experience from
1914. All these missions are Roman Catholics.  In American mission also,
there is a majority of Mahars. Somwanshis are preferred from a among
Mahars because they are in majority. Roman Catholics work in Mangs.

**President, Municipal Committee:** Mahars are converted to
Christianity, bait on their certificates they keep the word Mahar,
because they get free education.  When we passed a resolution about
this, 19 Christian boys left the school.  The boys were not willing to
give out their true religion.

**Father:** We give fees irrespective of religion.  Have the people got
any right to control Government expenditure on religious grounds? We
shifted these students to Catholic school in Kapustalani.

**Mamraj Khande:** I have not seen any compulsory conversion. On the
other hand, they render useful service. No prachar R. C. Mission. During
the famine time of 1756 or 1856 missionaries helped the villagers and
they became Christians. They might sell their religion at the time of
distress. Several boys and girls who were destitute, might have taken to
conversion.  In Chikalda one non-Christian doctor took fees for going to
a patient, but later refused to go even though he had received the fees.

**Father:** We do not make Christians at all.  We allow people to become
Christians by telling them our doctrines and only when they come to us
with their express consent, we convert them. If the other members of the
family do not agree, we do not convert those members.

**Dr. Sonar, M.L.A.:** Inducements are offered for conversion.  Prachar
of American goods from their own hospitals takes place.  Injections are
given and at the same time religious prachar is made by means of
gramophones.  This is not desirable.

**Barve, Pleader:** My request to Christian brothers is that they should
not convert hospital and school into a church. We have no objection to
their leading a Christian life.  But our main apprehension is of a
Christian Raj like Pakistan. Why should foreigners be inclined to come
to this country to preach their religion?  If the Indian Christians do
this, we would have no objection. Non-British Christian missions
supplied all information to their own nations.  This was revealed during
the enquiry made at the time of 1942 war.  It is difficult to give
evidence in such matters. Censorship of correspondence, control over
incoming finances and expenditure and also registration of conversions
with Government should be necessary to check missionary activities.

At the time of visit to Kothara Leper Home it was observed that posters
giving teachings of Jesus were put on walls.  The doctor showed a tin of
medicine to say that all medicines were not American as alleged in the
Circuit House Meeting held earlier.

------------------------------

CHIKHALDA

*The 11th August 1954.*

**Head Mistress in charge of Baptist Mission:** \[There are three
missions--

\(1\) Central India Baptist Mission;- (2) Christian Missionary Alliance;
and (3) Evangelical Mission.  Roman Catholics representative came
later.\] Six years have passed since the establishment of my school.  My
money comes from orphanage fund in America.  There is no grant from
Government.  We do not have much contact with the Indian people.  Most
of the students are children of Christian parents.  Some of them are
orphans.  No donations from Indian friends except in terms of fees.

**Roman Catholic Father:** Our headquarter is in Daryapur.  We run two
institutions and all members are nearly Christians, except 10 to 12. 
Total is 70. There is one Pracharak under me. Two or three converts have
been made by me last year.  It is not possible to say exactly what made
them become Christian. In Melghat there are about 300 Christians. I was
sent from Nagpur to Ranchi, Ranchi was the centre of Roman Catholics
also. We are running only primary and middle school, to which both boys
and girls are admitted.  We teach Bible in the school.  Those who are
willing, come and others do not.  The school is recognised and receives
grant from Government.  There is a four year course of Theology and
prior to that three years of Philosophy for us.  We have got coffee
plantations, but our income from the plantations is just sufficient to
meet the expenditure.

------------------------------

DHARNI

*The 12th August 1954.*

**Shri Upadhyaya:** There are two missions here-(1) Korku and (2) Roman
Catholic.  Indian Christians begin to hate us as a result of the
Christian teachings.  We, therefore, feel sorry that our brothers are
separated from us.  I used to teach my foreign friends and I have no
personal grudge against them.  A song was sung at the time, of reception
of Shri Grubbs ""ohÝXwñWmZ OrV\|J{ Bgm \_grh H{$ ob\`{'' Khansama
Yunatan had arranged the party.  All Government officers were present.
We understood the meaning of the function and the song as “though the
Britishers have gone, Americans want to rule the country”. Allurements
are shown for conversion.

**Batu, a Korku:** I was a chaukidar at mission’s bungalow.  I was paid
Rs. 30 per month. I was told that I would be given Rs. 40 per month if I
became a Christian. I gave up the job.  I was not converted.

**Yunatan:** Batu was converted-; and his name changed after baptism, to
Anand Masih.  He left Christianity.  One man only was converted during
the last 50 years at this place.

**Mr. Grubbs:** Yunatan is a Christian Pracharak here.  He is also a
khansama in Government service.

**A convert from Patna:** I come from district Darbhanga, Fulbaras and
am son of Pandit Ramnarayan Dube (or Mishra).  I became Christian
because I found that there was difference among man and man in the Hindu
religion and among different castes.  I came here last year.  I came to
Koylari. I was doing Ramayana katha there.  There was quarrel with me
and some other sadhu regarding bhog. I am a Preacher, but not on
anybody’s behalf.  It is a year now.  My gotra is Kashyap (when he was
asked about his Prawara lie admitted, ‘I am a bairagi’).  I do not get
any pay, but my railway fares are paid by church.

**Rev. Grubbs:** When I preach, I preach against idolatry because Bible
condemns idolatry.  This is a basic fundamental teaching in the Bible. 
It does not condemn any particular religion.  By idolatry I mean any
idol made for worship.  We do social service because it is the teaching
of Jesus Christ to love people.  We regulate our activities.  We come
here with the message of Christ.  We may be right or wrong.  You may
regulate our activities.  If we are wrong, and you think that our
activities should not come in anybody’s way, you can tell us
accordingly.  We would appreciate suggestions or recommendations from
you about the work we should do.  It is difficult to he careful in
preaching as not to offend the feelings of other religions.  More
missionaries came to India since 1945.  Every five years we return to
our country on furlough.  Those people who contribute to the Home Board
do expect some returns from us in numbers of converts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
