+++
title = "50 Oral Statement made before the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee. JABALPUR (8-8-1955) No. 1"

+++
*Oral Statement made before the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry
Committee.*

JABALPUR

(8-8-1955)

**No. 1**

*Name*-Vidyavati Gaikwad.  
*Father’s name*-Gangadhar Gaikwad.  
*Age*-16 years.  
*Address*-Narbada Road, Jabalpur.

I, my sisters and brothers studied in Johnson Girls’ School, Howbagh,
Jabalpur, from Primary up to Matric Class.  I passed my Matriculation
from there.  Bible is taught in Primary classes compulsorily.  It is
also taught in the Middle and High Schools.  Students need not attend
the Bible class.  Morning prayer is compulsory for all from the Primary
to the High School standards.  The prayer is a Christian Prayer.  All
Saturdays and Sundays are observed as holidays for the whole school. I
don’t know why the school is closed on these days.  In my time
non-Christian boarders also used to go to the Churches for prayer.  They
were only one or two in number.  The boarders have also to go
compulsorily for prayers in Churches on Sundays.  Sometimes our teachers
in the School used to go in numbers and groups on Saturdays for
preaching outside Jabalpur.

During Christmas we used to be asked to bring some clothes for
distribution amongst poor children.  Though there was no compulsion,
some influence used to be exerted on us. These clothes used to be
distributed to poor boys and girls, both Christians and non-Christians,
without any distinction.

There was a drama played in the school on the 13th August 1954 in
celebration of the Independence Day.  During the course of the drama,
the four quarters of the world were represented by four directional
winds which brought their flags, one representing Pakistan, another
representing England, third America and the fourth representing India,
i.e., the Indian National Flag.  After some dialogue, the Indian Flag
was hoisted.  Then, after sometime, some sound was heard from behind the
stage and then one holy person came and she said “We wish that there
should be peace in the whole world”.  Then a girl came with a flag
having the sign of the Cross.  Then that flag was hoisted on the top of
all the other flags.  This would bring peace in the world and it would
be hoisted all over the world. I and other Hindu girls felt that this
was a disrespect to our National Flag.  Neither I nor any other girl
raised any objection to that.  
 

*To Shri A. B. Shinde.-* I do not know what is Rashtriya Prayer.  I know
prayer is a song.  By Christian prayer, I mean that it included recitals
from the Bible and Christian Hymns and Parables from the Bible.  In the
prayer, peace and progress of no particular community was prayed for. 
It was for the whole of humanity.  By “influence” mentioned in my
deposition above is meant that it might be intended that all the poor
children should get clothes and so they were asked to be brought by us.

That the teachers used to go on Saturdays to preach is not my personal
knowledge but it is my information.  The girl carrying the flag of
Cross, they said, was the symbol of peace and the girl carrying it was a
small and short one and she was made to stand on a stool.

A cutting from “Nava-Bharat” of Jabalpur, dated 17-8-54, is produced by
the witness, and presented to the Committee.  
 

**No. 2**

*Name*-Miss Zillah Soule.  
*Age*-45 years.  
*Occupation*-Principal, Training College, Howbagh, Jabalpur.

In 1954, I was officiating as Principal of the Johnson Girls’ High
School, in which Vidyavati Gaikwad (P.W.1) was a student from
Kindergarten to Matriculation. Ordinarily, we have holidays on
Saturdays.  That is not on any religious grounds. but just to
accommodate the hostel girls for their weekly cleaning, washing, etc. 
We belong to the Methodist Church, in which Saturday has no special
significance.

2\. We have our Bible classes during the last period, after regular
school hours.  They are not compulsory for any girl, even for the
Christian girls.  Whenever I pray, I pray in the name of Jesus; but this
is not true or necessary for other teachers, including Christian
teachers.  Some pray in the name of God and not in the name of Christ. 
The non-Christian teachers don’t attend our prayer, but the students do,
and there is a special reason for it.  It is because in this hour, which
is called the Assembly Hour, we read out the announcement of the day’s
programme of the school.  It is thus in their interest to attend.  Last
year, one Muslim teacher used to attend and take her turn in leading the
prayer.  Notices put on the notice-board are not generally read by all. 
Hence the daily announcement at the Assembly is necessary.

3\. We had our Independence Day Programme unanimously approved by the
Staff Committee in which every member of the staff was present.  This
included two Hindu and one Muslim teachers.  They approved the
programme.  The draft of the play intended to be staged was also put up
before them and they unanimously approved of its being played.  Then I
entrusted this to a teacher to coach the girls taking part in the
drama.  The whole thing was reduced to writing and I am handing over to
the Committee a copy of it.  When an article appeared in the press and
an enquiry was made by the District Inspectress of Schools, I had
presented one copy to her.  The statement made in the press is incorrect
and there is no truth in it.  It was far from our intention.  In fact, I
was terribly shocked at the article in the press, to belittle the
National Flag.  Although I was not present on the day when the drama was
actually played, as I was in Bombay on that day, I bad seen the
rehearsals of the drama before it was actually played and to me there
was nothing in it which could be interpreted as hurting the National
feelings of anybody.

*To Shri B. S. Bakshi.-*

4\. Our total expenditure last year was about 102 thousand rupees. (This
is subject to correction.) Our deficit was about 13 to 15 thousand last
year.  This was met by a donation from the American Methodist Church. 
In previous years our deficits were larger and so the Methodist Church
used to donate larger amounts.  Building donations are separately made. 
The building donation to us was about 3 to 4 lakhs of rupees, between
1949-1951.  This donation was mainly a result of my efforts.  My Mission
is affiliated to the International Missionary Council, U.S.A. I may be
making a mistake in this.  Therefore, I prefer to say that I cannot
answer the question.  Our Christian teachers voluntarily do preaching
work for 5 to 15 days in a year.  This is confined to visiting Christian
women in the villages and we have no intention to preach to
non-Christians.

5\. The idea of bringing the Pakistan Flag in that drama was merely to
cultivate a feeling of friendliness with the neighbouring countries. I
am aware of the military pact between America and Pakistan and also of
the fact that public opinion in India is against that pact, but I feel
that the tendency to create ill-feeling between the two countries is not
healthy.  On the contrary, the creation of friendly feelings in the two
countries among the little children is desirable and that was the object
in my mind when I wanted the Pakistan Flag to be hoisted in the drama. 
All the flags except our National Flag were merely paper flags.  The
original script of drama that was passed at the staff meeting of the
school has been sent to the Education Department, and the copy handed
over by me now, is a true copy of it.  
 

**No. 3**

*Name*-Janardhan Shankarlal.  
*Age*-14 years.  
*Occupation*-Student, Mahakoshal High School.

I was a student of the Christian Mission High School for two years
during 1953 and 1954 in the Seventh and Eighth classes.  In the first
period, on alternate days, the Bible used to be taught to all students. 
We used to recite on the next alternate day what was taught to us on the
previous alternate day and also further lesson used to be given. 
Attendance used to be taken during the Bible period.  Absence in the
Bible period amounted to absence from class, as attendance was taken
before that.  A student who did not prepare his lessons of the Bible
class used to be punished.

2\. One Ganesh Prasad, a co-student of mine had brought me a paper in
which it was written that no force was used on Hindu students to attend
the Bible classes in the school.  Ganesh Prasad asked me to sign, it.  I
refused and said that it was not true.  He said that if I did not sign
it I would have to suffer the consequences. I said I would not mind it. 
Then he went away.  After some days when once I was on my way to
school.  Ganesh Prasad ran past me but I saved myself by shifting away. 
Then, while I was sitting, he gave me a blow by his knee. I connect
these actions on his part with my' refusal to sign the paper he had
brought as there was no other reason for him to behave with me in that
manner.  Ganesh Prasad is Hindu.  I became unconscious by his blow.  I
could not attend to my class and was taken home.  Nothing was done by
the school authorities against Ganesh Prasad.  Ganesh Prasad is older
and stronger than myself.  I have left the school and am now studying at
Mahakoshal High School, Jabalpur.  
 

**No. 4**

*Name*-Shankarlal.  
*Father’s name*-Narayanji.  
*Age*-40 years.  
*Occupation*-Hotel-keeper.  
*Address*-Andherdeo, Jabalpur.

I am the father of Janardan Prasad who was formerly reading in Christian
Mission High School.  He used to tell me that the Bible was compulsory
and that in plays (dramas) Hindu Gods and deities were scantly referred
to. I asked him not to bother about all those things and attend to his
studies properly.  There was a meeting in this connection presided over
by Shri Oak, Headmaster, Mahakoshal High School.  There, I told about
the things happening in the Mission School and that our Hindu boys
should not be compelled to learn the Bible and to take part in dramas
villifying our religion.  There, it was resolved that Shri Bernard
should be approached and apprised of all these matters. I, with some
other guardians of Hindu boys, met Shri Bernard and related all this to
him.  He took down our statements.  Nothing happened afterwards.

2\. One day, my son complained to me that he was being asked to take
part of a female in a drama in the school.  I asked him not to do so. 
But, he was nervous and afraid of pressure.  He, therefore, without my
knowledge took some girls’ apparels from his mother and played the part
in the school.

3\. One day, when I was in hotel, Amarkumar Ghosh, a student of that
school, came to me and informed me that my son was hit by Ganesh Prasad
and was brought in my house in senseless condition. I immediately rushed
to my house and found that it was really so.  After some effort my son
came to senses. I enquired of him as to what had happened.  But he had
not fully recovered from the pain and was complaining of pain in the
head and could not reply to my questions.  I reported the matter to the
police.  The next day I went to the Headmaster of his school and
reported the matter to him. He called his class teacher and the boy
Ganesh Prasad, as the class teacher said he had not heard about it.  The
class teacher said that my son was weeping and, when questioned, did not
answer anything, he, therefore, in allowed Amarkumar to take him home. 
Amarkumar had told me that the boy was complaining of some pain, that he
told the teacher that he was not well and he would take him home
whatever might be the result.  Amarkumar then brought him to our house. 
The Headmaster questioned Ganesh Prasad.  He told him that he was coming
running and fell upon my son.  On this, the Headmaster wrote something,
put it in an envelope and gave it to Ganesh Prasad to hand it over to
his father.  My son had contradicted Ganesh Prasad that his falling
while running was not a fact.  The fact was that he did not sign the
paper and that Ganesh Prasad had threatened him with serious
consequences.  Ganesh Prasad tore the letter.  I was informed of it by
other boys.  Nothing has happened so far.  To my knowledge, no
punishment was given to Ganesh Prasad and no further action was taken.
My son continued to read in the school for about four months after that
incident.

*To Shri A. B. Shinde-*

4\. I sent my son to the Christ Mission School on the information that
the teaching there is good.  When we went and reported to Shri Bernard,
we did not make any report to the school authority.  This happened in
about August or September of 1953 or so.  After this I never enquired
from my son whether the Bible teaching was stopped or not, nor did I
enquire from Shri Bernard.

5\. My son was reading in the Mahakoshal High School in Fifth and Sixth
classes.  I withdrew him from that school and got him admitted in the
Mission School as some other co-students of his also joined the Mission
School and my son insisted to follow them.  My son studied in Seventh
and Eighth classes in Mission High School.  In respect of change of
school, I allowed him to do what he liked.  
 

**No. 5**

*Name*-Beohar, Rajendra Singh.  
*Father’s name*-Beohar, Raghubirsingh.  
*Age*-54 years.  
*Occupation*-Landlord.  
*Address*-Beoharbagh, Jabalpur.

I had extensive malguzari villages in Mandla and Jabalpur districts
inhabited mostly by Gonds.  My villages were mostly in the Jungle areas
in Niwas and Mandla tahsils.  They are mostly inhabited by Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, namely, Gonds, Bhils, Baigas and Kunkas,
etc.  I had various occasions to go that side.  Narayanganj was and is
my headquarters for that area, where I go and reside several times in a
year. I have given my written reply to the questionnaire and there I
have given, in short, activities of Christian Missionaries and their
methods.

2\. I was President of the Mahakoshal Branch of the All-India Harijan
Sewak Sangh and, therefore, also, I took special interest in finding out
their conditions.  I was the Vice-President of the Vanwasi Sewa Mandal
started in Mandla and which has now spread all over India.  In my
enquiries, I found that the mode of conversion to Christianity was by
giving inducement, for instance, giving of loans and then telling the
debtor that, if he became a Christian, his debt would be written off,
boys would be given free education and even books.  The Mission working
was Apostolic Prefecture, Roman Catholic Mission.  I have direct
knowledge of these incidents.  I met several pupil teachers who told me
the stories.  The Missionaries had opened several Primary Schools and
there was one Normal School opened by them at Sijhora, about 40 miles in
the interior from Mandla.  There, only Seventh standard passed students
could be admitted if they came from other schools or Government and
District Councils.  But they had obtained the facilities of admitting to
the Normal School, their men even if they had not passed the Seventh
standard.  I had occasions to meet many such who had not passed the
Seventh standard and who bad come out of the Normal School and become
teachers in Primary Schools run by Missionaries.  The Mission School
teachers used to do preaching work also.  During the whole period of my
visits and enquiries, I did not come across any case in which a man had
become Christian out of conviction.  All cases that came to my notice
and information were cases of conversion due to reasons other than
conviction, as mentioned above.

3\. Some of the teachers in Sijhora were of tender age, about 15 or so. 
At the moment I can give the name of one person who was resident of my
village Maharajpur.  His name is Lalaram, by caste Dheemar.  I owned 40
villages in Mandla and about 40 villages in Jabalpur district.  Their
area was larger in jungli tracts than in other parts.  In my capacity
mentioned above, I had occasions to tour that area with Thakkar Bapa.
The teachers employed in Mission Primary Schools were mostly
Christians.  The attitude of Christians towards our Harijan Sewak Sangh
and Vanwasi Sewa Mandal was that they thought we were their rivals and
they did not welcome our work.  They were hostile to the Sangh and
Mandal.

4\. It was as a result of exposure by Dr. Elwin and Thakkar Bapa, and
questions put by me in the Madhya Pradesh Legislative Assembly that the
Normal School at Sijhora was taken over by Government.  I have been a
Member of the State Assembly for a number of years.

5\. I had my grandson in the Christ Church School and its Hostel.  I
withdrew him, both from the School and the Hostel, because I came to
know that attendance in the Church and learning of the Bible was
compulsory there as a measure of discipline.  In the Hostel, before
going to bed, the students had to kneel down and pray Christian prayer. 
I drew attention of the Headmaster of that school to Article 28 of the
Constitution.  To that, he said, it was not compulsory and was as a
matter of discipline.

6\. I have answered the Committee’s Question No. 19 and would like to
bring to the notice of the Committee the book entitled “What has
religion done for mankind?”, published by Watchtower Bible and Tract
Society, Inc. International Bible Students’ Association, Brooklyn, New
York, U. S. A. This is on behalf of Jehowa’s witnesses who have a
Mission working at Jabalpur also.

7\. With reference to the Committee's Question No. 96, I would like to
bring to the notice of the Committee Article 25 (2) (a) of the
Constitution.  I would like to express my opinion to the Committee that
in the backward tracts, suitable measures be taken by the State so that
the Backward Tribes may be protected and be not led away to change their
ancestral religion on account of their backward and economic conditions.
I would answer to one of the questions regarding conversion and its
effect on the security of the State as follows.  I have no objection to
conversion by conviction.  Conversion by inducement is bad as I have
already said before.  But, conversion with a view to increase number and
by means other than conviction is fraught with great danger to the
future security of the State, as it is likely to create a tendency to
remand a separate and independent State on the basis of religion.  No
such large-scale conversions are taking place in the open areas now.

(9-8-1955)

8\. If the Madhya Pradesh Trust Act applies to any charitable, public,
educational or other institution it should also apply to such
institutions of Christians.  If the present Act does not cover any
institution of the Christians that Act should be so modified as to apply
to them also.  And, under the present Act, if it applies to them, no
exemptions should be granted for filing of returns as also to others.

*To Shri A. B. Shinde-*

9\. My grandson was reading in the Model High School before he joined
the Christ Church High School. As he could not pull on there with his
studies and he was weak in many subjects, he was put in the Christ
Church School.  Shri R. P. Guru, a teacher of the school, with whom I
have friendly relations, said that if I put my grandson in the Christ
Church High School, he would be under his direct supervision and that
was the main reason why I put him there.  Although I thought the School
as worst. I put him there on the undertaking of Shri Guru. I did not
give anything in writing as that was not necessary when I withdrew my
grandson.  But before actual withdrawal I had sent a letter objecting to
the Bible teaching and Church attendance of my grandson.  The admission
form was not filled by me.  It was filled by my son.  I withdrew my
grandson from the School at my instance and with the consent of my son.
(A letter, dated 14-1-53 written by the father of the child was shown to
the witness and he was asked whether it was written by his son.  He said
that it was written by his son asking for transfer certificate.) Without
seeing my letter, which I request you to produce, I cannot say how long
after that (even approximately) I withdrew my grandson from the school. 
I don’t remember when I withdrew my grandson.  The letter, dated
24-9-51, was written by me.  But it was never replied. (A copy of this
letter is also produced by the school authorities.) I would not question
the date 31-12-52 as the date when my grandson left the school.  The
reason why I waited so long after my letter, dated 24-9-51, was that I
waited for things to improve and also told several times to Shri Guru. I
see that in No. 11 of the admission form my son had written “no” to the
question “Do You claim exemption from religious instructions?”.  I note
that my son in No. 6 of the same form has written “private study” in
answer to the question “name of the last school in which studied” while
the child had studied at the Model High School for some months.

10\. The Harijan Sewak Sangh started working in the province about the
year 1932 or 1933 and Vanwasi Sewa Mandal about 8 or 10 years after. I
personally started several schools in the locality both before and after
the Harijan Sewak Sangh started its work. I also gave land for Vidya
Mandir before the Harijan Sewak Sangh started functioning. I started 3
or 4 schools before the Harijan Sewak Sangh started, and two hostels for
poor boys in Narayanganj add Niwas.  I can supply their dates if you
desire them.  But I will have to refer to my records which are not here.

11\. The persons who reported to me that they became Christians because
of inducements and allurements and financial help did not speak to me
that they were subsequently cheated.  No case of cheating came to my
knowledge.  There were different categories of people.  Some who became
teachers became materially better off after conversion.  In case of
others to whom allurements and inducements were given and became
Christians their material conditions did not improve.  In some cases the
promises given were also not fulfilled.

12\. If we encourage tendencies of religious fanaticism, there is danger
of demanding separate Theocratic States.  
 

**No. 6**

(9-8-1955)

*Name*-J. E. Robinson.  
*Father’s name*-G. E. Robinson.  
*Occupation*-Headmaster, Christ Church High School, Jabalpur.

Ours is a Government-aided institution and we follow different Codes. 
It is an Anglo-Indian School.  Formerly since a long time our school had
to admit only up to 50 per cent non-European and non-Anglo-Indian
students, if they sought admission.  Now that has been enlarged and we
cannot refuse admission to any non-European and non-Anglo-Indian.  Our
school receives Government aid and the remaining expenditure is met by
fees and endowments and scholarships.  This school belongs to the Church
of India, Burma and Ceylon.  The head of that church, is the
Metropolitan Bishop Mukerjee of Calcutta.  The number of Christian
teachers is six, and that of nonChristian teachers is also six.  There
are 58 Christian and 145 Hindu students.  The non-Christian teachers
were and have been serving for a long time, one is as old as of 30
years.  The pay and other facilities given to Christian and
non-Christian teachers are the same.  We have English medium and pupils
come from well-to-do families.

2\. I know Ramprakash Sinha, who was in my school from 2-8-51 to
31-12-52.  The date of issuing transfer certificate was later than
31-12-52.

3\. We prepare students for Senior Cambridge and the Bible is taught as
an optional subject.  We do not teach the Bible to those who have not
taken it as a subject.  By question No. 11 in the admission form we do
not mean religious instructions being given to any student but we mean
to ensure that if a student takes Bible as a subject for examination,
his guardian has no objection to it.

4\. There are prayers every day at the beginning of the school.
Announcements of the day’s programme are made at the end of the
prayers.  It is not compulsory for every student to be present at the
prayers.  But it is compulsory for them to attend at the time of
announcements.  We have hostel accommodation where non-Christian boys
are also admitted.  Their number is 32 Christians and 44
non-Christians.  They get up at 6 o’clock and have to pray silently for
five minutes near their beds.  It is not a conducted prayer and each one
can pray as he likes.  At night, however, there is a conducted prayer
which is also not compulsory, but everybody attends it.  The prayer is
in an Anglican form which is adopted in our school, and is meant only
for Anglicans.  We did not reply to Beohar Ramprakash Sinha’s
grand-father's letter as I had to deal with the boy's father who was the
recognized guardian. I, therefore, met the father and explained him the
situation.  He said that he had no objection to his son attending the
church services on Sundays in the evening.  This I noted on Shri Beohar
Rajendrasingh’s letter.  I do not remember if I showed Beohar
Rajendrasingh’s letter to his son.  The implication contained in the
letter that the hostel Superintendent compels the non-Christian boys to
attend the church is not correct.

*To Shri Bakshi-*

5\. We do not get any help from outside, barring two scholarships meant
for Anglo-Indian students amounting to Rs. 13 each per month.  There is
no differential treatment from our side in the matter of admissions,
scholarships, and freeships among Anglo-Indian, Christian or
non-Christian students.  After I received the letter from Beohar
Rajendrasingh, I asked Shri Guru to explain the position to the boy’s
father.  The reason why I asked Shri Guru was that it was through him
that the boy was admitted to the school. I met the father.  I cannot say
if I had called him or not. I did not take anything in writing from the
father of the boy when he said that he had no objection because I took
it as a gentleman’s word.  There is no date on my comments (in red ink)
on Beohar Rajendrasingh’s letter. I can only say that I forgot to put
date there.  It must be shortly after the receipt of the letter.  Since
his father did not object, the boy continued to attend the church but I
cannot say how long.

6\. To the question whether there had been any non-Christian headmaster
in the school, Shri Shinde objects as irrelevant.  Sardar Bakshi insists
that the question be put and it is relevant. I allow it.  The answer is
that there has been, non-Christian headmaster of the school so far.  It
is a Christian school.  
 

**No. 7**

JABALPUR  
(9-8-1955)

*Name*-Daduram.  
*Father’s name*-Sobha.  
*Caste*-Gond.  
*Occupation*-Agriculturist.  
*Address*-Naighai, tahsil Jabalpur.  
*Age*-50 years.

I am Gond by caste and was a Choukidar in the service of Shri Toudon,
Thekedar, Railway Station, Jabalpur.  The Christians, Hansa, Peter and
Mohan, used to come to me and tell me that I should become their
Gurubhai, meaning thereby Christian and that I would be better off and
would be given some money also.  After some time one Padri by name
Albert came to me and took me, my wife and my son in a motor car to a
church and there we were baptised.  My Choti was also cut.  They asked
me to come to the church every Sunday.  They said “Tum Girja men adhe
hakdar rahhonge”.  When I went to my village and told my villagers the
story they said that I had become a Christian and, therefore, they would
have no caste connections with me.  The Christian Padri did not give the
promised help.  Therefore, and as I heard that Arya Samaj can reconvert
me to Hinduism, I went to Arya Samaj of Gorakhpur (Jabalpur) and became
reconverted to Hinduism.

*To Shri A. B. Shinde-*

I was a Gond and follow Gondi Dharma.  I became a Christian by ‘Lalach’
(allurement) but I would not change my religion now if such an offer
were made to me.  The information about Arya Samaj doing reconversion
work was given by Arya Samaj Pracharak.  
 

**No. 8**

(9-8-1955)

*Name*-Jalimsingh.  
*Father’s name*-Sheo Bux.  
*Occupation*-Carpenter, G.C.F., Jabalpur.  
*Age*-28 years.

The counsel for Christians, Shri A. B. Shinde, objects to the
examination of the witness.  Shri Bakshi says that he can be examined as
he is an important witness disclosing relevant matter.  As a matter of
compromise and agreement between Shri Bakshi and Shri Shinde, it is
decided that Shri Jalimsingh should give his statement in writing to
which both the counsels have no objection.  This is allowed.  
 

**No. 9**

*Name*-J. B. Hulasirai.  
*Father’s name*-H. W. Hulasirai.  
*Occupation*-Minister of the Methodist Church of Southern Asia.  
*Address*-Civil Lines, Jabalpur.  
*Age*-46 years.

I am the District Superintendent of Methodist Church of Southern Asia.
(Shri Bakshi, on the analogy of the previous witness Jalimsingh, objects
to his examination.) We had a Conference here technically called the
Institute of Youth Directors of Southern Asia and it lasted for a week
during April 1955.  Two delegates from Pakistan had also come to attend
it.  After meetings of the Institute were over, Shri Joshi, A.S.P.,
Jabalpur, came to me and asked me whether there was such a conference I
said ‘Yes.’  He then asked me the names and addresses of all the members
that had attended the meeting. I gave him the names and addresses of the
two Pakistani delegates as also two American Missionaries one from
Bombay and one from Delhi who had come.  But I refused to give the names
of others as they were all from India and Indian Nationals.  This is all
so far as Shri Joshi, A.S.P., is concerned.  I call this as harassment,
because one community, to my mind, is singled out for such enquiries. I
have received a report from Bergi from one of my workers that enquiries
regarding our activities were made from him also.  By ‘our activities’ I
mean activities of Indian Christians.

2\. I have Cot in my hand a booklet entitled ‘Arya Mitra’.  I have
marked passages in it, which are objectionable, specially where the Arya
Samaj programme is given.  The portion on page seven gives what they
want to do. I have marked it.  This booklet is styled ‘Arya Mitra-Isai
Mat Samikshank’ and is published from Lucknow.  The table of contents is
given at the beginning of it. I am handing over the book to the
Committee.

3\. During my 22 years work in several places in Madhya Pradesh. I have
found relations among Hindus, Christians and Mohammadans very cordial. 
It is only recently since about a year or two that we have found
opposition to our work and malicious propaganda against our community by
Arya Samajists.

*To Shri Bakshi-*

4\. When I refused to give to Shri Joshi the names of delegates from
India he agreed that I should give him the names of foreigners only. 
The Methodist Church has no headquarters in the world on international
basis.  All non-Catholic Churches are federated into the World Council
of Churches with their Headquarter at Geneva.

5\. I did not enquire from the Sub-Inspector of Police, Bergi, as to
what he had enquired from Prabhu Charandas and why. (Page 42 of the
Directory of Churches and Missions in India and Pakistan 1951 edition
shown to him.) These are the aims and objects of the National Christian
Council of which the Methodist Church is a member.  We subscribe to the
aims and objects given therein. I also endorse what is written there as
regards the head offices of the above Council at New York and England. 
There are foreign Missionaries of my Church working in Jabalpur. I
cannot give their number now but I can give a list tomorrow.  The
foreign Missionaries are here on invitation from the Church in India but
they are paid by the Church in.  America.  They can also be sent away by
the Church of India.  We keep a record of conversions made through our
Churches, but I cannot just now give the number of conversions since
1947. I will furnish the list to the Committee after some days. (The
certificate of baptism filed by Jalimsingh, shown to him.) The
certificate is from our Mission.  The Arya Samaj is here since I was a
child studying here in school.

6\. Prabhucharandas is one of our workers at Bergi.  His educational
qualifications are not high but as a worker he is very good.  Although
our ultimate aim is to convert every body to Christianity as
Commissioned by Our Lord, we do not convert persons coming to us by
inducement or with any other ulterior motive.  
 

**No. 10**

(10-8-1955)

*Name*-R. J. Macwan.  
*Father’s name*-Zinnabhai Macwan.  
*Occupation*-Teacher in Leonard Theological College, Jabalpur.  
*Address*-Leonard Theological College, Jabalpur.  
*Age*-60 years.

I am a Professor in the Leonard Theological College, where Christian
students are trained for Christian ministerial work. I associate myself
with activities of general welfare of the people, for instance, in
distributing milk-powder, contributing to flood relief fund, to Narad
Memorial.  About milk-powder, it is distributed from the railway station
to various agencies irrespective of caste, creed or religion.  We
contributed during 1954 to the Prime Minister’s Bihar Relief Fund, and
Rs. 101 to Narad Memorial Fund.

2\. We sent from time to time three batches of volunteers from among our
students to Bihar to help construction of houses and schools. (Witness
was assisted in reply by Dr. Thomas, Registrar of the College.)

3\. There is no truth in the allegation that in the distribution of
milk-powder any partiality is shown to the Christian agencies.  There is
no truth in the allegation which is maliciously brought against us that
milk-powder is distributed only to the Christians or Christian Doctors.

*To Shri Bakshi-*

4\. We had started a centre for social service at Bergi, but it has been
discontinued since last year as Bharat Sewak Samaj started working there
and we felt that there was no need for us to continue as they were doing
the same work.  We used to distribute one or two barrels of milk-powder
in a year according to the quantity received by us.  The choice of Bergi
was not for the reason that it had any Christian population or it bad
any predominantly backward population.

5\. Our students come from various Churches in India and their expenses
are met by the respective Churches or individuals or bodies that sent
them.  Government of India pays the expenses of two Koreans.  The
co-operating Churches, about seven in number, meet the salaries of the
staff.  There are seven foreign nationals, mostly Americans in the
college.

6\. (To the question by Shri Bakshi, “What is the total amount of
expenditure in your college?” Shri A. B. Shinde objects.  The question
being allowed the witness answers).  “I cannot answer this question
off-hand.  It is not possible for me to say even approximately the
figure of the last year.”

7\. In teaching comparative religion, we present other religions to our
students in an appreciative manner and not in derogative manner.  
 

**No. 11**

*Name*-Laxminarayan.  
*Father’s name*-Rajaram.  
*Occupation*-Fitter, Gun Carriage Factory, Jabalpur.  
*Address*-Gun Carriage  Factory Quarters, Jabalpur.  
*Age*-28 years.

*To Shri A. B. Shinde-*

I file a statement in writing.  The girls’ school is a Mission School
and not Government school.  Apart from the building and some monetary
help given by the factory the school is run by the Missionary.  No
control so far as teaching and education is concerned, is of the
factory.  
 

**No. 12**

*Name*-F. M. P. Singh.  
*Father’s name*-Phoolsingh.  
*Occupation*-Headmaster, Christian High School, Jabalpur.  
*Address*-401, Napier Town, Jabalpur.  
*Age*-39 years.

The Christian High School is run by two Churches-Methodist and
Disciples. This school was started in 1930.

2\. From 1930 till 20th September 1954 there was no complaint against
the school and no trouble arose.  Teaching of the Bible and Prayer were
compulsory for all students and no trouble arose before September 1954. 
From 23rd September 1954 compulsory Bible teaching has been abolished. 
We are holding the prayer as before.  The Bible teaching is compulsory
for the Christian students.  The Bible teaching was abolished because of
the trouble.  The trouble arose not only on account of Bible teaching
but also for other reasons.  Now the prayer, which is sung is that of a
general form and not of a Christian form.  In this general prayer, we do
not pray in the name of Christ but we pray in the name of God.  A copy
of a text of this prayer is submitted before the committee.  This draft
is in use since 23rd September 1954.  The former prayer used to be ex
tempore but it did not materially differ from this prayer except that it
ended in the name of Jesus Christ.  The five reasons for the trouble in
the school are-

> \(1\) suspension of a teacher,  
> (2) the teaching of the Bible,  
> (3) amount of amalgamated fund,  
> (4) alleged biased attitude of management against Hindu teachers and
> students, and  
> (5) alleged non-admission of non-Christians in the hostel.

One Saraf, a teacher in our school, was suspended for instigating the
boys to indiscipline and strike.  Shri Saraf, was on the staff for 10
years from 1944 to I7th September 1954.  He distributed copies of the
three typed sheets (shown to the Committee) and he was actually caught
red-handed distributing these.  Of the three sheets, two are addressed
to Shri Martin, the Manager of the School, the third one is not
addressed to any one. I will file copies of all the three sheets.  Shri
Saraf, was suspended on 17th September 1954 for six days and an enquiry
was held by the Director of Public Instruction. I am submitting a copy
of his report to the Committee.  The Director upheld the decision of the
school in suspending Shri Saraf, and told him that in case he resigns,
no action be taken by us against him.  We adopted the modifications
proposed by the Director of Public Instruction.

3\. There are at present nine Hindu and 10 Christian teachers in the
staff. Formerly we had 10 Hindu teachers and nine Christian teachers. 
The hostel is not run by the school but by the two Churches, one each. 
The school does not interfere in the internal management of the
hostels.  These hostels are meant for the school.

4\. Shri Saraf resigned the post and so no action was taken against
him.  But I understand that he has been given a Government job as
teacher.  There are many other High Schools, Non-Christian
non-Government, in which, so far as I know, there is not a single
Christian teacher.  In my school there are 44 per cent Christian boys
and 56 per cent non-Christian boys.  In other schools, which are above
mentioned I cannot exactly say how many Christian and non-Christian boys
are studying but I vaguely say that the number of Christian boys might
be by 5 per cent.

*To Shri Bakshi-*

5\. No warning was given by the Government to my school in connection
with the trouble in September 1954.  Shri Saraf went against the
discipline of the school inasmuch as instead of conveying to us the
grievances of the students he instigated them to go on strike. , Among
other things, the allegations on the question of compulsory teaching of
the Bible were correct.  But he did not make any representation about
this to the management.  There was no drama either played or rehearsed
depicting Hindu Godess Kali and Hindu Gods in a disparaging manner, and
extolling Christianity.  I did report against Ramnarayan Verma, Lalji
Prasad and Narendra of the 10th class alleging apprehension of breach of
peace by them.  In fact the first information report was not made by me.
The City Magistrate and then the police enquired of me and it was in
answer of that enquiry that I made the statement which I called report. 
Before the enquiry was made from me I had called upon the guardians
(parents) of these boys to furnish bonds for good behaviour of their
wards in the school.  I had written letters on the 27th September 1954
to the guardians of the boys, but before that also I had written to
their guardians to see me so that I may explain to them the
indisciplinary conduct of their wards. I have not got a copy of that
letter in the file that I have brought here. I shall furnish to the
committee a copy of that letter.  The question about the apprehension of
breach of peace of any kind by the students was not put to me by the
City Magistrate and I did not tell him in regard to that.  In fact there
was no apprehension of any breach of peace in my mind.  The students
apologised to the management of the school and they continued to be on
the school register.  They apologised orally for having taken part in
the strike.

I do not know nor did I make any enquiry whether Ganesh Prasad was
taking signatures from the students as mentioned by Janardhan or whether
he went to Janardhanprasad.  I never knew the incident of Janardhan
having been hit until I received a letter from Shankarlal, Janardan’s
father.  The letter was given to me on the 2nd although it bears no
signature. I called the class teacher Shri F. N. Mukerjee, who told me
that while Ganesh Prasad was playing Kabaddi he fell on Janardhan and
that is how Janardhanprasad was injured. I did not think it necessary to
enquire into the complaint of Shankar Lal Bhatt regarding the allegation
made in his letter that Ganesh Prasad had beaten his son because the
latter refused to sign a paper brought by Ganesh Prasad, as the matter
bad been reported to the Police.

To the question by Shri Bakshi that the province of the police was
limited to the enquiry of offence in which they can interfere and not in
the matter of school discipline like the one of taking signatures as
complained in that letter.

The witness answers-

> “As I had enquired from the school master that it was an accident and
> not a deliberate action on the part of Ganesh Prasad and further more
> when this case had been given to the police, I did not make any
> enquiry.”

Shri Bakshi asked “Is it a fact that you did not then realise that it
was necessary for you to make enquiry into the allegation of collecting
signatures by Ganesh Prasad on the paper as alleged by Shankarlal,
father of Janardhan?” (By ‘then’ I mean after the witness received the
report of this incident).

The witness replied-

> “I did not think it necessary after the report of the class teacher
> who was asked to enquire into the matter, by me.  I gave a letter to
> Ganesh Prasad addressee to his father.  In that letter I bad asked
> Ganesh Prasad’s father to come and see me in connection with this
> all.  He did not come. I gave the letter before I enquired from Shri
> Mukerjee.  There are no freeships or scholarships in our school. We
> don’t have physical feats of students played on Nag Panchami day. 
> There are some schools where Nag Panchami is celebrated like this. But
> in ours it is not so. The students did ask to celebrate feats-of-arms
> on the Nag Panchami day but I declined their request, because we did
> no such functions before.  My reason was not that this was associated
> with Hindu culture and practices.”

  
**No. 13**

*Name*-Shri Sohanlal.  
*Father’s name*-Shri Shaligram.  
*Occupation*-Contractor.  
*Address*-25811, Kariya Pathar, Jabalpur.  
*Age*-45 years.

I am B.A. (Hons.) and LL.B. I am Secretary of Gun Carriage Factory,
Jabalpur, Arya Samaj and Secretary of Vedic Sanskriti Raksha Samiti,
Jabalpur. I have submitted a supplementary memorandum and also answer to
the questionnaire. It is incorrect to say that the Activities of the
Arya Samaj are opposed to the Christian Community. The reason why such a
charge is levelled against us is that while before the advent of Arya
Samaj there were no reconversions to Hinduism, the Arya Samaj brings
about reconversion of persons willing to come back to that religion.

2\. I will file my statement in writing and hand over the same to the
Committee on the 14th when the Committee returns from Sagar for a few
hours.  
 

**No. 14**

*Name*-Dr.  E. Emanuel.  
*Father’s name*-Rajappan.  
*Occupation*-Professor and Vice-Principal, Leonard Theological College,
Jabalpur.  
*Address*-Leonard Theological College, Jabalpur.   
*Age*-58 years.

I was Secretary of the Madhya Pradesh Conference of Methodist Church of
Southern Asia.  My duties are very limited.  In fact they last for about
only eight days in a year when the Conference meets.  The Ministers are
appointed by the Bishopries in consultation with the District
Superintendent, which includes the Cabinet.  Our Conference has to do:
Evangelistic work.  We pass the character of every Director and if there
be any unworthy work of his, we severely reprimand him.  Inducements and
allurements will surely be reprimanded.  No case of such type came to
the notice of our Conference.

*To Shri Bakshi-*

2\. If there is any charge unworthy of a Christian Minister, it can be
communicated by anybody, and by even a non-Christian.  It is then
enquired into and that goes to the Conference Relations Committee, which
investigates the case, and then it comes before the Executive Session of
the Conference.  We take into consideration reports appearing in the
Press regarding the conduct of any Minister.

3\. All Ministers of the self-supporting Churches are paid out of
indigenous funds raised locally.  But in case of Bishops their salaries
are paid from Bishop Fund, which consists of money raised from all
countries including America.  I am telling this not as Secretary, but in
my personal capacity. I do not know how the non-supporting Churches are
financed.  We Indian Christians, feel that we should be sell-sufficient
and do not like to depend on aid from outside.  There is fraternal
relation between all the Methodist Churches in the world.  It extends to
financial assistance from one country to another, e.g., from India to
America and America to India.  
 

**No. 15**

*Name*-M. K. Banerjee.  
*Father’s name*-S. C. Banerjee.  
*Occupation*-Legal Practitioner, Jabalpur.  
*Address*-Napier Town, Jabalpur.  
*Age*-58 years.

I am a Hindu Brahmin.  I came to Jabalpur as a refugee from East
Pakistan and my son had been a student in Christ Church Boys’ High
School and is a student in St. Aloysius College, Jabalpur.  I have come
across no propaganda in the school or in the college with a view to
convert students to Christianity.  My son attended Bible Classes while
in school.

2\. During the whole course of education of my son in Mission schools, I
had not found that anything was being done with a view to convert him to
Christianity.

*To Shri Bakshi-*

3\. I am a staunch Hindu and I have always been taking care that my boy
is not influenced by any other religious teachings.  Majority of the
converts to Christianity are from poor classes and Aboriginals but I
know of some cases of people embracing Christianity who are rich and
scholarly.  
 

**No. 16**

*Name*-George Masih.  
*Father’s name*-Gangappa.  
*Occupation*-Painter, 506-Army Workshop.  
*Address*-Ranjhi, Jabalpur.  
*Age*-About 40 years.

I am a painter in the 506-Army Workshop, Jabalpur.  Formerly, I was a
sepoy in the Supply Depot working as an orderly to Lt. Noor Mohammad at
Gorakhpur., His neighbour, Capt. Morris, an Englishman, had an Ayah with
whom I fell in love.  The Captain told me that unless I became a
Christian he would see me dismissed. I then became a Christian, married
the girl and remained a Christian for ten years.  Two months ago, I went
to the Arya Samaj to have my *Shuddhi* ceremony and have come to my old
religion. I have been reconverted with my wife and children.  After I
had become a Christian, I had been to the Church only once or twice.  My
original name was Ningappa and when I became Christian my name was
changed to George Masih. I have, now, applied to the authorities of the
Workshop to have my name changed from George Masih to my old name
Ningappa.

*To Shri A. B. Shinde-*

2\. I did say to my wife before marriage that since we loved each other,
she should become a Hindu.  But she refused.  Capt. Morris had told me
that since I had spoilt his Ayah, I should become a- Christian,
otherwise he would see that I was dismissed.  For the last ten years I
had been persuading my wife to embrace my old religion but she was not
agreeing.  Lately, however, she happened to say herself that we should
embrace our own religion.  
 

**No. 17**

*Name*-Girja Kishore Kapoor.  
*Father’s name*-Shri Naval Kishore Kapoor.  
*Age*-52 years.  
*Occupation*-Merchant.  
*Address*-Gorakhpur, Jabalpur.

I am the Vice-President of the Madhya Pradesh Branch of Bharatiya
Jansangh here.  Yesterday I have handed over to the Committee a written
statement.  In my statement I have written nothing from my own self. I
have quoted passages from books and writings of the Christian
Missionaries.  References to pages have also been given.  The desire to
read Christian literature came to me when certain incident occurred
regarding Jharkhand and in Naga Hills, when our Prime Minister, Pandit
Jawaharlal Nehru, visited these places.  On going through their
literature I felt convinced that whatever colour they may give to their
activities of proselytization as being out of love, service, and if it
is not covered by these, out of discipline and good manners, the real
object is to create a political problem ultimately culminating in the
demand of a separate “Isaistan”.

2\. All my opinion is based on my study of the books and leaflets
published by the Missionaries. I have not personally heard any preacher
in Madhya Pradesh, or anywhere else advocating any such movement. I
produce the book entitled “Masihi Awaj” of June 1954 number, issued from
Raipur, at page 4 of which occurs:

""B©gmB©\`m\| H$s Bg hmbV \_\| ·\`m \`h \_wZmog\] Zht h¡ oH$ \[moH$ñVmZ
H$s Vah B©gmB©\`m\| H{$ ob\`{ ^r ohÝXwñWmZ Am¡a \[moH$ñVmZ Xm{Zm\|
\_wëH$m\| g{ O\_rZ b{H$a EH$ ñWmZ H$m\`\_ oH$\`m O\`m.''

3\. I also produce a leaflet entitled “Pap ki Duniya Men” published and
issued by Mission Press, Jabalpur.  I produce the following “Ap Anant
kal Kanha Bitawenge”, “Hinduism and Christianity”, “Tribal India
Speaks”, “Whole World is my Neighbour” (pp. 1035-1036), “Christianity
and the Asian Revolution” (pp. 91, 93, 280 and 281), “Communism and
Social Revolution in India” (p. 76), “Adivasi Mahasabha Visheshank” (p.
34), “Catholic Dharma ka Prachar” (particularly pp. 32 and 33),
“Hand-drawn map of proposed Jharkhand area”, “Catholic Directory for
1954 of India”.  (All -the books except the leaflets are to be
returned.)

*To Shri A. B. Shinde-*

4\. By “Demand for Jharkhand” my conclusion from the books that I have
read is that it is really a demand for “Isaistan”.  This is harmful to
the country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
