+++
title = "58 Statement made before the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee MALKAPUR (20-8-1955) No. 1"

+++
*Statement made before the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry
Committee*

MALKAPUR

(20-8-1955)

**No. 1**

*Name*-Baburao Gyanuji Navaghare.   
*Age*-36 years.  
*Address*-Mission Bungalow, Malkapur.

I am a born Christian.  I live in the compound of Missionary bungalow. 
The name of the Missionary is Lewellan from America. I have been
residing here from 1¼ years.  I do not know how to tell lies because God
has taught me to speak truth. I shall never tell lie before the
Commission.  I get Rs. 55 per month from Synod. I belong to the Alliance
Mission. I am a preacher here for the last 1¼  years. I preach in
Malkapur as well as in the countryside. I may have preached in 30 or 35
villages. I preach only what is in the Bible but I do not refer to any
other religion, their Gods and Goddesses.  In the course of my preaching
I never hold out any inducement of material gain.  This is entirely
repugnant to my religion.  In the Exodus, 17th chapter, 20 verse, it is
not said that one should not offer any inducement or bribes to people to
bring them to God.  The Missionaries do not take any part in politics. 
If they were to tell me anything of a subversive type, I will atonce
report to the Police. I am definitely of opinion that those who are
against our Government or our country, should not be allowed to stay in
India.  To the best of my knowledge and belief there is no Missionary
who preaches against the Government.  There may be about 40 individuals
young and old in Malkapur who are Christians. I have so far had no
harassment from the public or from police or from the other Government
officer’s.  For about 17 or 18 years I was at Akola and I am here for
the last 1¼ years.

At Akola I was a warden of the hostel and preacher.  There was no Hindu
boy in the hostel at Akola. I was educated in the Mission school at
Akola.  The Hindu boys in the Mission school are not given any
inducement of being sent to America or the marriage with Christian
girls.

*To Chairman-*

I do not tell anything against idol preaching.  What I preach is that
Jesus Christ is Saviour. I do not know how many foreign Missionaries are
there.  I get my pay from Synod. I file the pamphlet entitled Christian
and Missionary Alliance of India, Akola.  
 

**No. 2**

*Name*-Nathan Anandrao Hiwale.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Age*-48 years.  
*Occupation*-Pastor.  
*Address*-Malkapur.

I am Pastor of the Church of Malkapur for the last four months.  There
are 14 members and about 40, including children. I get Rs. 139 as my pay
from Synod. I was Pastor of the Church of Jalgaon.  That Church belongs
to Alliance Church, an American church. I was there for one year. 
Jalgaon is in East Khandesh. I was at Yeotmal Seminary as a student for
two years. I know Dr. Cline, Rev. Gaikawad, Rev. Samudre at Yeotmal. I
know Rev. Groff and Burkhard.  Miss Burkhalter is also at Yeotmal. I
know all these people from Yeotmal. I had no occasion to go to Umri or
Washim. I was at Yeotmal in 1952-53.  I do not know one Puranmal Misra
who had come to Yeotmal Church.  A student by name S. Kumar was also
studying in Seminar.  There were also two South-Indians both named
Vargese. I do not believe that S. Kumar would ever preach as fellows:-

“We must be one if divided how shall we conquer India?” I have never
heard any uttering of these words. I do not think that he has any such
idea as to bring about the union of Christians in order to rule India. 
The expression “Kingdom of heaven” occurring in Lords prayer has no
connection with mundane kingdom.  It is spiritual.  There were about 30
students when I was there. The staff consisted of about eight teachers. 
The number of students that I mentioned, includes girl students.  Rev.
Gaikawad is a man of principle and I do riot believe that he will ever
offer any inducement for conversion.  Dr. Cline is a very capable
preacher.  She never concerns about the worldly things. He preaches
about spiritual things. I know the Missionaries at Akola.  Offering of
inducement is repugnant to the teachings of Christian religion.  In my
tour of preaching at Malkapur and other villages I never offered any
inducement.  There have been no conversions as a result of my preaching
during the last seven or eight years.  The American Missionaries never
indulge in subversive activities or even speak about them.

*To Chairman-*

There are 14 communicant members in the Malkapur Church.  They pay
subscription.  My grand-father had become Christian. I cannot say of
what caste I was before. I have been in Church service during the last
ten years.  The synod is composed of members elected by the various
churches.  They may be members if they are elected by the churches. 
They means the foreign Missionaries.  In the Seminary, the course of
study includes Bible as text book.  There was no text book on Theology. 
As regards other religion there was a book written by Dr. Hume.  That
God whom I regard as God may or may not be accepted by adherents of
other religions but I believe that it is only Jesus God saved me.  
 

**No. 3**

*Name*-Ramrao Bhagwantrao Deshpande.  
*Age*-68 years.  
*Occupation*-Cultivator.  
*Address*-Malkapur.

Out of my six sons one by name Anant Ramrao embraced Christianity three
years ago.  He had learnt composing in a local Printing Press.  But it
was a precarious occupation.  Then he used to sell some cinema books,
etc.  Then he used to keep away from home for days together and behaved
in a queer way when I asked his conduct he was giving unsatisfactory
answer.  Then he disappeared.  He came to me during the last month twice
or thrice. As he had no employment nor had he any chance of getting it. 
After he became a Christian he was preaching Christianity.  He married a
Christian girl.

*To Mr. Tiwari of Mungeli-*

Besides 6 sons I have got 4 daughters.  My wife is alive.  Anant Ramrao
is about 30 years of age.  He became a Christian 3 years ago.  I learnt
about his conversion 2½ years ago.  No Christian preacher came to my
house.  I do not know any Christian preacher at Malkapur.  He lives at
Varangaon.  He was at Bodwad.  He studied up to VIII class.  He had not
lost his reason.  I did not teach him anything of Ramayan or Geeta.  I
cannot say the doctrine in Geeta.  My son told me that he was induced by
the Missionary to become a Christian, on the offer of material gain. 
This is said about 2 years ago.  My son did not tell me that the
Missionaries were offering him inducement and that he was to adopt
Christianity.  The boy was living in the house usually. I do not know
about his movement whether he was living in Missionaries’ house.  He
told me that he got married and also got children.  This was about a y I
ear and a half ago. I was never offered any inducement, nor was anybody
induced in my presence.  I cannot say how many people were induced to
become Christians.  I am absolutely ignorant about it, as to whether
anybody was induced.  My religion is Brahaman Dharm.  It is well-known
what Brahman Dharm is.  I know Brahman Dharm very well and there may be
others and I do not know, them.  There is no such book like Arya Samaj
Book or Bible in Brahman Dharm book.  My son is preaching Christian
religion.  I never heard his preaching.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
