+++
title = "05  THREE HISTORIAN WITH COMMUNIST GLASSES"

+++
THREE  
HISTORIAN WITH COMMUNIST GLASSES

Pandit Nehru's second book, *Glimpses of World History*, was first
published in India in 1934 and later on in England in 1939. The second
edition which was "revised and, to a considerable extent, rewritten",
carried a foreword from Krishna Menon who was mainly responsible for
getting it published in England. Krishna Menon says: "*Glimpses of World
History* is no mere narrative of events, valuable as the work is in this
respect, but also a reflection of the author's personality."[1](#1)

When Pandit Nehru rose to unrivalled power and position in India his
toadies recommended this book as a reliable reference work for advanced
students of history in our universities. As this book has been reprinted
many times, translated into several languages of India, and poisoned
successive generations of Indian intelligentsia, the ideas it lays down
about Communism and Soviet Russia are of particular interest and deserve
to be presented in some detail.

In this book, he dismisses non-Marxist schools of Socialism in a single
chapter while he devotes two chapters to Marx and Marxism. He is
infatuated with the "arresting personality" of Karl Marx,
notwithstanding the fact that most of Marx's contemporaries found him
intolerant, cantankerous, and abusive. Marx's labyrinthine work, *Das
Capital* (which, we are absolutely sure, he has never read), is for him
"a purely scientific work" in which "he dealt with the development of
history and economics dispassionately and scientifically, avoiding all
vagueness and idealism".[2](#2)

In his opinion, "Marx did not preach class conflict. He showed that in
fact it existed, and had always existed in some form or other. His
object in writing *Capital* was 'to lay bare the economic law of motion
of modern society', and thus uncovering these fierce conflicts between
different classes in society. These conflicts are not always obvious as
class struggles, because the dominant class always tries to hide its own
class character. But when the existing order is threatened, then it
throws away all pretence and its real character appears, and there is
open warfare between the classes. Forms of democracy and ordinary laws
and procedures all disappear when this happens. Instead of these class
struggles being due to misunderstanding or the villainy of agitators, as
some people say, they are inherent in society, and they actually
increase with better understanding of the conflict of interests."[3](#3)

He is very critical of the leaders of the Second International as
against those of the Third International or the Communist International
(Comintern). He says: "This International had many people in its ranks
who later took high office in their countries. Some used the labour
movement for their own advancement and then deserted it. They became
prime ministers and presidents and the like; they had succeeded in life;
but the millions who had helped them on and had faith in them were
deserted and left where they were. These leaders, even those who swore
by the name of Marx or were fiery syndicalists, went into parliament or
became well-paid trade-union chiefs, and it became more and more
difficult for them to risk their comfortable positions in rash
undertakings. So they quietened down, and even when the masses of the
workers, forced by desperation, became revolutionary and demanded
action, they tried to keep them down. Social democrats of Germany became
(after the War) president and chancellor of the Republic; in France
Briand, fiery syndicalist preaching the General Strike, became prime
minister eleven times and crushed a strike of his old comrades; in
England, Ramsay MacDonald became prime minister, and deserted his own
Labour Party which had made him; so also in Sweden, Denmark, Belgium,
Austria. Western Europe today is full of dictators and people in
authority who were socialist in their earlier days. But as they aged,
they mellowed down and forgot their old-time colleagues. Mussolini, the
Duce of Italy, is an old socialist; so also is Pilsudski, the Dictator
of Poland."[4](#4)

It did not occur to him that the leaders of the Third International had
also become presidents and prime ministers and had come to occupy "high
office". The communist leaders, of course, did not *desert* the working
class. They *destroyed* the working class movement itself by a mass
murder of its vanguard and by depriving it of the right to form trade
unions and go on strike against oppression and exploitation. Compared to
the communist dictatorships, the dictatorship of Mussolini and Pilsudski
sounded like liberal democracy. But for Pandit Nehru a dictator meant a
patriot who destroyed the communist Trojan horse in order to save his
country from Soviet imperialism.

Next, he comes to the Soviet Union. And this is what he writes about
Stalin's Russia of the thirties: "Russia today is a Soviet country, and
its government is run by representatives of the workers and peasants.
*In some ways it it the most advanced country in the world*. Whatever
actual conditions may be, the whole structure of government and society
is based on the principle of social equality".[5](#5) How did this
Russia happen to come into existence? Not as a result of a *coup d'etat*
staged by a traitorous gang of assassins equipped with plentiful German
gold. For Pandit Nehru, what happened in Russia in the November of 1917
was a "unique revolution" which he wishes to see spread over many more
countries. He says: "Apart from its effect on the war, the Revolution
was in itself a tremendous event, unique in world history. Although it
was the first revolution of its kind, it may not long remain the only
one of its type, for it has become a challenge to other countries and an
example for many revolutionaries all over the world."[6](#6) Again: "The
March Revolution had been a spontaneous unorganized one, the November
one had been carefully planned out. *For the first time in history the
representatives of the poorest classes, and especially of the industrial
workers, were at the head of a country*."[7](#7)

His opinion about Lenin, the author of a premeditated civil war and
slaughter on an unprecedented scale, is equally enthusiastic. "There
was," he says, "no doubt or vagueness in Lenin's mind. His were the
penetrating eyes which detected the moods of the masses; the clear head
which could apply and adapt well-thought-out principles to changing
situations; the inflexible will which held on to the course he had
mapped out, regardless of immediate consequences."[8](#8) Again: "It is
not many years since he died, and already Lenin has become a mighty
tradition, not only in his native Russia, but in the world at large. As
time passes he grows greater; he has become one of the chosen company of
the world's immortals. Petrograd has become Leningrad, and almost every
house in Russia has a Lenin corner or a Lenin picture. But he lives, not
in monuments or pictures, but in the mighty work he did, and in the
hearts of hundreds of millions of workers today who find inspiration in
his example and the hope of a better day."[9](#9)

Coming to the post-war period, he writes: "What are the outstanding
events, then, of these past fourteen years? First in importance, I
think, and most striking of all, has been the rise and consolidation of
the Soviet Union, the U.S.S.R. or the Union of Socialist and Soviet
Republics, as it is called. I have told you already something of the
enormous difficulties which Soviet Russia had to face in its fight for
existence. That it won in spite of them is one of the wonders of this
century. The Soviet system spread all over the Asiatic parts of the
former Tsarist Empire, in Siberia right up to the Pacific and in Central
Asia to within hail of the Indian frontier. Separate Soviet republics
were formed, but they federated together into one Union, and this is now
the U.S.S.R. This Union covers an enormous area in Europe and Asia,
which is about one-sixth of the total land area of the world. The area
is very big, but bigness by itself does not mean much, and Russia, and
much more so Siberia and Central Asia, were very backward. The second
wonder that the Soviets performed was to transform great parts of this
area out of all recognition by prodigious schemes of planning. *There is
no instance in recorded history of such rapid advance of a people. Even
the most backward areas in Central Asia have gone ahead with a rush
which we in India might well envy*."[10](#10)

He accepts the Leninist doctrine of an irreconcilable conflict between
"capitalism" and "socialism". He writes: "But the conflict has not ended
and the fight between the two rival forces-capitalism and socialism-goes
on. There can be no permanent compromise between the two although there
have been, and there may be in the future, temporary arrangements and
treaties between the two. Russia and communism stand at one pole, and
the great capitalist countries of Western Europe and America stand at
the other. Between the two, the liberals, the moderates, and the centre
parties are disappearing everywhere."[11](#11)

Talking about the rise of dictatorships in Europe, he says: *"I have not
included the Soviet Union in the above list of dictatorships, because
the dictatorship there, although as ruthless as any other, is of a
different type*. It is not the dictatorship of an individual or a small
group, but of a well-organised political party basing itself especially
on the workers. They call it the 'dictatorship of the
proletariat'."[12](#12)

Justifying this judgement, he quotes the communist theory in the
following words: "I have referred to democracy as 'formal' in the
preceding paragraph. The communists say that it was not real democracy:
it was only a democratic shell to hide the fact that one class ruled
over the others. According to them democracy covered the dictatorship of
the capitalist class. It was plutocracy, government by the wealthy. The
much-paraded vote given to the masses gave them only the choice of
saying once, in four. or five years, whether a certain person, X, might
rule over them and exploit them or another person, Y, should do so. In
either event the masses were to be exploited by the ruling class. Real
democracy can only come when this class rule and exploitation end and
only one class exists. To bring about this socialist State, however, a
period of the dictatorship of the proletariat is necessary so as to keep
down all capitalist and bourgeois elements in the population and prevent
them from intriguing against the workers' State. *In Russia this
dictatorship is exercised by the Soviets in which all the workers and
peasants and other 'active' elements are represented. Thus it becomes a
dictatorship of the 90per cent over the remaining 10 or 5 per cent*.
That is the theory. In practice the Communist Party controls the Soviets
and the ruling clique of communists controls the party. And the
dictatorship is as strict, so far as censorship and freedom of thought
or action are concerned, as any other. *But as it is based on goodwill
of the workers it must carry the workers with it. And, finally, there is
no exploitation of the workers or any other class for the benefit of
another*. There is no exploiting class left. If there is any
exploitation, it is done by the State for the benefit of all."[13](#13)

The Soviet Union was, in his eyes, the model of a peaceful nation. He
says: "Soviet policy with other nations was one of peace at almost any
cost, for they wanted time to recuperate, and the great task of building
up a huge country on socialistic lines absorbed their attention. There
seemed to be no near prospect of social revolution in other countries,
and so the idea of a 'world revolution' faded out for the time being.
With Eastern countries Russia developed a policy of friendship and
co-operation, although they were governed under the capitalist
system."[14](#14)

The Soviet Union had produced a "miracle" by solving her problem of
minorities. He writes:

"This Soviet solution of the minorities problem has interest for us, as
we have to face a difficult minority problem ourselves. The Soviets'
difficulties appear to have been far greater than ours, for they had 182
different nationalities to deal with. Their solution of the problem has
been very successful. They went to the extreme length of recognizing
each separate nationality and encouraging it to carry on its work and
education in its own language. This was not merely to please the
separatist tendencies of different minorities, but because it was felt
that real education and cultural progress could take effect for the
masses only if the native tongues were used. And the results achieved
already have been remarkable.

"In spite of this tendency to introduce lack of uniformity in the Union,
the different parts are coming far nearer to each other than they ever
did under the centralized government of the Tsars. The reason is that
they have common ideals and they are all working together in a common
enterprise. *Each Union Republic has in theory the right to separate
from the Union whenever it wants to, but there is little chance of its
doing so, because of the great advantages of federation of socialist
republics in the face of the hostility of the capitalist world*…

"These Central Asian republics have a special interest for us because of
our age-old contact with Middle Asia. They are even more fascinating
because of the remarkable progress they have made during the past few
years. Under the Tsars they were very backward and superstitious
countries with hardly any education and their women mostly behind the
veil. *Today they are ahead of India in many respects*."[15](#15)

But his greatest admiration is reserved for the First Five Year Plan in
implementing which Stalin murdered millions of peasants and workers. He
writes at length: "This Five Year Plan had been drawn up after the most
careful thought and investigation. The whole country had been surveyed
by scientists and engineers, and numerous experts had discussed the
problem of fitting in one part of the programme into another. For, the
real difficulty came in this fitting in... But Russia had one great
advantage over the capitalist countries. Under capitalism all these
activities are left to individual initiative and chance, and owing to
competition there is waste of effort. There is no co-ordination between
different producers or different sets of workers, except the chance
co-ordination which arises in the buyers and sellers coming to the same
market... The Soviet Government had the advantage of controlling all the
different industries and activities in the whole Union, and so it could
draw up and try to work a single co-ordinated plan in which every
activity found its proper place. There would be no waste in this, except
such waste as might come from errors of calculation or working, and even
such errors could be rectified far sooner with a unified control than
otherwise."[16](#16)

The wanton and wholly unnecessary starvation forced on the people of the
Soviet Union was, for him, only an evidence of "a spirit of sacrifice".
In his own words:

"For Russia, therefore, this building of heavy industries at a
tremendous pace meant a very great sacrifice. All this construction, all
this machinery that came from outside, had to be paid for, and paid for
in gold and cash. How was this to be done? The people of the Soviet
Union tightened their belts and starved and deprived themselves of even
necessary articles so that payment could be made abroad. They sent their
food-stuffs abroad, and with the price obtained for them paid for the
machinery. They sent everything they could find a market for: wheat,
rye, barley, corn, vegetables, fruits, eggs, butter, meat, fowls, honey,
fish, caviare, sugar, oils, confectionery, etc. Sending these food
articles outside meant that they themselves did without them. The
Russian people had no butter, or very little of it, because it went
abroad to pay for machinery. And so with many other goods...

"Nations have, in the past, concentrated all their efforts on the
accomplishment of one great task, but this has been so in times of war
only. During the World War, Germany and England and France lived for one
purpose only - to win the war. To that purpose everything else was
subordinated. *Soviet Russia, for the first time in history,
concentrated the whole strength of the nation in a peaceful effort to
build, and not to destroy, to raise a backward country industrially and
within a framework of socialism*."[17](#17)

But the credit for these "achievements" should, in his opinion, go to
Stalin, and Stalin alone. In his own words: "But the privation,
especially of the upper and middle-class peasantry, was very great, and
often it seemed that the whole ambitious scheme would collapse, and
perhaps carry the Soviet Government with it. It required immense courage
to hold on. Many prominent Bolsheviks thought that the strain and
suffering caused by the agricultural programme were too great and there
should be a relaxation. But not so Stalin. Grin-fly and silently he held
on. He was no talker, he hardly spoke in public. *He seemed to be the
iron image of an inevitable fate going ahead to the predestined goal*.
And something of his courage and determination spread among the members
of the Communist Party and other workers in Russia."[18](#18)

And Stalin's victims were only "capitalist elements and saboteurs".
According to Pandit Nehru, "But, as I have told you, this Five Year Plan
brought much suffering, and difficulties and dislocation. And people
paid a terrible price willingly and accepted the sacrifices and
sufferings for a few years in the hope of a better time afterwards; some
paid the price unwillingly and only because of the compulsion of the
Soviet Government. Among those who suffered most were the *kulaks* or
richer peasants. With their great wealth and special influence, they did
not fit into the new scheme of things. *They were capitalistic elements
which prevented the collective farms from developing on socialist
lines*. Often they opposed this collectivization, sometimes they entered
the collectives to weaken them from inside or to make undue personal
profit out of them. The Soviet Government came down heavily on them. The
Government was also very hard on many middle-class people whom it
suspected of espionage and sabotage on behalf of its enemies. Because of
this, large numbers of engineers were punished and sent to
gaol."[19](#19)

Now we know the truth about Stalin's collectivization and forced
industrialisation. We know that the people who resisted this
totalitarian tyranny were not capitalists or *kulaks* but millions of
ordinary workers and peasants who were given a bad name by Stalin so
that they could be liquidated. But Pandit Nehru's brain had been washed
by communist propaganda so systematically and so completely that he
became a willing victim of this semantic fraud and wanted to share his
own imbecility with his countrymen at large. And he did succeed to a
significant extent with the active assistance of the communist
propaganda machine which was fast multiplying inside India of the
thirties.[20](#20)

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Jawaharlal Nehru, *Glimpses of World History*, Lindsay
Drummond, London, 1949, p, vi. On p.2 of this book he congratulates his
daughter, Indira, in the following words: "The year you were born in -
1917 - was one of the memorable years of history.... In the very month
you were born, Lenin started the great Revolution which has changed the
face of Russia and Siberia. (Footnote added in 1993.)  

[2](#2a) Ibid., p. 539.

[3](#3a) Ibid., p. 547.

[4](#4a) Ibid., pp. 541-42.

[5](#5a) Ibid., p. 597. Italics added.

[6](#6a) Ibid., p. 638.

[7](#7a) Ibid., p. 649. Italics added.  

[8](#8a) Ibid. p. 643.  

[9](#9a) Ibid., p. 660.  

[10](#10a) Ibid. pp. 685-86. Italics added.

[11](#11a) Ibid., p. 787.  

[12](#12a) Ibid., p. 822. Italics added.

[13](#13a) Ibid., p. 824. Italics added.

[14](#14a) Ibid., pp. 847-48.

[15](#15a) Ibid., pp. 850-51. Italics added.

[16](#16a) Ibid., pp. 853-54.

[17](#17a) Ibid., p. 855. Italics added.  

[18](#18a) Ibid. pp. 855-56. Italics added.  

[19](#19a) Ibid., p. 857.  

[20](#20a) Pandit Nehru has seen the history of many countries including
India through the same communist glasses. He drops those glasses only
when he comes to the rise of Islam and its imperialism. (Footnote added
in 1993.)

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
