+++
title = "13  ELEVEN A FELLOW-TRAVELLER OF SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY-3"

+++
ELEVEN  
A FELLOW-TRAVELLER OF SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY-3

An year or so before Sardar Patel's death in December 1950, there was a
serious rift between him and Prime Minister Nehru on questions
concerning the foreign policy of India. The Sardar did not like the way
in which our foreign affairs were being conducted. He felt that our
foreign policy was too servile to the Soviet camp in spite of the
violent hostility which that camp had all along shown towards the
Government of independent India. But he could not or did not review this
policy in terms of any alternate international analysis of his own.
Pandit Nehru, on the other hand, pointed out repeatedly that the general
direction of India's foreign policy after the attainment of independence
was not new but only an application of the principles enunciated in the
various foreign policy resolutions which the Congress had passed in
pre-independence days. The Sardar was exasperated. And he made a. public
statement that he had never read a single foreign policy resolution of
the Congress. He added that these resolutions were passed always and
unanimously more in order to avoid controversy over what was an academic
issue for enslaved India than to denote any decisive national attitudes
towards international politics.

Pandit Nehru was himself aware all along that his foreign policy
resolutions were not being taken seriously by anyone except himself and
his communist co-conspirators. He admits: "This all-round support was
very gratifying, but I had an uncomfortable feeling that the resolutions
were either not understood for what they were or were distorted to mean
something else... These resolutions of mine were somewhat different from
the usual Congress resolutions; they represented a new outlook. **Many
Congressmen no doubt liked them; some had a vague dislike for them, but
not enough to make them oppose. Probably the latter thought that they
were academic resolutions, making little difference either way, and the
best way to get rid of them was to pass them and move on to something
more important."[1](#1) Yet after attainment of independence he insisted
that these resolution were binding on his Party and Government! This was
a typically communist operation.

At the same time, however, that confession on the part of Sardar Patel
conveyed the utter poverty of that mind which views international
affairs only in terms of narrow national interests, and refuses to
project national principles and power into the arena of international
conflicts. The indefensible indifference towards international politics
which led the Congress foreign policy into the Soviet trap through the
agency of Pandit Nehru is still the predominant national mood, in all
circles outside the communist camp. For people who happen to be admirers
of Pandit Nehru for personal or ideological reasons, the foreign policy
of India is safe in his hands. The only duty they assign to themselves
is to shout the slogans issued by him with ever increasing ardour, no
matter what the source of these slogans is and where they are leading
the nation. On the other hand, people who claim that they are opposed to
Pandit Nehru's foreign policy proclaim their difference only on matters
of detail, and endorse the general direction and the underlying
principles of that policy.

That is the tragedy of this nation. Either we are narrow-minded
nationalists who think that our quarrel with Pakistan, and Portugal, and
now with communist China, constitutes the whole of our concern for
foreign affairs, and that, for the rest, our policy should be 'a plague
on both (or all) your houses'; or we are followers of this or that
international camp; or we are empty-headed but self-righteous
simpletons. There is not a single voice which proclaims that we are an
ancient nation with our own *svadharma* which alone should be our
touchstone for settling our attitude towards international questions.
Our national *svadharma*, which lays down the lofty principle of
*Vasudhaiva kuTumbakam* (i.e., the whole world consists of my. kinsmen),
should be able to point out principles which can be our strength and
solace in a tormented and topsy-turvy world.

A greater tragedy is that hypocrisy in certain quarters which, while
they know fully well that Pandit Nehru's foreign policy has been and
still remains a copy-book exercise of the turns and twists of Soviet
foreign policy, yet refuse to subject that policy to a free and frank
public discussion. Not only that. These quarters go out of their way to
bestow fulsome praise on that foreign policy, and say that this policy
has raised the prestige of the nation. Their criticism is confined to a
clever footnote, namely that in spite of all its sweep and loftiness,
the policy has served no "practical interests" of the nation.

The need of the hour, if it is already not too late, is first to expose
Pandit Nehru's foreign policy fully and frankly for whatever it is. He
should be told that he is the Prime Minister of India and not a Soviet
satrap set up for superintending the interests of Soviet imperialism in
Asia and the world. He becomes temperamental and difficult only when he
is criticised in what he calls "a constructive" manner. The only way of
dealing with him firmly is to identify him and his ideology for what
they really are. Our people are still not denuded of patriotism in spite
of decades of drugging by Pandit Nehru and his communist camp-followers.
It was these people who rose and protested when Tibet was over-run, and
when our own territory was occupied. Nor has our people's sense of moral
values become blunted beyond repair in spite of a total absence of that
sense in their Government. Wherever the communists have committed crimes
against humanity, as in Hungary and Tibet, our people have registered a
powerful protest.

So, on the balance, it is not our people who have failed their political
leaders. On the contrary, it is our political leaders who have failed
their people. There is so much of self-seeking or party patriotism among
even the top leaders of all political parties that they have no devotion
or patriotism to spare for the nation. Session after session of our
Parliament has witnessed broadsides against the "betrayals by Krishna
Menon". Session after session of our Parliament has seen Pandit Nehru
hitting out in all directions in defence of his indefensible Defence
Minister. Yet no member of Parliament has had the patriotic urge or the
moral courage to stand up and point out an accusing finger at this
villain of the piece. If India is ever undone, it will be because
India's political leaders are more afraid of losing their leadership
than of losing their country.

And in this surging sea of cowardice, cynicism, and hypocrisy, Pandit
Nehru comes out easily as the only man who has had the courage of his
convictions. He became a communist quite early in his political career.
He stuck to that creed even when he could not have his way in the
Congress. But as soon as his opportunity came, he translated his
convictions into concrete actions. For others, convictions have been
like cosmetics, and their brand of powder and puff has changed with the
change in political fashion. Of course, the fashion has always been set
by Pandit Nehru.

It may be said that courage is often combined with stupidity. Pandit
Nehru may be stupid in the sense that he could never think a thought of
his own all through his life. And his courage may be in a very large
measure the by-product of cowardice on the part of other political
leaders. He has, however, been courageous in yet another sense. Surely
it requires a lot of courage to imbibe other people's ideas at short
notice and proclaim them publicly without looking into the logic of
one's own past pronouncements. He has always exhibited this courage
whenever the call has come to him from Moscow.

We have seen how he was denouncing all the "enemies" of the Soviet Union
from 1927, when he visited his Fatherland, to 1934, when he completed
his exercise in world history, in spite of the fact that the Soviet
press had denounced him in strong terms. He must have thought that he
had caught up with the Comintern line. But, unfortunately for him, the
Comintern was ahead of him once again. The Seventh Congress of the
Comintern, held in Moscow during July/August 1935, proclaimed the
strategy of "United Front" which meant that the communist parties
everywhere were to join hands with their erstwhile enemies - the Social
Democrats and the Nationalists - in order to "stem the rising tide of
Fascism".

The earlier strategy of the Comintern had resulted in the victory of
Nazism in Germany, and the strengthening of Japan in the Far East. Both
of them now threatened the Soviet Union with containment. So the Soviet
foreign policy underwent a volte-face. In May 1935, the Soviet Union
signed the famous Franco-Soviet Pact. An year later, the
Soviet-Czechoslovak Pact was signed. The Soviet Union was out to
cooperate with the Western nations in a bid to save itself from the
Frankenstein it had raised. The Comintern hammered out a new strategy
suited to the new situation in which the Soviet Union now found itself.

Delivering his Main Report to the Comintern Congress, Comrade Dimitroff
said: "How can fascism be prevented from coming to power and how can
fascism be overthrown when it has come to power? *The first thing that
must be done, the thing with which to begin, is to form a united front,
to establish unity of action of the workers in every factory, in every
district, in every region, in every country, all over the
world*."[2](#2) Coming to India, he proposed: "In India the communists
have to support, extend and participate in all anti-imperialist mass
activities, not excluding those that are under national reformist
leadership."[3](#3)

Pandit Nehru was released from jail in September 1935. He immediately
went to Europe. The ostensible purpose was to attend to his sick wife.
But the real purpose was to "refresh" his mind once more. And he did get
"refreshed" very soon. By the time he returned to India in early 1936 to
preside over the Lucknow Congress held in April that year, he was
completely converted to the new Comintern line. He himself says: "I was
full at the time of the idea of Popular Fronts and joint Fronts, which
were being formed in some European countries. In Europe, where class and
other conflicts were acute, it had been possible for this cooperation on
a common platform. In India these conflicts were still in their early
stages and were completely overshadowed by the major conflict against
imperialism. *The obvious course was for all anti-imperialistic forces
to function together on the common platform of the Congras*."[4](#4)

Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya, the official historian of the Congress,
reports: "When he had presided over the Lahore Session in 1929, he
stated in his Presidential address that he was a Socialist and
Republican. When seven years later he presided over the Lucknow Session
(April, 1936) he reached the logical fulfilment of socialism-namely,
communism."[5](#5)

Once again he presented his famous foreign policy resolutions to the
Congress. He writes: "On the eve of the Lucknow Congress we met in
Working Committee, and I was pleased and gratified at the adoption by
this Committee of a number of resolutions that I sponsored and which
seemed to give a new tone and a more radical outlook to the
Congress."[6](#6)

The first resolution sent greetings to the World Peace Congress
announced by the World Committee for the Struggle Against War and
Fascism-a regular communist front. It said: "This Congress, having
considered the invitation of Monsieur Romain Rolland, Honorary President
of the World Committee for the Struggle Against War and Fascism, to
participate in the World Congress for Peace to be held in Geneva in
September next, conveys its greetings to the organisers of the Peace
Congress and its assurances of its full sympathy and cooperation in the
great work of ensuring peace in the world based on national and social
freedom. The Congress is convinced that such a peace can only be
established on an enduring basis when the causes of war are removed and
the domination and exploitation of nation by nation is ended."[7](#7)
Krishna Menon was selected by Pandit Nehru to represent the Indian
National Congress at this communist rally. Incidentally, the word
"peace" means "Soviet Foreign Policy" in the *Glossary of Marxist Terms*
published from Moscow.

He was also able to persuade the Lucknow session to pass a resolution
for setting up a Foreign Department of the A.I.C.C. The resolution read:
"The Congress authorises and directs the Working Committee to organise a
Foreign Department of the A.I.C.C. office to work under the general
superintendence of the General Secretary and with such special staff as
may be necessary, with a view to create and maintain contacts with
Indians overseas, and with international, national, labour and other
organisations abroad with whom cooperation is possible and is likely to
help in the cause of Indian freedom."[8](#8) The Foreign Department was
immediately manned by two communist stalwarts - Z.A. Ahmed and K.M.
Ashraf.

Now he could get regular communist drafts from his comrades in the
Foreign Department. Next year, he was elected president of the Faizpur
Congress held in December 1936. A majority of Congressmen wanted Sardar
Patel to assume this office. But the Sardar had to withdraw under
pressure from Gandhiji and Pandit Nehru was elected without a contest.
And he continued to carry forward his communist game inside the
Congress.

Resolution No. II of the Faizpur session congratulated Krishna Menon in
the following words: "The Congress having considered the report of Shri
V.K. Krishna Menon on the World Peace Congress, records its appreciation
of the part he took in this Congress as its representative. It supports
wholeheartedly the objective of the Peace Congress to ensure world peace
by removing the causes of war and offers its full cooperation to it in
this urgent and vital task. The National Congress will willingly
associate itself with the organization which the Peace Congress has
established in this behalf. The Congress, however, wishes to emphasise
that imperialism itself is a continuing cause of war and its elimination
is essential in the interests of world peace. The President is
authorised and directed to take necessary steps in this behalf."[9](#9)

Resolution No. IV toed the communist line in Spain where General Franco
was putting up a heroic fight to save his country from becoming a colony
of Soviet Russia. It said: "The Congress has followed with the deepest
sympathy and anxiety the struggle that is going on in Spain between the
people of Spain and a military group aided by foreign mercenary troops
and Fascist Powers in Europe. The Congress realises that this struggle
between democratic progress and Fascist reaction is of great consequence
to the future of the world and will affect the future of imperialism in
India. The Congress has noted without surprise that in this struggle,
the policy of non-intervention followed by the British Government has
been such as to hamper in many ways the Spanish Government and people in
fighting the Fascist rebels, and has thus in effect aided these rebels
who are being openly backed and helped by the Fascist Powers. This
Congress, on behalf of the people of India, sends greetings to the
Spanish people and the assurance of their solidarity with them in this
great struggle for liberty."[10](#10)

Soviet Union's single-minded policy in Europe now was to draw both
France and Great Britain into an entente against Nazi Germany and
Fascist Italy, both of which were strongly opposed to Communism. To this
end, the Soviet Union was trying to precipitate "Popular Front"
governments in Britain and France. The game was "dialectical" as in the
case of every game the communists play. A "Popular Front" government
meant a government in which the communist party of that country
participated directly or which depended on communist support. Such a
government was expected to become increasingly an instrument of the
Soviet Government, and, at the same time, try to capture complete power
in slow stages by internal subversion.

The game succeeded to quite an extent in France where Leon Blum got
deeply entangled with the Communist Party of France and the Soviet
Foreign Office. France was to pay dearly for this policy in 1939-40 when
Stalin ganged up with Hider and the Communist Party of France worked
actively for the defeat of French armies. But Great Britain refused to
walk into the trap. There was no prospect of a "Popular Front"
government in London. And Great Britain's price for a pact with Soviet
Russia was that the Kremlin should withdraw her communist fifth-columns
from every part of her far-flung empire. Soviet Russia felt furious. She
decided to force Great Britain into a "Popular Front" government and a
British-Soviet pact with the help of her communist hirelings. They were
directed to agitate everywhere against the Chamberlain Government. The
standard plank of this agitation was that the Chamberlain Government was
conspiring with the Axis Powers - Germany, Italy, and Japan - for a war
against the Soviet Union.

The Communist Party of India decided to start such an agitation in
India. But, meanwhile, the Indian National Congress had formed
governments in several provinces. Pandit Nehru had opposed this decision
of the Congress after his return from Europe. But he could not prevail
over the "reactionaries" of the Congress Right. So he consoled himself
by injecting the communist line into another foreign policy resolution
which was passed by the Faizpur Congress.

This resolution was the most thinly camouflaged communist pill swallowed
by the Congress. It said: "The Congress has drawn repeated attention in
the past to the danger of imperialist war and has declared that India
can be no party to it. Since the last session of the Congress the crisis
has deepened and fascist aggression has increased, the fascist powers
forming an alliance and grouping themselves together for war with the
intention of dominating Europe and the world and crushing political and
social freedom. The Congress is fully conscious of tile necessity of
facing this world menace in cooperation with the progressive nations and
peoples of the world, and especially with those peoples who are
dominated over and exploited by imperialism and fascism. In the event of
such a world war taking place, there is grave danger of Indian manpower
and resources being utilised for the purposes of British imperialism,
and it is therefore necessary for the Congress to warn the country
against this and prepare it to resist such exploitation of India and her
people. **No credits must be voted for such a war and voluntary
subscriptions and war loans must not be supported and all other war
preparations resisted."[11](#11)

In February 1937, Pandit Nehru issued an appeal for aid to the communist
armies in Spain: "We have already expressed our deep sympathy and
solidarity with the Spanish people in many ways. The National Congress
has given eloquent expression to the Indian people's voice and feelings.
But that is not enough. We must translate our sympathy into active and
material help. We are poor and hungry folk, crushed under many burdens,
dominated by an arrogant imperialism, and we struggle ourselves for
freedom. But even in our poverty and misery we feel for our Spanish
comrades and we must give them what aid we can, however little this
might be. We can help in sending them medical supplies and food. I trust
it will be possible for us to arrange to send grain and other food
supplies, and I appeal to those who deal in such foodstuffs for their
cooperation in this matter. *In London our countrymen have formed a
Spain-India Committee with Syt. V.K. Krishna Menon as chairman*. **I
suggest that we might send money to them for the purchase and despatch
of medical supplies. I trust that contributions for this purpose will be
forthcoming from all parts of the country."[12](#12)

And, finally, at the Haripura Congress in February 1938, he repeated his
lies against Great Britain in yet another resolution which read:

"In view of the grave danger of wide-spread and devastating war which
overshadows the world, the Congress desires to state afresh the policy
of Indian people in regard to foreign relations and war.

"The people of India desire to live in peace and friendship with their
neighbours and with all other countries, and for this purpose wish to
remove all causes of conflict between them. Striving for their own
freedom and independence as a nation, they desire to respect the freedom
of others and to build up their strength on the basis of international
cooperation and goodwill. Such cooperation must be founded on a world
order and a free India will gladly associate itself with such an order
and stand for disarmament and collective security. But world cooperation
is impossible of achievement so long as the roots of international
conflict remained and one nation dominates over another and imperialism
holds sway. In order, therefore, to establish world peace on an enduring
basis, imperialism and the exploitation of one people by another must
end.

"During the past years there has been a rapid and deplorable
deterioration in international relations, fascist aggression has
increased and an unabashed defiance of international obligations has
become the avowed policy of fascist powers. British foreign policy, in
spite of its evasions and indecisions, has consistently supported the
fascist powers in Germany, Spain and the Far East and must, therefore,
largely shoulder the responsibility for the progressive deterioration of
the world situation. The policy still seeks an arrangement with Nazi
Germany and has developed closer relations with rebel Spain. It is
helping in the drift to imperialist world war.

"India can be no party to such an imperialist war and will not permit
her man-power and resources to be exploited in the interests of British
imperialism. Nor can India join any war without the express consent of
the people. **The Congress, therefore, entirely disapproves of war
preparations being made in India and large-scale manoeuvres and air-raid
precautions by which it has been sought to spread an atmosphere of
approaching war in India. In the event of an attempt being made to
involve India in a war, this will be resisted."[13](#13)

It was now fully clear what Pandit Nehru meant by what he called an
"imperialist war". As a convinced communist he had come to believe that
Britain was conspiring with Nazi Germany to unleash a war against the
Soviet Union. But only an idiot or a communist could believe that. For,
an year later, it was not Britain but Pandit Nehru's Fatherland, the
Soviet Union, which signed a pact with Nazi Germany and left the latter
free to unleash war in Europe.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) *An Autobiography*, p. 167. Italics added.  

[2](#2a) G. Dimitroff, *The United Front*, International Publishers, New
York, 1938, pp. 30-31. Italics added.

[3](#3a) Ibid., p. 68.

[4](#4a) *The Unity of India*, p. 96.

[5](#5a) Pattabhi Sitaramayya, *The History of the Indian National
Congress*, Padma Publications Ltd., Bombay, 1947, Vol. II, p. 8.

[6](#6a) *The Unity of India*, p. 98.

[7](#7a) *The Background of India's Foreign Policy*, pp. 49-50.  

[8](#8a) Ibid., p. 49.  

[9](#9a) Ibid., p. 50.  

[10](#10a) Ibid., p. 51.

[11](#11a) Ibid., pp. 51-52.  

[12](#12a) *The Unity of India*, pp. 266-67. Italics added.

[13](#13a) *The Background of India's Foreign Policy*, pp. 55-56.
Leaders of the Communist Party of the Great Britain, R. Palme Dutt and
Ben Bradley, had written an article, 'The Anti-Imperialist People's
Front in India', in *Labour Monthly* of March 1936. Pandit Nehru's
biographer, Sarvepalli Gopal, says that "this article was written after
the talks with Jawaharlal at Lausanne and stated what Palme Dutt and
Bradley believed to have been accepted by Jawaharlal as the common
programme for which he will strive" (*Jawaharlal Nehru A Biography*,
Volume One, OUP, 1976, pp. 203-04). Pandit Nehru was in Lausanne,
Switzerland, during the last days of his wife's illness. Kamala Nehru
died on February 28, 1936. (Footnote added in 1993.)

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
