+++
title = "01 THE CALL TO JAPAN"

+++



THE first attempt to carry the Gospel to Japan was made by Christopher Columbus.

Nearly two centuries before the discoverer of America set out upon his memorable voyage, a Venetian merchant, who had recently been taken captive in a naval battle, was confined in a prison of Genoa, the city that afterwards became the birthplace of Columbus. The prisoner, who had spent many years in travelling through distant lands, was wont to relieve the tedium of confinement by telling his companions about the many strange things he had seen and heard. Among those that listened to his stories was a prisoner from Pisa, a man who had already written a few books and who saw that these tales furnished excellent material for another. It was at his request that Marco Polo, the Venetian merchant, dictated the narrative that gave to Europeans much more knowledge of the Far East than they had before possessed. One day he spoke as follows of a country which he himself had not visited, but of which he had often heard during his sojourn at the court of Kublai Khan:

"Zipangu is an island towards the cast in the high seas, fifteen hundred miles distant from the Continent, and a very great island it is. The people are white, civilised, and well-favoured. They are idolaters and are dependent on nobody. And I can tell yon, the quantity of gold they have is endless; for they find it in their own island, and the king does not allow it to be exported. Moreover, few merchants visit the country, because it is so far from the mainland, and thus it comes to pass that their gold is abundant beyond all measure.

"I will tell you a wonderful thing about the palace of the lord of that island. You must know that he hath a great palace which is entirely roofed with fine gold, just as our churches are roofed with lead, insomuch that it would scarcely be possible to estimate its value. Moreover, all the pavement of the palace and the floors of its chambers are entirely of gold, in plates like slabs of stone a good two fingers thick; and the windows also are of gold so that altogether the richness of this palace is past all bounds and all belief. They have also pearls in abundance, which are of a rose colour, but fine, big, and round, and quite as valuable as the white ones.

.       .       .       .       .       .       .

"Now you must know that the idols of Cathay and of Manzi and of this island are all of the same class. And of this island as well as elsewhere, there be some of the idols that have the head of an ox, some have the head of a pig, some of a dog, some of a sheep, and some of divers other kinds. And some of them have four heads, whilst some have three, one growing out of either shoulder. There are also some that have four hands, some ten, some a thousand. And they do put more faith in those idols that have a thousand hands than in any of the others. And when any Christian asks them why they make their idols in so many different guises and not all alike, they reply that just so their forefathers were wont to have them made, and just so they will leave them to their children, and these to after generations, and so they will be handed down for ever. And you must understand that the deeds ascribed to these idols are such a parcel of deviltries as it is best not to tell." \(*Yule's Translation.\)*

It has been doubted whether Columbus had read Marco Polo's book before he started upon his voyage of discovery. One reason for supposing he had done so is that in the Biblioteca Colombina at Seville is a copy of the first Latin printed edition \(1485\) with notes in what is thought to be his handwriting. At all events, it was only through Polo that information concerning Japan had reached Europe; and thus, either directly or indirectly, he had an important part in exciting the zeal of Columbus for his great undertaking. Since Zipangu was the most eastern of all the lands described by the Venetian, Columbus believed that it would be the first one reached in sailing westward from Europe. The gold with which it was said to abound did not furnish the sole incentive for seeking the island: Columbus hoped to extend the blessings of Christianity to this and other lands that he might discover. When he came to write an account of his expedition, he said in the prologue addressed to his royal patrons:

"The Grand Khan of the Mongols and his predecessors had many times sent to Rome asking that doctors of our holy faith be sent to instruct them. The Holy Father had never provided these teachers; and thus many people perished while believing in their idols and imbibing the doctrines of perdition. Therefore Your Highnesses, as Catholic Christians and princes, lovers and promoters of the holy Catholic faith, and enemies of the sect of Mahomet as of all idolatries and heresies, determined to send me, Christopher Columbus, the said parts of India that I might see the said princes with their people and lands, might discover the nature and disposition of all, and might devise means to be taken for their conversion to our holy faith."

Thus we see that, whatever other considerations may have had weight with Columbus, the missionary motive was professedly, and we may believe actually, the most prominent in his mind and in that of his patrons.

The people if the regions reached on the first voyage showed so man signs of poverty that Columbus could not consider them the inhabitants of Zipangu. They possessed, however, some gold ornaments, and the signs made by them when asked the place from which these were obtained nourished the hope that the land of golden palaces was not far away.

Six of the natives whom Columbus brought back, and whom he supposed to be Asiatics, were baptised with great ceremony at Barcelona; King Ferdinand, Queen Isabella, and Prince John acting as sponsors. The Pope appointed a Benedictine monk to be vicar apostolic in the newly discovered lands, and eleven members of the same order accompanied Columbus on his second voyage. The queen gave into their care some sacred vessels and vestments taken from her own chapel. Although the opinion of Columbus that Cuba was Cathay gained acceptance, Zipangu was believed to be near that land and so was doubtless included in the thought of those who made these provisions for the extension of their religion to the regions beyond the western ocean.

It was half a century later when Europeans really reached Japan. Though it is not certainly known who were the first to do this, the honour is usually ascribed to some Portuguese mariners, who in 1542 were driven thither from the Chinese coast by a storm. Mendez Pinto, in an account of his travels, that he prepared near the close of his life, claimed the discovery for himself and his companions; but there are many reasons for doubting the truth of his statements.

To Francis Xavier\* was given the privilege of leading the first company of missionaries to Japan. The place that this remarkable man holds in ecclesiastical history as the" Apostle to Japan" justifies a somewhat extended notice of his life. He was born at the castle of Xavier in Navarre, April 7, 1506. At the age of eighteen he entered the University of Paris, where he became acquainted with Ignatius Loyola. He was one of the six who united in forming the Society of Jesus. War and other obstacles having interfered with the original plans of these associates, who had hoped to go to the Holy Land in order to attempt the conversion of the Mohammedans, they spent some time in Italy, teaching, preaching, working in hospitals, and completing the organisation of their society. In addition to their former vows of chastity and poverty, they now took that of obedience, binding themselves to perform whatsoever the reigning pontiff might command. They held themselves ready to go forth among Turks, heathen, or heretics, as he should direct, and this they were to do without hesitation or delay, as also without question, condition, or reward.

The King of Portugal applied to the Jesuits for missionaries who should seek the conversion of the nations that had lately been conquered in India. At first Rodriguez and Bobadilla were selected for this service; but the sudden illness of the latter made it impossible for him to go at once. Loyola, who was also ill, called Xavier to his bedside, and in the name of the Pope commanded him to set out the next day for Portugal in order to make arrangements for the mission. Rodriguez had already started, and Xavier was to follow in the company of the Portuguese ambassador. The few hours at his disposal gave him barely time to repair his worn garments, say farewell to his friends, and receive the Pope's blessing.\*

Rodriguez \(who is not to be confounded with others of the same name who afterwards went to Japan\) finally remained in Portugal; but Xavier with two other Jesuits proceeded to Goa, which was reached May 6, 1542, In this city, the capital of the Portuguese possessions, he began those missionary labours that have made his name famous. Two classes of people claimed his attention—the Europeans and the natives. It would be hard to say which had sunk lower in the scale of morals. He visited patients in the hospital, preached to the Portuguese, distributed alms, and gave much time to the instruction of children. It was hard for him to remain quiet long in one place, and he visited various parts of India, besides many of the Spice Islands. One of his letters describes his methods of preaching to those natives who were nominally Christians. He says:

"Their native language is the Malabar; mine, the Basque, They do not understand mine nor I theirs. Accordingly I brought together the wisest among them and sought out some men who knew both tongues. After that, in numerous sessions and with great labour, we wrote out the forms of prayer; first, that of the Sign of the Cross accompanied with the Confession of the Three Persons of the Trinity; then the Creed, the Commandments, the Pater Noster, Ave Maria, Salve Regina, and the Confiteor; translating all from Latin into the Malabar language. I learned these formulas by heart, and then, a bell in my hand, I went out collecting all whom I could, children and adults, in the place where I was staying. Two times a day for a month I taught them the prayers. What the children learned they were to teach \(it soon became a regular institution\) to their lathers and mothers, to all the people in their houses, and to their neighbours. Sundays I assembled all the inhabitants of the place, men and women, old and young, to say the prayers in their own language. They manifested great pleasure in this exercise. They came very gladly and forthwith recited aloud the Creed in their own tongue, commencing with the confession of one only God in three Persons First I uttered the words, and all followed. At the close of this recitation of the Creed, I repeated it myself alone, article by article, stopping after each one. I made them observe that to be a Christian meant nothing else than firmly and without hesitation to believe the twelve articles. Then, since they declared themselves to be Christians, I demanded concerning each article if they firmly believed it, at which the men and women, old and young, with their hands crossed upon their breasts, would always answer, 'Yes,'"

After describing how he taught the prayers and Commandments, Xavier continued:

"In the country where I now am the multitude of those who become converts to the faith of Jesus Christ is so great that my arms often grow weary with baptising, and I am unable to speak any longer. . . I have baptised a whole village in a day."

So much has been written about the success of Xavier's work in India that a reader of his letters is surprised to find that he was greatly disappointed over the results. In 1548 he wrote to a fellow-worker urging him to baptise as many children as possible, for, asked he, "Do you not see that few Indians, white or black, will go to paradise, if one excepts the children of fourteen years and under who die in ignorance of evil?" The next year he wrote to Loyola:

"The experience that I have of these countries shows me clearly that there is no possible hope of perpetuating the Society here by means of the native Indians. Christianity itself will survive only so long as we remain and live here—we who have already come or those whom you shall send."

In a letter to Rodriguez he said:

"From the experience I have had I see only one way and means by which the service of our Lord can be greatly promoted in India. It is this. Whoever may be governor of India, let the King give him a letter of introduction saying, 'In India there are none of the ministers of religion \(here the King should mention the Society of Jesus first of all\) on whom I so much depend as I do upon you for the extension in those countries of the faith of Jesus Christ, and therefore I command you to make the Island of Ceylon Christian and to cause the Christian community of Cape Comorin to increase. . . . Let him say to the governors, 'I swear that unless you clear my conscience by making many Christians in India, I will cause you on your return to Lisbon to be arrested and put in irons. You will remain long years in prison and I will confiscate all your property. ' Let the King talk thus to the governors. Let him then give his orders, and let all disobedience and neglect be severely punished. Then there will be many Christians gained in this country; but there will not be in any other way."

These and many similar expressions showing how much Xavier depended upon political power for the promotion of religious ends, help us to see why he and his successors, on going to Japan, sought with so much earnestness the conversion of the Shogun and the feudal lords.

It was while Xavier was feeling so discouraged over the condition of affairs in India and considering whether he should go elsewhere, that his thoughts were turned toward Japan. He was in Malacca when there came to him a young Japanese who in Xavier's letters is called Anjiro.\* The main features of this man's story may best be told by giving the letter which he wrote November 29, 1548, to the Society of Jesus:

"Paul of Japan sends to Father Ignatius and to other Fathers and Brothers of the Society of Jesus the peace, grace, and love of Jesus Christ that He may be glorified and the holy faith extended.

"It had pleased Him who chose me from my mother's womb \(coming, as He did, to seek wandering and lost sheep\) not to forget me who was so far separate from Himself, but to bring me out from the darkness, leading me into the light and to a place of safety through the faith of Jesus Christ, the Restorer of our souls. . . How this favour of the Lord came to me I wish to relate in order that He may be blessed and praised.

"While yet in my native country of Japan and still an infidel, it came to pass that for certain reasons I slew a man. To escape arrest, I fled by night to a Buddhist monastery. While I was there, a Portuguese vessel came to the city. One Alonzo Vaz, whom I had formerly known, happened to be on board. As soon as he learned what had happened to me, he invited me to sail with him from Japan. His departure was delayed, and fearing lest I should incur further risk, he gave me a letter of recommendation to a friend who was staying in the same port. In the darkness of the night I mistook the vessel and gave the letter to George Alvarez instead of Ferdinand Alvarez, to whom it was addressed. The former, however, received me in the kindest manner and offered to take me to Father Francis, with whom he was intimately acquainted. From what was told me about Father Francis and his works I conceived a strong desire to be with him.

"Setting sail we came to Malacca. On the voyage George Alvarez had taught me what it is to be a Christian so that I was already somewhat inclined to receive baptism. My desire for this kept increasing day by day, and I should quickly have become a Christian on this first visit to Malacca if the vicar in that city would have baptised me. He asked me who I was and in what condition I lived. I informed him that I was married and expected to go back to my home. Thereupon he refused baptism, saying that if I received it I could not return to be the husband of a pagan woman. Therefore, when the monsoon favourable for sailing to Japan commenced to blow, I embarked on a vessel bound for China where I could avail myself at the proper time of a ship going to Japan.

"Setting sail from China to Japan \(a seven or eight days journey, or two hundred leagues\) we came within about twenty leagues of the coast of my country. While in sight of it we were overtaken by a violent tempest; the wind blowing from the land and so against us. The weather was so thick that we did not know where we were. This lasted four days and nights. Every one was in terrible distress and cried for mercy. It was finally necessary to return to the Chinese port from which we had set out.

"That storm, which thus brought me back to China, gave me cause for reflection. Moreover my desire to be a Christian and to be instructed in the faith had never left me. I was in doubt what I ought to do. Then I met the Portuguese, Alonzo Vaz, who in my own country had first encouraged me to go to Malacca, He was much surprised when he heard how I had left Malacca and had been driven back to China by the tempest. As he was then about sailing to Malacca, he asked me to accompany him. An honourable man named Lorenzo Botelho united with him in urging me to go. 'Return to Malacca.' said he, 'I believe that you will find Father Francis there. From Malacca you will go to the College of St. Paul at Goa in India. There you will be instructed in the faith and afterwards some one of the Fathers will go with you to Japan.'

"This advice seemed good and I set forth with joy. On coming to Malacca, I at once met George Alvarez, who hastened to bring me to Father Francis. We found him in a church where he was conducting a marriage service. George Alvarez introduced me and told him my history. The great joy with which Father Francis looked on me and welcomed me was sufficient to show that all things had been brought about by God's providence. The further I go, the more fully do I understand this. Already the mere sight of Father Francis had given me satisfaction and comfort. I was able to talk with him, for I could understand a little of what was said in Portuguese and could also speak some words.

"The Father at once told me to go to the College of St. Paul in company with George Alvarez, who was setting out for Goa. Father Francis was going to visit the Christians of Cape Com or in and proceed from there to Goa. He did not delay on the way, for hardly had I arrived in the beginning of March, 1548, at the College of St. Paul when he came, only four or five days after me. Great was my joy at seeing him. Indeed, from the first moment that I had seen him, I was conscious of a holy emotion which inspired in my heart the desire to be in his service and never to leave him.

"While in the college I gained such a knowledge of the faith that I was baptised in May of that year on the Day of Pentecost. On the same day was also baptised my servant, whom I had brought from Japan and who is now here with me.

"I hope that God, the Creator of all things, and Jesus Christ who was crucified for our redemption will cause all that has happened to redound to their glory and to the propagation of the faith. The special mercies that I have received from the Lord convince me of the truth of Christianity; while further witness is given by many proofs and by the quiet and peace which filled my soul. May God in His mercy grant that I may not be ungrateful for such benefits nor for the intelligence, memory, and persistency with which the Fathers of the College say He has endowed me. They are astonished at the impression the things of God make upon me, that in so short a time I have learned to read and write so well and that I have been able to understand such exalted doctrines, and that I have learned by heart the Gospel of Matthew, which I have written in Japanese characters and divided into sections so as to remember it the better. Your Reverences will find specimens of the Japanese characters and writing enclosed with this letter.

"For the love of our Lord, obtain for me by your prayers that He who has given me so much will not allow the gifts to remain without fruit, but that all may redound to His praise and glory.

"Pray too that our Lord will aid Father Francis, who is preparing for the voyage to Japan; also that I may have the courage to give my life a thousand times, if necessary, for the love of God. For this I greatly need the powerful aid of Father Ignatius, Father Antonio Gomez, and other members of the Society of Jesus. Let them constantly recommend me to God's favour, for I hope in our Lord that He will gain for Himself much fruit in Japan, and that before I die I shall see a college of the Society established there for the glory of Jesus Christ and the propagation of the faith. Amen.

"Goa, Nov. 29, 1548.
> > > "Your servant in Jesus Christ,> > > > > > "Paul of the Holy Faith \(a Japanese\)."\*
The name "Paul of the Holy Faith" was received by him at baptism, this being the designation of the College at Goa. His servant took the name Anthony. A third Japanese, who had likewise been sent by Xavier from Malacca to Goa, was baptised as John.

It was in reply to Xavier's question, "If I went to Japan, would the people become Christians?" that Anjiro made his famous reply, "My people would not immediately become Christians; but they would first ask you a multitude of questions, weighing carefully your answers and your claims. Above all, they would observe whether your conduct agreed with your words. If you should satisfy them on these points—by suitable replies to their inquiries and by a life above reproach—then, as soon as the matter was known and fully examined, the king \[daimyo\], the nobles, and the educated people would become Christians. Six months would suffice; for the nation is one that always follows the guidance of reason."

In January, 1549, Xavier wrote to Paul; "In the space of eight months he has learned to read, write, and speak Portuguese," At one time he was heard sighing and exclaiming: "Oh, unhappy people of Japan, who adore the creatures that God made to be your servants\!" When Xavier asked, "Paul, why do you talk thus?" the answer was, "I was thinking of my countrymen who adore the sun and moon, whereas those luminaries are servants to the men who know the Lord Jesus, They were made to illumine the day and night in order that by their light we might serve God upon the earth and glorify His Son, Jesus Christ"

The fervent, restless spirit of Xavier was moved with an earnest desire to carry Christianity to Japan. No sooner did he broach the subject to his friends than he was assailed by a multitude of objections. He was told that there was so much work to be done in the Portuguese colonies that he could not he spared. In reply, he pointed to other Jesuits who had already come to India, and to the fact that more were expected. When the dangers of the undertaking were portrayed, he asked if the servants of God ought to be less willing than the merchants to run risks. In one of his letters he says, after writing of the dangers from tempests, shoals, and pirates: "It is doing well if two out of four vessels make the journey in safety; but were I certain of finding myself in greater perils than those already experienced, I would not give up going to Japan, so strong is the impression on my mind and so great hope do I have in God that I shall see our holy religion propagated there."

Xavier chose Father Cosmo Torres and Brother Juan Fernandez to accompany him in his new undertaking. The former was a Spanish priest who had been on board a ship that touched at the Moluccas while Xavier was sojourning in those islands. Being greatly impressed by what he saw of Xavier and his work, he would gladly have remained with him; but for some reason it was necessary for him to go to Goa, where for a time he served as a parish priest before being admitted into the Society of Jesus. Juan Fernandez had been a rich silk merchant of Cordova. His business led him to Lisbon, and there he was one day invited by a friend to attend a service of the Jesuits, where it was said he could hear the sweetest music to which he had ever listened. On going to the church, Juan found a gathering of over two hundred men belonging to a fraternity that met every week for devotion and penance. After a sermon the lights were extinguished, while the men with tears and groans for their sins began to scourge their bared backs and to beg divine pardon. The young merchant was so much moved by these proceedings that lie at once sought out Father Rodriguez and asked to be received into the Society as a lay-brother. Rodriguez, in doubt whether the young man had sufficient of the spirit of self-renunciation, asked whether, as a proof of sincerity, he was willing, richly dressed as he was, to ride on a donkey through the chief street of Lisbon with his face toward the animal's tail. As Fernandez gladly met the test, he was soon afterwards received into the Society. Xavier wished to have him enter the priesthood before sailing to Japan; but Fernandez begged permission to remain in his humbler position as a lay brother.

Xavier's fame has unduly eclipsed that of his companions. If to him belongs the honour of planning the mission and inspiring them with zeal to enter upon it, they were the ones who did the more solid work. They remained in Japan the rest of their lives, learned the language of its people, and laid the foundations of the Roman Catholic Church in that land, Fernandez proved the most apt of the company in acquiring the Japanese language and in reaching the hearts of the people. Father Torres once said concerning him: "Very little would be accomplished in Japan if we should lose Brother Juan Fernandez."

In addition to the three Jesuits and the three Japanese, there were two servants who accompanied them from Goa. One was a native of Malabar, by the name of Amador, and the other was a Chinese named Manuel. The little company went first to Malacca, where they hoped to find some vessel that would take them to their destination. There they received intelligence that gave them much encouragement to believe that God was preparing the Japanese people to welcome them. A letter written from Malacca by Xavier says:

"On our arrival we were given many items of news from Japan. There had come letters from Portuguese merchants who were in that country. They informed me that a great lord in those islands desired to be a Christian and had despatched an ambassador to the Governor of India asking that some Fathers be sent to teach him our religion. They also wrote that in one place visited by the Portuguese traders the lord of the land had given them an abandoned house for *their* lodging. It was one that the people of the country did not wish to occupy, because, as they said, it was haunted by an evil spirit. The Portuguese established themselves there, but soon they felt something pulling at their clothes. When they looked around to find who was doing this, they could see nothing. This caused them much alarm. Among them was a boy, who one night commenced to cry out aloud. The Portuguese all arose and ran to him with their weapons, thinking that they were being attacked. When they asked the boy the reason of his cries, he replied that a vision had frightened him and made him call out. After this the boy set up many crosses about the house, and nothing more occurred to alarm the Portuguese. The men of the town had heard the boy's cries and they asked an explanation. It was given to them, and it was then that the lord of the place told the merchants that the house was haunted. He asked them if they knew any way of driving out the evil spirit; whereupon they replied that there was nothing better than the sign of the holy cross. As the Portuguese had placed crosses inside and outside their house, the Japanese began to do the same thing to theirs."\*

No Portuguese ship was ready for the voyage to Japan, a circumstance that Paul attributed to God's special providence, since, as he said: "If my countrymen should see on the one hand Master Francis preaching the holy law of God, and at the same time should also see the Christian merchants doing contrary to the same law, they would form their judgment of it rather from the deeds of the merchants than from the words of the preacher, and would ask Master Francis how could it be that the Christians look forward to the good things of heaven after death if they live now as if there were no goods but those of this world. I thank God that no European enters Japan along with Francis."

The implication in this last statement is not exact, for, in addition to the two other missionaries, Xavier was accompanied on this voyage by a Portuguese named Domingo Diaz, of whom we know almost nothing, except that Xavier describes him as a very great. friend of mine."

Being unwilling to delay, the party embarked on a junk belonging to a Chinese corsair. The Commandant of Malacca tried to make their journey less disagreeable by providing a variety of supplies. To these he added many valuable articles that could be used as gifts for gaining the good will of the Japanese rulers.

The following extract is from an account that Xavier wrote of the voyage:

"A hundred leagues from Malacca on our way towards China, we touched at an island where our people provided themselves with tillers and other pieces of timber that were needed in preparation for the great storms of those Chinese waters. After this, they made many sacrifices to their idol, held a feast in its honour, worshipped many times, and then by casting lots inquired from it whether or not we should have a good wind. The reply was that the weather would be favourable and that it was not necessary to wait longer. The anchors were weighed and we set sail. All were in good spirits; the pagans putting trust in their idol, which with much ceremony they had installed in the stern of the ship, where they surrounded it with lighted candles and burned incense before it; while our trust was in God, the Creator of heaven and earth, and in Jesus Christ, His Sou, for whose love and in whose service we had come to preach our holy faith.

"After a while the heathen again cast lots, asking the idol if our ship would return from Japan to Malacca. The reply was that the ship would reach Japan, but would not come back to Malacca. This had the effect of deterring them from going to Japan. They decided to winter in China and wait there until the next year. Judge by this how annoying it was for us to be on a voyage where the question of proceeding or not was left to the decision of a demon and his followers; for, in fact, those that commanded the ship did only what the demon through these lots ordered them to do.

"Going on our way, we came off the coast of a country called Cochin-China, a little before reaching China but not far from it, when two disasters befell us on the same day. It was the eve of the feast of St. Mary Magdalene. The sea was high and very boisterous. The ship's sink had carelessly been left open. As the Chinese Manuel, our companion, was passing near it, the violent rolling of the ship caused him to stumble and fall in. We thought he would be dead from such a fall and because the sink was full of water; but God did not permit him to die. For a long time he was head downward with more than half of his body submerged. With much trouble we drew him out insensible, and he suffered many d. ays from a severe wound on the head, but it pleased our Lord to restore him to health.

"We had just finished dressing Manuel's wounds when the storm made the vessel give a great pitch, thus throwing the pilot's daughter into the sea. The violence of the tempest was such that we were unable to rescue the girl, who was drowned close by the ship in sight of her father and of us all. It was pitiable to hear the groaning and wailing of the poor pagans during the day and night that followed; pitiable too to see the misery of their souls. They passed the time in making constant sacrifices or feasts to their idol, slaying many birds and offering food and drink. The lots that they cast were to find out the reason for the girl's death. The answer was that, if our Manuel had died when he tumbled into the sink of the ship, the girl would not have fallen into the sea."

After the storm had subsided the boat proceeded to Canton. It was only with great difficulty that the captain was dissuaded from remaining in that port. Finally he consented to go to another city, but just as they reached its harbour, where they expected to spend the winter, since the assertion was made that the season for sailing to Japan was nearly past, a boat came out to warn them that the port was infested with pirates. This so frightened the captain that he would have turned back to Canton had it not been that the wind was adverse, while it was favourable for going to Japan, whither they therefore directed their course. It thus came to pass that on August 15, 1549, they reached Kagoshima, the largest city in Paul's native province of Satsuma. The journey from Malacca had occupied only seven weeks.

**Footnotes**

\* The best life of Xavier in English is that of H. J. Coleridge \(London. 1886\). It is largely made up of Xavier's letters. It will be seen, however, that the extracts from the letters contained in the present book sometimes differ very much from Coleridge's translation. This is because much use has been made of Cros's "Saint François de Xavier, Sa Vie et Ses Lettres" \(Paris and Toulouse, 1900\). Cros has made a careful study of existing manuscripts and has thus freed the letters from the amplifications and changes introduced by editors and translators.

\* The story that on his way to Portugal Xavier would not turn a little aside from the direct road in order to bid his mother farewell is happily proved incorrect by Cros, who shows that the mother had died eleven years before.

\* There have been various conjectures about the Japanese form of this name. Valegnani, writing about 1600, says, "His true name was Yajiro." Froez says that he was about thirty-six years old when he came to Goa.

\* In the main I have followed Cros's version of the letter, supplying from other sources one section which he abbreviated.

\* Cros, vol. i., p, 460. Editors of Xavier's letters have considerably amplified this story, as may be seen in Coleridge, vol. ii., p. 177.




