+++
title = "02 FRANCIS XAVIER IN JAPAN 1549-1551"

+++



IN order that the events to be described in the following chapters may be better understood, it will be well to pause at this point in order to consider some of the political, social, and religious conditions of Japan at the time when Xavier and his companions reached its shores.

From ancient times the country had been divided into sixty-six provinces. Though the names by which these were designated have continued in use until the present day, the territories of the feudal lords were seldom coterminous with these divisions. In some cases a daimyo possessed several provinces, while in others a single province was divided between two or more of these barons, Xavier and his associates applied the name of "king" to these feudal lords; and there was much to justify the nomenclature, for many of them were practically sovereigns within their own estates, having little occasion to concern themselves about any person who might claim superiority over them.

The nominal ruler of the whole country was the Mikado, to whom alone the name of Emperor could properly be applied. Since a. d. 793, the Imperial residence had been in Kyoto. As the Japanese designation for a capital is "*miyako, "* we find this word under various forms of spelling \(most commonly "Meaco"\) used in older European books as though it were the name of the city. The Emperor possessed but little real authority at the time when Xavier came to Japan. Since the twelfth century the power had been in the hands of military rulers who obtained for themselves the title Sei-i Tai-' Shogun, or Barbarian-Expel ling Great-General. The name Shogun, originally applied to all generals, came in time to he restricted in common use to the holder of the longer title. He nominally held his commission from the Emperor; but, as different families gained military ascendency, they were able to assert their claims to the office, which in practice became hereditary except as one family succeeded in supplanting another, thus setting up a new dynasty of rulers. The distinction between nominal and real power did not stop at this point. It often happened that a vassal of the Shogun would hold such a position towards him as the Shogun held towards the Emperor. These regents took care that their nominal superiors were kept as mere puppets, unable to assert themselves or to take any active part in public affairs. Children, only four or five years old, were made emperors or shoguns, were surrounded in their palaces with everything that tended to make them effeminate, and then, as they neared the age when there was any possibility of their becoming dangerous, were set aside for other children.

The Imperial power was at its lowest ebb under the shoguns of the Ashikaga family, whose rule began in 1338. As the revenues were chiefly absorbed during this period by the shogunate, the Emperor and the court nobles were ill provided with means for supporting their dignity. In one case the coronation ceremony was for lack of money postponed twenty-two years, and was finally made possible only by a contribution from the head of one of the Buddhist temples. The body of one Emperor lay unburied for forty days because a sum of money equal to about two thousand dollars could not be collected for the expenses of the funeral.

This period was marked by a succession of civil conflicts. Ashikaga Takauji, the first of his line, after failing to gain possession of the occupant of the throne, set up another person as Emperor and obtained from him the appointment as Shogun. For half a century there were two lines of rival claimants to the Imperial power; one supported by Ashikaga remaining in Kyoto, while the other dwelt in the mountains of Yamato. Dissensions afterwards arose in the Ashikaga family itself; or rather, those among its vassals who desired to gain the office of Prime Minister upheld different members of the house as claimants of the shogunate. At one time there were five of these rival shoguns.

As a result of the wars between the factions, Kyoto and the neighbouring provinces were greatly impoverished. Japanese historians say that the capital was filled with mountains of the slain, while the rivers ran with blood. Great conflagrations left behind them heaps of blackened ruins. Many of the people fled to the mountains for safety. Gardens and fields were left without cultivation. Famine and pestilence added their horrors to those of war; while an unusual number of typhoons and earthquakes seemed to show that nature was ready by the use of its most stupendous forces to help men in their work of destruction. Kyoto was still disturbed by civil strife at the time the missionaries began their labours in japan; and twenty-four years later the Ashikaga family was brushed aside by a militant daimyo named Nobunaga.

The lack of a strong central government had left the feudal lords in the provinces free to fight among themselves as they might please. Those that were strong added the lands of weaker lords to their own. On the other hand, a retainer left in charge of some outlying castle might shake off allegiance to his former daimyo, becoming an independent lord or perhaps inducing others to help him in an attempt to supplant his former master. There was not the great separation, between classes that afterwards made the soldiers so distinct from the farmers and artisans. Men were needed for attack and defence; whoever was able and willing to fight could easily find military employment. Some of the most powerful lords cherished ambitions for extending their influence over the whole country. To accomplish this, each schemed how he might gradually make his way towards Kyoto, where, by obtaining possession of Shogun and Emperor, he could become the real ruler of the land. It was finally from one of the small daimiates that there arose a warrior who was able to accomplish more than others had done. This was Oda Nobunaga, who in 1549—the year Xavier reached Japan—succeeded to his father's estates in the province of Owari. The history of the early missions in Japan synchronises with that of the process by which the government became centralised; a movement begun by Nobunaga, greatly advanced by Hideyoshi, and brought to completion by the early Tokugawa rulers.

The early religion of the Japanese was Shinto. The name signifies the Way of the Superior Beings. It combined nature-worship with reverence for ancestors. Buddhism entered the country from Korea about the middle of the sixth century. At first its progress was but slow. Gradually, however, it became the leading religion of the land, its success being in large part due to the promulgation of the theory that the beings hitherto worshipped by the Japanese were incarnations of Buddhist saints. Though the two religions became combined in such a way that the mass of the people made little distinction between them, the Buddhist elements in the admixture exerted the greater influence upon the religious thought and life of the nation. Some of the temples became very wealthy and powerful. The priests often took an active part in political and even in military movements. The monasteries were in many cases strong fortresses whose inmates were better trained in the use of the sword than in the ceremonies of worship. Often the monks of two opposing sects engaged in active warfare, attacking and burning each other's temples. They also took sides with rival claimants to the shogunate and other offices. Those that had their headquarters on Mt. Hiei, an eminence overlooking Kyoto, were specially-noted for their turbulence. Sometimes, when displeased at action taken in the name of the Emperor, they would march down from the mountain, those in the front ranks carrying the sacred cars on their shoulders, while others clad in full armour followed after them. On arriving at the gates of the palace, they would demand in the name of religion that their protests be heard. Petitions backed by such a display of force were not to be lightly dismissed. In the eleventh century the Emperor Shirakawa, who after a nominal abdication of imperial power still wielded it with a vigour shown by few of those who have ruled Japan, once said to a flatterer who praised his achievements: "There are three things that I have never succeeded in controlling—the throw of the dice, the flooded waters of the Kamo River, and the monks of Mt. Hiei. "Kyoto was often burned, pillaged, and filled with bloodshed through the contests that these turbulent priests waged with other sects or with their political enemies.

Buddhism was at the height of its influence at the period with which we have to do. Murdoch writes: "It is no exaggeration to say that at the date of the first arrival of Europeans in Japan the greatest political power in the empire was that of the Buddhist priesthood. "As a natural consequence, those that desired power for themselves were ready to welcome whatever seemed likely to weaken that of Buddhism. This is doubtless the chief reason why Nobunaga showed such favour to the missionaries; and it had much to do with the readiness of many feudal lords to receive into their territories the men whom they hoped to utilise as instruments for diminishing the arrogance of the Buddhist priests. Yet it must be remembered that some daimyos were devoted Buddhists and that the custom of having their younger sons enter the priesthood greatly increased the political power of the monasteries.

Kagoshima, the port at which Xavier landed, was in the territories of the Daimyo Shimazu Takahisa. He and Otomo Yoshishige of Bungo, from whose port Xavier was to sail when he returned to India, were the most powerful lords in the island of Kyushu.

A letter written by Xavier shows that his reception in Japan was such as greatly encouraged him. In it he says:

"We have been received by the Governor \(*Capitan*\) of the city and by the Commandant \(*Alcayde*\)\* with much kindness and friendship, as we have also been by all the people. They are much surprised to see priests from the land of the Portuguese. Far from thinking It strange that Paul has become a Christian, they greatly approve what he has done. All of them, whether relatives or strangers, have congratulated him on having gone to India and there beholding things which have never been seen in Japan. The Duke of the country has himself congratulated Paul, receiving him with honour and asking many questions upon the manners and the power of the Portuguese. To the great satisfaction of the Duke, Paul has given a full account of all these things. This Duke lives five leagues from Kagoshima. When Paul went to speak with him, he carried a very sacred picture that we had brought from India. It represented Our Lady holding in her arms the Child Jesus. The Duke was so delighted at seeing it that he knelt before the picture of Our Lord and Our Lady, reverencing them with great respect and ordering all his attendants to do the same.\* Then the painting was shown to his mother, who looked upon it with the greatest pleasure. Paul returned to Kagoshima, where we reside, and a few days later there came a gentleman whom the Duke's mother had sent with orders to have the picture copied. More than one thing was lacking for doing this, and so the plan was abandoned. The same lady also asked that she might be given in writing an account of the Christian faith. Paul devoted several days to the task, and wrote to some length upon the subject in his own language.

"Believe me and give thanks to God; the way is open for carrying out your desires. If we knew how to speak, we should ere this have reaped much fruit. Paul has been so active preaching day and night to a great number of his kinsmen and friends that through his efforts his mother, his daughter, many other relatives, both men and women, and also many friends have already become Christians.

"No one is surprised in this country if a person becomes a Christian, Since most people can read and write, they quickly learn the prayers. May our Lord be pleased to give us the tongue with which to speak of divine things, for then by His grace and favour we shall produce much fruit. At present we are like statues in the midst of the people. They talk and have much to say concerning us, while we, being ignorant of the language, remain silent. We are reduced to the necessity of making ourselves little children and learning to talk."

Xavier with the help of Paul prepared an account of the principal Christian doctrines. This he wrote out in Roman characters for his own use in order that he might read it before the people. In the processes connected with Xavier's canonisation the claim was made that he was endowed, sometimes at least, with miraculous power to use languages that he had never learned. Fourteen witnesses were found who testified that he spoke the languages of the countries visited by him, as freely and elegantly as though he had been born in those lands; that not infrequently men of different nations hearing him at the same time could all understand his meaning; and that when he first came to Japan "he preached without an interpreter, partly in Spanish, partly in Latin, partly in Portuguese, with a few Japanese words intermingled, and was understood by all as if he had spoken in the native language of each."

It hardly needs to be said that Xavier's letters contain no references to such marvels. On the contrary, there are several passages that show his inability to speak readily to the people. Besides using Paul and afterwards Fernandez as interpreters, much of his work was done by reading or repeating from memory the words of what he calls his "semi-Japanese volume."

It had been Xavier's desire to go directly to Kyoto; but in the letter from which quotations have already been made he says that the winds made this impossible and that it would be necessary for him to wait five months before they would be favourable. Meanwhile the Lord of Satsuma gave permission for the teaching of Christianity in his domains and for its acceptance by any of his subjects. The first converts, as we have seen, were in Paul's family, and after them came a young fisherman to whom the name Bernard was given. He afterwards accompanied Xavier in his travels through Japan and went with him to India.

Xavier hoped that many of the Japanese might be induced to go to Goa and that the college in that city would fit them to return as evangelists to their own people. He wrote to some of the Jesuits:

"Do your best at the college to instruct and train the Chinese and Japanese boys, above all watching over their souls. Let them learn to read, write, and speak Portuguese so that they may be interpreters for the Fathers who, if it so pleases God, shall before many years come to Japan and China. It does not seem to me that there can be any other land yet discovered where so much fruit will be garnered as in this, nor that the Society can be elsewhere so perpetuated as in China and Japan......

Should there come to Goa two bonzes who go this year to Malacca, do all you can to have them welcomed into the houses of the Portuguese. Show them much attention. Manifest to them as much love as I did to Paul when I was in Goa, This is a people which wishes to be led only by love; therefore put away all severity in dealing with the Japanese."

Another letter stated that the bonzes would be accompanied by several other persons. Xavier also informed the Commandant of Malacca that many Japanese were on the way thither, being influenced by Paul's praise of the Europeans, and he added: "Take care that they be received in the houses of rich Portuguese where there shall be nothing lacking in what makes up honourable hospitality, so that the Japanese may return to confirm concerning the Portuguese all the good that Paul has been able to report."

A letter written June 24, 1550, by Father Perez, who was then in Malacca, tells us that the ship bearing the first news from Xavier had arrived in April. It further says:

"In the ship came four Japanese. They were well received in the house of a Chinese Christian; and many of the Portuguese of the city frequently invited them to their houses. They often came to see us also, and we instructed them in the doctrines of our holy faith, so that they gladly received baptism on Ascension Day. . . . Three of the new Christians have returned to Japan; the fourth remains here."

When Xavier had been two months in Kagoshima, he learned that a Portuguese ship had come from China to Hirado, a port in the northwestern part of Kyushu. Although he was suffering from a fever, he set out at once for that city, accompanied by a young Japanese who served as an interpreter. After about a month's absence he returned to Kagoshima.\* Here he resumed his former method of teaching. One of the first Japanese believers admitted to the priesthood afterwards wrote that he had been informed by the Christians of Kagoshima that when Xavier was there he "went twice a day to the terrace in front of a Buddhist monastery and there taught the people by reading to them from a book he had prepared."

Xavier frequently visited the monasteries themselves. The abbot of one belonging to the Zen sect was, according to Xavier, named Ninjit. He became very friendly with the missionary and often discussed religious questions with him. This bonze did not have a very high opinion of his associates, for when Xavier once found the monks engaged in the ceremony of meditation as practised by the Zen sect and asked what they were doing, Ninjit replied: "Some are reckoning up how much money they have gained from their parishioners, others are trying to think how they can manage to dress well and have good food, while the rest are thinking of the pleasures in which they wish to engage. Not one thinks upon any matter of importance."

Though Xavier writes that Ninjit was then eighty years old, he was still alive twelve or thirteen years later when Kagoshima was visited by Brother Almeida, to whom he said: "I wished to know all that Father Francis came to preach in Japan; but, for lack of an interpreter, I was not able to understand. Though I should like to be baptised before I die, my position, my dignity, and the veneration in which I am held prevent me. "Afterwards he and the abbot of another temple, who had also known Xavier, asked to be baptised in secret; but Almeida refused to grant their request.

In September, 1550, the three missionaries, accompanied by Amador, Manuel, and Bernard, left Kagoshima and went to Hirado, The reason, as given by Xavier, was the opposition to their work shown by the Buddhist priests, who urged the Daimyo to put a stop to the teaching of doctrines that would turn the people from their former beliefs. The "History of the Japanese Church"\* written at Macao in 1634, says the bonzes saw that the progress of the Gospel would cause the ruin of their monasteries, and so they decided to drive away the missionaries. They told the people not to listen to the foreigners, and circulated various rumours concerning them, such as that they ate human flesh. To increase suspicion, they threw blood-stained rags about the house occupied by the missionaries. The bonzes succeeded in getting the Daimyo to issue an edict forbidding under penalty of death that any one should in future become a Christian. He did not, however, persecute those that had already received baptism. Father Valegnani and the author of the history just mentioned say that the Daimyo became less favourable to the missionaries when he found that he could not make them his instruments for inducing the Portuguese ships to come to Kagoshima instead of to Hirado.

Anjiro was left to care for the little company of about one hundred and fifty baptised persons in Kagoshima. Five months after the departure of the missionaries, he was so persecuted by the bonzes that he fled to China. Sad to relate, this first Japanese convert and evangelist proved to be like many after him whose course has been a disappointment to their teachers. "Driven by misfortune," says Froez, "he became a *bafan* along the coasts of China. A *bafan* is nothing more nor less than a pirate who joins to deeds of violence at sea similar deeds on shore, thus inflicting loss upon fishermen and other people that live there. He was slain while engaged in one of these piratical expeditions."\*

On the way to Hirado Xavier stopped twelve days at the castle of Ichiku. Very likely it was not the first time he had been there. A retainer of its commandant had already been baptised under the name of Michael; and it was probably on the present visit that the commandant's wife, his eldest son, who was then about five years old, and several of his vassals were baptised. Froez tells us that before Xavier continued on his journey Michael asked that something efficacious for the healing of disease be given him, as the country was without physicians and medicines, Xavier therefore presented him with an image of Mary and a scourge. In giving him the image Xavier said: "My son Michael, here is a medicine for souls. Adore the image of the Holy Virgin, and when you wish to obtain forgiveness for your sins, kneel before it and ask Our Lady to obtain pardon through her Divine Son. "In presenting the scourge, he said: "This, my son Michael, is for the health of your body. If any one, Christian or pagan, suffers from fever, you must give him or he must give himself three light blows with this scourge, while he invokes the very sacred names of Jesus and Mary. In this way the sick will be healed. "During the remaining fourteen or fifteen years of Michael's life invalids were constantly coming to him from different parts of the country, being drawn by reports of the benefits that others had received from the remedy. Michael was so careful to observe Xavier's directions that he would never allow more than the prescribed number of blows to be given, asserting that otherwise the disease would be augmented.

Xavier taught Michael how to baptise infants and adults. He also gave him manuscripts in Japanese which contained a life of Christ, the Seven Penitential Psalms, some prayers, and a calendar. He told the Christians to meet on Sundays and feast-days that they might read the life of Christ and engage in worship; while on Fridays they were to repeat the Penitential Psalms. For amulets he gave them some little silk bags, each of which contained either the Creed or the names of Jesus and Mary.

Twelve years later, when Almeida visited Ichiku, he found that Michael was the leader of a company of Christians numbering about seventy. He still kept the scourge and told how by its use the wife of the commandant had been healed of a severe ailment. Every week the Christians of the castle held a meeting in which each gave himself three blows with the scourge. The commandant had not been baptised. He said to Almeida: "Had I not been convinced that your religion is true, I should not have allowed my wife and children to accept it, I adore no God but the One worshipped by you and in all my needs I look to Him for help. Out of regard for the Daimyo I do not yet announce my faith; but I hope that hereafter God wilt make it possible for me to do so and that I shall have my lord's permission to declare myself a Christian."

On reaching Hirado the missionaries were saluted with a salvo of artillery from the Portuguese ships that were lying in the harbour. They were also furnished with an escort of honour when they went to meet the Daimyo. In one of Xavier's letters he wrote concerning Hirado: "The lord of that country received us with much affection and kindness. In a few days about a hundred persons became Christians, thanks to what was preached to them by Brother Juan Fernandez, who already knew how to speak passably well, and to the book translated into the Japanese language, which we read to them."

Xavier remained in Hirado only ten days. He desired to push on towards Kyoto, where he hoped to effect the conversion of the Emperor. Leaving Cosmo Torres and the two servants in Hirado, he with Fernandez and Bernard continued their journey. They went most *of* the way on foot, their shoulders laden with the few things they needed to take with them. Many were the difficulties that they met. Sometimes they were refused shelter at the inns. In many places they were rudely treated by the people. The children hooted at them and pelted them with stones.

Fernandez says that while in Kagoshima the missionaries had been reproved by the bonzes for eating meat and fish; therefore on this journey, when these articles of diet were served at the inns, Xavier would explain to those who might be about him that it was perfectly proper to use such things, which God had supplied for the needs of men; but after taking a very small piece in order to enforce his words by his example, he made his meal entirely of rice and vegetables.\*

At Hakata the missionaries visited a large temple of the Zen sect, whose priests received them with great pleasure as persons who had come from India, the cradle of Buddhism. Before leaving them, Xavier, as we are told by Fernandez, reproved the abbot and priests in the severest terms for the abominable vice of sodomy which prevailed among them. He also reproached them because on the one hand they told the people that there was no future life and on the other exhorted them to bring in behalf of their dead friends offerings which the bonzes used for their own benefit. His hearers were astonished that a stranger should reprimand them so vigorously, though some of them only laughed at his words.

In a few days the travellers reached Yamaguchi, a city in the southwestern part of the largest of the Japanese islands. Here they met the Daimyo, who, after asking many questions about India and Europe, expressed a desire to know the nature of the religion they had come to teach. Accordingly Fernandez read from their book the account of the Creation and an explanation of the Commandments. When the Daimyo heard the condemnation of sodomy, a vice to which he himself was addicted, his countenance showed that he was much excited, and the officer who had arranged for the interview made a sign to the missionaries that they should withdraw: "As for me," wrote Fernandez, "I was afraid that the King would have our heads cut off."

"The next day," continues Fernandez, "without waiting for any order or permission of the King, Father Francis decided that we should preach in the streets of Yamaguchi. This we did in the following manner. We stood at the crossings where the people were abundant. I first read from the book an account of the creation of the world. Then in a loud voice I spoke of the great sins committed by the Japanese, dwelling principally on three things: First they forgot God, the Creator and the all-powerful One, who made and preserves them. Instead of Him they adored wood, stone, and inanimate things, through them worshipping the devil, who is the enemy of God and men. In the second place, they give themselves up to the abominations of Sodom; and at this point I exposed the shame and baseness of sin, speaking of the chastisements with which the world has been afflicted because of it. The third sin was that of the women, who, to spare themselves the trouble of bringing up children, slay their offspring at birth or even before, an act that proves them guilty of horrible cruelty and inhumanity. While I was thus preaching, Father Francis at my side engaged in prayer, asking God to bless my words to those that listened.

"Thus we continued preaching every day until there did not remain in that great city a street-crossing where we had not made public addresses. We also spoke in the house of gentlemen *\[fidalgos\]* who invited us, some of them for the sake of killing time, some because they wished to hear something new, and others that they might make fun of us. Some showed us either affection or pity, while others gave evident signs of despising us. Among these gentlemen was one who had, as I think, brought us to his house only for his amusement or pastime. While I was reading to him the story of the fall of the angels, how Lucifer for his pride was cast down from heaven to hell, and how those that are haughty will meet a like fate, since they will be delivered up to the demons with whom they must suffer eternal punishment, he began to show his contempt for what I was reading. Father Francis at once chided him, saying: 'However powerful you may be, if you do not humble yourself and weep for your sins, God will know how to subdue you by the torments of hell.' As the man drew nearer to us expressing his scorn for the Father and his words, Father Francis was inflamed with zeal and his face was all aglow as he said: 'Beware\! unless you humble yourself, you will suffer these torments.' Thereupon we left him. As we were going from his house the Father said to me: ' I am sorry for that gentleman. The more powerful these persons are, the less they profit from God's mercies.'"

It is evident that no fear of consequences held Xavier back from speaking plainly to his hearers. Moreover, when he was aware that men of high rank were using impolite forms of speech towards him, he told Fernandez: "Thee-and-thou them just as they do me."\* Fernandez says that in obeying this direction he always trembled lest his head would be struck off, but Xavier reproved him, saying that, in order to gain the respect of the Japanese, they must show that they had no fear of death.

Xavier wrote as follows of the way they were ridiculed by the rabble:

"Whenever we went through the streets of the city, we were followed by a company of boys drawn from the lowest dregs of the populace who laughed at us and mocked us with such words as: 'There go the men who tell us that we must embrace the law of God in order to be saved, because we cannot be rescued from destruction except by the Maker of all things and by His Son\! There go the men who declare that it is wicked to have more than one wife."

The missionaries remained about two months in Yamaguchi and then finding, as Xavier writes, that the results of their labour were small, they started the last of December on their way towards Kyoto. The weather seemed very severe to persons that had lived in India and had spent the previous winter in the comparatively mild climate of Kagoshima. Sometimes they had to ford rivers where the icy water was waist-deep. They were ignorant of the roads, and the country was in a confused state owing to the civil wars. In one place through which they passed, an influential man who became interested in the travellers gave them a letter to a friend in the city of Sakai asking him to help them on their way. When they presented this letter, the person to whom it was addressed entertained them hospitably and made arrangements by which they joined the train of a nobleman who was on his way to the capital, now only about forty miles distant. It was a great advantage to be in such a company, since it afforded them protection from evil-disposed persons along the road.

Xavier and his companions reached Kyoto in January, a month when the winds, sweeping down from snow-covered mountains north of the city, are cold and piercing. Five years previously, war and conflagrations had made a large part of the city almost a desert. There had been a succession of civil strifes, in which the warlike monks of Mt. Hiei had taken an active part. The court-nobles and many other inhabitants had moved elsewhere. The missionaries had a letter to a gentleman who sent them to the residence of his son-in-law, eighteen or twenty leagues distant.\* From there they soon returned to Kyoto where Xavier tried to obtain an audience with the Mikado. Those to whom he applied asked whether he had brought any presents. He answered that these had been left in Hirado, whence they could quickly be procured if permission was given him to present them in person to the Mikado. This reply was not deemed satisfactory, and it may be doubted whether in any case an audience could have been procured. Xavier became convinced that the most powerful person in Japan at that time was the Lord of Yamaguchi. Since there seemed to be little hope of accomplishing anything in the capital, he departed after having spent only eleven days in the city.

Such is the account given by Fernandez. Xavier himself wrote:

"Arriving in Meaco, we passed some days making an attempt to have an interview with the King in order to demand permission to publish the Divine Law in his kingdom; but in this we failed, and since we did not find among the people any disposition to listen to the proclamation of the Gospel, wars or other obstacles standing in the way, we returned to Yamaguchi."

Retracing their way to Sakai, Xavier and his companions went from there to Hirado by sea. They found that in the four months of their absence a number of persons had been baptised by Torres, who was now left to continue his work while the others soon set out again for Yamaguchi. Increased acquaintance with the Japanese had shown Xavier that both the rich and the poor were inclined to despise a person that was not well dressed. He therefore abandoned the garb of poverty and procured from the Portuguese merchants richer garments than he had hitherto worn. He took with him the letters and presents that had been furnished by the Viceroy of India and the Bishop of Goa. These would have gone to either the Mikado or the Shogun if circumstances had been more favourable in Kyoto. As it was, they were given to the Lord of Yamaguchi, who in return sent a large sum of silver to Xavier. The latter at once returned this, saying that a more acceptable gift would be permission to preach the Gospel.

Xavier also gave the Daimyo a large and beautifully bound copy of the Bible, telling him that in this book was written the whole of the Sacred Law that the missionaries had come to proclaim. Verbal permission for teaching was at once granted, and four months later public notices were posted throughout the city proclaiming that the missionaries were at liberty to preach Christianity and the people to believe it. Moreover, the Daimyo presented the missionaries with a piece of land that had belonged to a Buddhist monastery.

At the Daimyo's residence Xavier met several Buddhist priests belonging to the Shingon sect. As they listened to his explanation of the attributes of God, they professed to find a great resemblance between his views and what they themselves taught concerning Dainichi, that one of the so-called Buddhist Trinity who is the personification of wisdom and purity. They said to him: "We differ in language and customs, but in reality the law taught by you and by us is one and the same. "They invited him to their temples and in other ways showed themselves very friendly, apparently hoping to profit by the favour which he enjoyed with the Daimyo. Xavier set himself to learn what he could about this Dainichi. Froez says:

"In frequent conversations with the bonzes he sounded their beliefs so far as his slight acquaintance with the language enabled him to do so. He especially asked them about the three divine Persons and the relations that existed between them, about the incarnation of the Second Person, and about the mystery of redemption through the Cross. The bonzes had no knowledge at all of such doctrines and ridiculed them as fables. On discovering this and also learning their abominable practices, Xavier recognized that their specious doctrines and the words in which these were disguised were the work of the devil. He ordered Juan Fernandez to preach through the streets that men ought not to adore Dainichi nor to consider him as a god; that, on the contrary, they should recognise that the teaching of the Shingon sect, like that of the others, was only an invention of devils and a tissue of falsehoods."

It is not strange that Xavier soon ceased to be a welcome guest at the temples nor that the bonzes did their best to counteract his influence.

In accordance with the permission that had been granted for the public proclamation of Christianity, Xavier was accustomed to go out twice a day for this purpose. Standing at a street-corner or sitting on the curb of the public well, he would read from his book and endeavour to explain its meaning to the people that gathered about him. Most of the preaching, however, was done by Fernandez. Though many persons were ready to praise the new doctrine, none were willing to become its adherents until after the occurrence of an incident that brought about the first conversion. As Fernandez was speaking to a large company of people, a man edged his way through the crowd and, pretending that he was about to whisper something in the preacher's ear, bent forward and spat upon his cheek. The crowd laughed at this exploit and looked to see how the foreigner would treat such an insult. With admirable self-control Fernandez, without pausing in his address or even turning to look at his assailant, quietly wiped his face with a handkerchief and went on as calmly as though nothing unusual had occurred. The spectators were greatly impressed. One prominent man who had been an avowed enemy of Christianity reasoned thus to himself: "A religion that enables its followers to practise such virtue must surely be divine. "At the close of the sermon he followed Fernandez home and declared that the words and the behaviour of the preacher had convinced him of the truth of Christianity. He was the first in the city to be baptised, and his example had a great influence upon others.

It was in Yamaguchi that Xavier is said by his biographers to have made a remarkable exhibition of miraculous powers:

"As he was often surrounded by many who hoped to puzzle him by their incessant and contradictory questions—such as the essence of the deity, the creation of the world, the secrets of nature, the malice of the devils, the immortality of the soul, the eternity of rewards and punishments; others again were questions of mere curiosity as to the motion of the heavenly bodies, the causes of eclipses, thunder, lightning, the rainbow, and other equally dissimilar subjects—he with one and the same answer solved these multifarious doubts, God so transforming the words, either in his mouth or in the ears of his auditors, that each one seemed to hear the answer required by his own special question."\*

Those that credit such marvels will not be surprised to learn that "in after years, when other missionaries succeeded him in Japan, the people complained that they did not answer questions as immediately as the first teacher of Christianity they had seen."†

Though Xavier's letters narrate no such wonders, they do speak of the many questions that were addressed to him. In asking for new missionaries he says:

"They will be annoyed more than can well be imagined. At all hours of the day and into the night they will be beset with visits and questions. They will be invited to prominent houses where no excuse can be found for staying away. They will have no time for prayer or thought or meditation. In the beginning especially, they will not be able to say daily mass. The answering of questions will occupy so much of their time that they will hardly find leisure for reciting the office, for eating, or for sleeping,"

The missionaries were much encouraged by their success in Yamaguchi. Xavier wrote: "In two months, at least five hundred persons have become Christians and the number is daily increasing. "Among the early converts was a young man, totally blind in one eye and having but little use of the other, who made a living as a story-teller and musician. He is said to have had a keen mind, as was shown by the kind of questions he addressed to the missionaries. Convinced by their answers, he was baptised and received the name of Lawrence. This man was afterwards admitted into the Society of Jesus as a lay brother. He became a very effective worker and in the remaining thirty years of his life was the means of procuring many conversions.

A report having reached Xavier that a Portuguese vessel had come to the province of Bungo on the east coast of Kyushu, he sent on the first of September, 1551, to get information concerning it. The messenger brought back letters from the Portuguese merchants and also one from Otomo Yoshishige, the Lord of Bungo, asking him to come to Funai, his capital. This daimyo, then only twenty-three years old, was to have an important place in the history of the Japanese Church, One of the first, perhaps the very first foreign ship to visit Japan had come to Bungo nine or ten years before, and it is said that his entreaties were what prevented its confiscation by his father. This made the youth very popular with the Portuguese. One of those who came on that ship remained three years in Bungo and taught him many things about Europe. When the young man became Daimyo, he did his best to attract merchants to his ports, recognising the great advantages that would come from foreign trade. It seems probable that the letter which had come to Malacca two years before asking for missionaries was from Yoshishige.

Xavier summoned Torres to come to Yamaguchi, while he himself set out for Bungo accompanied by Bernard and three other Christians. They were enthusiastically welcomed by the Daimyo and the Portuguese. Among the latter was the famous Mendez Pinto, who describes the ceremonies connected with Xavier's introduction to the Daimyo, besides recounting many other incidents alleged to have occurred during the stay in Bungo. Among other things he gives a full report of a discussion that Xavier is said to have had with a famous Buddhist priest. Unfortunately it is impossible to put much reliance on this and other improbable stories narrated by Pinto in connection with this visit.

Xavier accepted the invitation of the Portuguese captain to take passage with him to India. Affairs connected with the Society's work in that country are said to have made his presence desirable; but in his own letter the only reasons given for the decision to return are that he desired to meet the associates from whom he had been so long separated, to find new workers for Japan, and to provide many things that were needed by the labourers there. In the same letter he speaks of his decision to attempt work in China. He had met many Chinese in Japan and considered them as belonging to a superior race. Moreover, the relations of the two countries were such that he thought the acceptance of Christianity by the Chinese would ensure its victory in Japan.

The ship sailed from Bungo November 20, 1551. Xavier therefore had spent twenty-seven months in Japan. He was accompanied on the return voyage by Bernard and another convert named Matthew. The latter died the next year in Goa. Bernard proceeded to Europe, was admitted as a lay brother to the Society of Jesus, and died a few years later in its college at Coimbra, Portugal.

The Lord of Bungo sent by the same ship an envoy to the Viceroy of India asking for an alliance with the Portuguese. He also requested that more missionaries be sent to teach his people and said: "They will reside at Funai near me, and I will show them greater favour than the other kings of Japan possibly can. "The envoy became a Christian while on the voyage. The next year he returned to Japan.

After reaching India, Xavier busied himself over matters connected with the conduct of the Society, selected missionaries to be sent to Japan, and made arrangements for his own journey to China. Setting out at last for the latter country, he in due time reached Chang-chuang \(Sanchian\), an island which was at that time the place for trade between the Chinese and the Portuguese. It was his hope that some of the native merchants might be induced to convey him secretly to the mainland. The Portuguese, who feared that such an attempt might lead the Chinese to withdraw permission for trade, tried to dissuade him from his purpose. While trying to surmount the obstacles they put in his way, he was struck down with fever and died November 27, 1552.\*

The accounts given by the Jesuits assert that Xavier's coffin was filled with quicklime in order that the flesh might be quickly consumed, leaving the bones to be taken to India; but in February, when the coffin was opened, it was found that the body and even the clothes remained intact. When a slight cut was made in the flesh, the blood flowed freely. The body was taken to Malacca and ultimately to Goa. It is affirmed that many miracles have been wrought in connection with it. At Goa, every twelfth year, there is a great festival at which the faithful are allowed to gaze on the hands and feet of the saint. Those who saw the body in 1890 said that it no longer retained the fresh appearance it formerly had, but that the skin had become dry like that of a mummy. One Roman Catholic missionary in India, in endeavouring to account for the change, wrote: "It is my humble opinion that the desiccation of the holy relic began at the moment when the Jesuits were expelled from Goa."†

Whatever we may think of these stories and of the reverence shown for the body, we must recognise that Xavier yet lives through the influence that he has exerted upon his own church and to some extent upon others. He did more perhaps than any other man of modern times to arouse the missionary zeal of Roman Catholics. He was indeed far from being a model missionary. He did not exhibit that persistence in one line of effort that is needed to secure the best results. In India, lie relied too much on the power of the government for advancing the interests of religion. He even desired to have a military expedition sent to aid a person who promised to be a Christian if he were set up as a native ruler. Having obtained authority over the pearl fisheries at Tutocorin, Xavier ordered that certain persons should not be allowed to share in them because they had been so disobedient to him that they deserved the name of renegades. He urged the King of Portugal to set up the Inquisition in India.\* Such facts show that had he remained in Japan he would doubtless have approved the methods by which afterwards some of the converted daimyos forced their subjects to accept Christianity. All of this, however, is little more than to say that in such matters Xavier was a man of his own age. We must not judge even the progressive men of the past by the standards of to-day. We cannot expect them to surpass their contemporaries in every particular. If some of Xavier's methods, such as the speedy baptism of multitudes who knew hardly anything of the real meaning of Christianity, seem to us unwise, we must remember that he was treading unbeaten paths. They that undertake a new work must frequently make mistakes. They cannot profit by the experiences of others. In missionary methods men of the present day ought to he wiser than those that have gone before them.

Whatever may have been Xavier's faults, he was fitted to be a leader of men. He was a pioneer who, like Livingstone, opened the way for others. An enthusiast himself, he was able to inspire his followers with enthusiasm. There was in him something that to a wonderful degree called out the love of those who came under his influence, making them willing to work or to suffer with him and for him. Many whose religious views differ greatly from his can sympathise with his earnest devotion to Christ; Romanists, Protestants, and Eastern Christians alike finding in the hymn which is ascribed to Xavier an expression of their own deepest thoughts:
> "O God Thou art the object of my love,  
Not for the hopes of endless joys above.  
Not for the fear of endless pains below  
Which those who love Thee not must undergo.  
For me and such as me Thou once didst bear  
The ignominious cross, the nails, the spear;  
A thorny crown transpierced Thy sacred brow;  
What bloody sweats from every member flow\!  
For me in torture Thou resign'dst Thy breath,  
Nailed to the cross, and sav'dst me by Thy death.  
Say, can those sufferings fail my heart to move?  
What but Thyself can now deserve my love?  
Such as then was and is Thy love to me,  
Such is, and shall be still, my love to Thee.  
Thy love, O Jesus, may I ever sing,  
O God of love, kind Parent, dearest King."> \(Translated by Dryden.\)\*
**Footnotes**

\* Cros thinks that this person was in command of the castle of Ichiku, which was afterwards visited by Xavier on his way to Hirado. It was about twenty miles from Kagoshima.

\* Probably they merely assumed the respectful posture usually taken by the Japanese when looking at objects of art.

\* Cros, vol. ii., p. 55. Most of Xavier's biographers do not mention this journey, of which we learn through Father Froez, who wrote in 1586 and had good opportunities for learning the facts. It seems strange that Xavier himself does not speak of it in the long letter dated November 5, 1549, which contains the account of the voyage to Japan and the early experiences in Kagoshima. However, there are other omissions that are equally inexplicable. Xavier does not tell us how he found opportunity to forward this and other letters of the same date. Father Cros, extending somewhat the "two months" at Kagoshima, supposes that the letter, which was evidently written by piecemeal was finished and dated just before Xavier set out for Hirado and that the four Japanese who were to go in the Portuguese ship to Malacca followed him more slowly. Another question to which we find no answer is why Xavier delayed so long in carrying out his desire to go to Kyoto. To say nothing of the possibility of going by land, as he finally did, the more than a year spent in Kagoshima must have brought a favourable season for navigation.

\* This has not been printed, but is often quoted by Cros.

\* Cros, "S. François de Xavier," vol. ii., p. 96.

\* Cros, vol. ii., p. 102. In one of the letters written before reaching Japan, Xavier says that they had been told that the Japanese would be offended if they saw the missionaries eating animal food, and so to avoid offence they determined to refrain from it. Apparently they had not strictly adhered to this resolution.

\* In the French of Father Cros, "*Tutoyez-les comme ils me tutoient."*

\* This statement is taken by Cros from the unprinted history by Froez. It might be thought a misplacement of the account of the gentleman in Sakai to whom Xavier took a letter were it not that the latter is mentioned in the same history.

\* Bartoli and Maffei, Eng. Ed., p. 388.

† Coleridge, vol. ii., p. 302.

\* The date is usually given as December 2. The reasons for considering the one in the text correct may be found in Cros, vol. ii., p. 55.

† *Missions Catholiques,* February 27, 1891.

\* For proofs of the above statements drawn from Xavier's letters see Cros, vol. i., pp. 275, 279, sq.; vol. ii., p. 508.

\* Though this hymn was one of Xavier's favourites, the probability is that he was not, as formerly supposed, its author




