+++
title = "06 INCREASED PERSECUTION UNDER IEYASU 1598-1616"

+++



HIDEYOSHI, shortly before his death, had appointed a board of five Regents, with Tokugawa Ieyasu at their head. Under their direction was another board of five Ministers. To these last was committed the care of Hideyoshi's son, Hideyori, who was then six years old. Ieyasu, who was born in 1542, had served under both Nobunaga and Hideyoshi. His original territories had been in the provinces of Mikawa and Totomi; but in the re-distribution of fiefs made by Hideyoshi he had been transferred to the provinces lying about the Bay of Yedo. He made Yedo his capital, building there a castle that became the centre of the great city that quickly grew up around it.

One of the first acts of the new government was to recall the army from Korea. This brought back to Japan some of the men who were recognised leaders among the Christians. The missionaries saw many reasons for believing that a new era of prosperity was about to dawn. Ieyasu's desire for foreign trade made him ready to favour Christianity, or at least to shut his eyes to the fact that the edict of Hideyoshi, though unrepealed, was not being enforced. The daimyos were allowed to treat the Christians in their own territories as they thought best.

Jerome de Jésus, the Franciscan that had escaped from prison, was arrested in December, 1598, and brought before Ieyasu, who, after hearing his story, said to him: Do not fear. Henceforth make no attempt to conceal yourself, and do not lay aside your ecclesiastical dress, for I wish you well. Every year the Spaniards in their voyages to Mexico pass very near my estates in Eastern Japan. I wish they would visit my ports to obtain supplies, trade with my people, and teach them how to develop the silver mines. In order that ere I die I may carry out my wishes in this matter, I desire that you will show me how it can be done. "Jerome suggested that he ask the Governor of the Philippines to send pilots, who by making soundings and surveying the coasts could render navigation safer. Ieyasu accordingly sent a messenger to make his desires known to the Governor; but since just at this time a number of ships and men had been sent from Manila to aid the King of Cambodia in his war with Siam, the Governor could do nothing except offer encouragement that on their return he might be able to accede to Ieyasu's requests.

Jerome for a while was given lodgings in Ieyasu's own mansion in Kyoto. He was then allowed to go to Yedo, where he built a church in which he celebrated the first mass on the Day of Pentecost in 1599. Afterwards he was sent by Ieyasu to Manila that he might help in securing success for a second envoy to the Governor.

The missionaries soon came out from their hiding-places. The churches that had been destroyed in Arima and Omura were rebuilt. Organtin re-established the houses of the Jesuits in Kyoto and Osaka. New residences were built in Yamaguchi and Hiroshima. Bishop Çerqueira says that in two years the number of baptisms amounted to seventy thousand.

There were, however, some drawbacks. Terasawa was now opposed to the faith into which he had been secretly baptised, and on returning from Korea he annoyed the missionaries to such an extent that in March, 1599, Bishop Çerqueira removed, with several members of the Society and thirty seminary students, to Amakusa. While Terasawa was on a visit to Kyoto he sent an order to his deputy that Japanese Christians should not be allowed to attend services in the church. Father Rodriguez was at once sent to Kyoto, where he succeeded in inducing Terasawa to revoke this order, and also received assurance from Ieyasu that the Christians would not be disturbed.

More serious trouble arose in Hirado, The Daimyo had recently died. The one who succeeded him was in Kyoto and sent back word to his son that all the people must be forced to take part in the Buddhist rites performed in honour of his predecessor. The son was also ordered to repudiate his wife, a daughter of Sumitada, unless she was willing to give up the Christian religion. She stood firm and sent for her brother, the Daimyo of Omura, to take her home; but her husband, unwilling to give her up, promised to leave her undisturbed in her faith. Several of the leading retainers, with their families and many other Christians, fled by night to Nagasaki, where they were sheltered by the missionaries. The Daimyo was so alarmed by this action, which was being imitated by others, that he sent orders to have none of the Christians molested.

In the year 1600 fourteen new Jesuit missionaries came to Japan. This brought the whole number of those connected with the Society, the Japanese included, to one hundred and nine. They were divided among six central and twenty-four subordinate residences. Many of the churches that had been torn down were now rebuilt, and new ones were erected. Several charitable institutions were also established. Konishi, since his return from Korea, had been very active in religious and philanthropic endeavours. It is said that in the year 1600 there were thirteen thousand baptisms in his daimiate. His nephew showed his zeal by declaring that all the Buddhist priests in the district under his care must become Christians or leave the country. Six of them chose the former of these alternatives. Konishi himself established a leper hospital in Osaka and appropriated annual rents worth one hundred *koku* of rice for the support of foundlings. He also bought a piece of land in Sakai to be used for a church, a missionary residence, and a cemetery.

The hopes of what might in the future be done by this powerful patron of the Church were doomed to disappointment. It was soon evident that Ieyasu was trying to gain the supreme political authority for himself, and a movement against him had for its leader Ishida who had shown much favour to the Christians. He induced Konishi to join him.\* The battle of Sekigahara, October 21, 1600, resulted in the utter defeat of the confederates and made Ieyasu the real ruler of Japan, Although he treated most of his enemies with clemency, Ishida and Konishi were condemned to death. They were beheaded at Kyoto in the dry bed of the Kamo River, and their heads were exposed on the principal bridge of the city. The Christians bore Konishi's body to the residence of the Jesuits for the performance of funeral rites. In his robe was found a letter addressed to his wife and children, in which he expressed his trust in God and exhorted them to remain firm in the faith. Four other Christian lords were deprived of their fiefs.

Fear of being involved in Konishi's ruin led So, the Daimyo of Tsushima, to repudiate his wife, who was Konishi's daughter. This meant also his rejection of Christianity. The divorced wife hastened to seek advice from Bishop Çerqueira, who procured shelter for her in the nunnery at Nagasaki, where with sad heart, separated from her children, she spent the remaining years of her life.

It will be remembered that, while Konishi's possessions had been in the southern part of Higo, the northern half of the province was held by his rival, Kato Kiyomasa, a strong Buddhist. When the civil war broke out, Kato, as a supporter of Ieyasu, laid siege to Konishi's castle in Udo. Among those shut up in this stronghold were two Jesuit Fathers, three Brothers, and some Catechists. According to Japanese accounts, after Kato learned the result of the battle of Sekigahara, he had letters attached to arrows and shot into the castle, giving information of what had happened and calling on the defenders to surrender; but the missionaries induced the soldiers to burn these letters without reading them. The Jesuit accounts say that Kato wrote letters to the two priests, urging them to prevent useless slaughter by persuading the leaders to submit. He also wrote to the Vice-Provincial in Nagasaki, asking him to use his influence to the same end. The Jesuits replied that, as religious teachers and foreigners, they had no right to interfere in matters of this kind. It was soon evident to the besieged that further resistance was useless, and on Kato's promising to spare the lives of all except Konishi's brother, the castle was surrendered. The missionaries were sent to Nagasaki after they had been held for some time as prisoners.

Otomo Yoshimune, who had taken advantage of the civil strife to make an effort for the recovery of his former estates, was also condemned to death, but through the intercession of Kuroda his sentence was commuted into one of exile. Afterwards he was allowed to go to Kyoto, where he lived in destitution except as Father Organtin procured help for him. He professed repentance for his backslidings, and in 1605 he died.

Early in the contests, those that acted in the name of Hideyoshi's son Hideyori seized as hostages the wives and children of many of Ieyasu's supporters. The soldiers came to the Osaka residence of Hosokawa, the romantic baptism of whose wife Grace has already been narrated. The steward of the mansion hastened to her, saying that Hosokawa, apprehensive of what might happen, had left orders that he should put her to death rather than allow her to fall into the hands of the enemy. She at once placed her two daughters in the care of a trustworthy woman that they might be taken to the residence of the Jesuits, and then she knelt before the steward. After he had performed his sad service, he set fire to the house and joined with the other servants in committing *hara-kiri.* Grace is said to have been a very talented as well as a devout woman. In order to write letters to the missionaries she had learned to read and write Portuguese, having no foreign instruction but depending on an alphabet and a few manuscripts received from her brother. She was greatly beloved by her husband. Though he was not a Christian, he caused Father Organtin the next year to conduct solemn funeral rites in lier behalf, and at the close of the ceremonies gave a large sum of gold to be used for the poor.

Reference has been made to the Brief of Gregory XIII. that had confined to Jesuits the privilege of preaching the Gospel in Japan. December 12, 1600, Pope Clement VIII., yielding to the request of Philip III., published a Bull that allowed other orders to engage in this work upon the condition that they went under the Portuguese flag and by way of Goa, This was not wholly satisfactory to those that desired a removal of the old restrictions, and we shall find that they paid little heed to the conditions, thus giving occasion for bitter dissensions that did much to hinder the progress of Christianity.

The same year saw the first coming of men from other nations, who were in time to be powerful rivals of the Spanish and Portuguese. It was in April, 1600, that the first Dutch ship came to Japan, Moreover it brought as its pilot an Englishman, Will Adams, who holds an important place in the history of Japan's relations with Western lands. A consideration of the state of affairs in Europe at that time will suffice to show that there was likely to be little love lost between the newcomers and their predecessors; while the Jesuits could not but be apprehensive that the advent of Protestants might be even more dangerous than that of rival orders.

Of a fleet of five ships that had sailed together from Holland, all but one had fallen out by the way, and this one met with severe storms and various disasters, until at last it anchored off the coast of Bungo. Of the twenty-four men on board, only seven were able to stand, and six died within a few days. In the main they were kindly treated by the people of Bungo, notwithstanding that the Portuguese tried to excite suspicion against them. In a letter from Adams to his wife he says:

"After wee had beene there fine or sixe dayes, came a Portugall Jesuite, with other Portugais, who reported of vs that we were pirats, and were not in the way of marchandizing. Which report caused the gouernours and commonpeeple to thinke euill of vs: in such manner that we looked alwayes when we should be set vpon crosses: which is the execution in this land for theeury and some other crimes. Thus daily more and more the Portu-galls increased the justices and people against vs."

After a while Adams with one of his shipmates was taken to Osaka, where they were brought before Ieyasu.

"He viewed me well, and seemed to be wonderfull fauorable. He made many signes vnto me, some of which I vnderstood, and some I did not. In the end, there came one that could speake Portuges. By him, the king demanded of me of what land I was, and what mooued vs to come to his land, beeing so farre off. I shewed vnto him the name of our countrey, and that our land had long sought out the East Indies and desired friendship with all kings and potentates in way of marchandize, hauing in our land diuerse commodities, which these lands had not; and also to buy such merchandizes in this land, which our country had not. Then he asked whethre our countrey had warres? I answered him yea, with the Spaniards and Portugais, beeing in peace with all other nations. Further, he asked me, In what I did beleeue? I said, in God, that made heauen and earth. He asked me diuerse other Questions of things of religions, and many other things."

In another letter Adams wrote:

"The Iesuites and the Portingalls gaue many euidences against me and the rest to the Emperour \[Ieyasu\], that wee were theeues and robbers of all nations, and were we suffered to liue, it should be ageinst the profit of his Highnes, and the land; for no nation should come there without robbing; his Highness iustice being executed, the rest of our nation without doubt should feare and not come here any more: thus dayly making axcess to the Emperour, and procuring friendes to hasten my death. But God that is always merciful at need, shewed mercy unto vs, and would not suffer them to haue their willes of vs. In the end, the Emperour gave them aunswer that we as yet had not doen to him nor to none o fins lande any liarme or damage: therefore against Reason and Iustice to put vs to death. If our countrey had warres the one with the other, that was no cause that he should put vs to death: with which they were out of hart, that their cruell pretence failed them."

Adams spent the remainder of his life in Japan, where he was "in such favour with two emperors as never was any Christian in those parts of the world." Ieyasu relied not a little on his advice concerning matters connected with foreign trade. He taught the Japanese how to construct ships in the European style, and was also a source of information concerning various sciences. He helped to open the way for Dutch and English commerce. Pagés says that in 1605, when one of the Jesuits visited Yedo, where "still dwelt the Englishman Adams and many Hollanders who were his companions," the missionary, in behalf of the Bishop, offered them a safe-conduct for going to Nagasaki, and from there wherever they wished.\* "In fact, it was feared that these heretics might scatter the seeds of evil among the people. The offer was declined by Adams, who alleged as a reason that the Shogun would never consent to his departure. The Father did all he could for the conversion of these unfortunate men, but he found them rebellious and confirmed in their error."

Adams probably did not hesitate to say things derogatory to the missionaries. He is said to have told Ieyasu that the Roman Catholic priests had been driven out of Protestant countries. This led Ieyasu to exclaim: "Why should I tolerate those that are not endured by European rulers?" Richard Cocks, who became the manager of the English factory in Hirado, wrote in 1614 about a friar who had a long argument with Adams, and for the purpose of convincing him offered to perform a miracle by walking on the sea. The affair was well advertised, so that thousands of people came to behold the event. The friar stepped out boldly into the water and would have drowned, had not one of the Hollanders saved him. He afterwards reproved Adams for lack of faith, saying: "Had you only believed, I should have been able to do it." He was afterwards obliged "for very shame" to leave the country and went to Manila, where the Bishop imprisoned him for his rash attempt that had brought dishonour upon the Church. Charlevoix, who also relates the incident, is inclined, as a Jesuit, to make merry over the discomfiture of this fanatic, who belonged to another order.

In 1601, Father Rodriguez, who had been sent by his superior to solicit Ieyasu's protection for the Christians, induced him to send an order to Terasawa, the apostate Governor of Nagasaki, that he should not annoy the missionaries or their followers. Two official patents, issued at the same time, authorised the Fathers to reside in Kyoto, Osaka, and Nagasaki. Before this, Terasawa had brought accusations against the Daimyos of Omura and Arima, because they openly professed Christianity and were erecting many churches, and Ieyasu had commissioned him to destroy the buildings and send the missionaries to Nagasaki. As the accused daimyos were at Ieyasu's court, they quickly learned of what had been done, and sent word to the Father Visitor advising him to tear down the churches himself, so as to prevent their profanation. Hardly had he begun to do this, when a messenger came with the welcome intelligence that the daimyos had been able to get Ieyasu's consent to their remaining Christians, and so there was no longer any reason for demolishing the churches. In fact, Terasawa had at this time fallen somewhat into disfavour. According to Pagés, one of the Governor's servants had purchased goods for Ieyasu without at all consulting Father Rodriguez, as it had been the custom to do. Since the goods did not prove satisfactory, the servant tried to throw the blame upon Rodriguez and the Portuguese merchants. An investigation that followed led Ieyasu to issue a patent providing that thereafter all purchases should be made through the missionaries and without Terasawa's assistance. Warned by this event that it was unwise for him to be on bad terms with the missionaries, Terasawa sought to win their friendship and promised that in Amakusa, which now belonged to him, he would receive them and favour their work. The next year, when he built a new castle in Amakusa, he gave land in its vicinity for a church and also paid for its erection.

Soon after Kato kiyomasa came into possession of the territory formerly belonging to Konishi, he commenced to persecute the Christians. Having banished the missionaries, he ordered the leading retainers to sign a document in which Christianity was renounced. Many were weak enough to yield, while some allowed others to sign in their behalf. The goods of those that remained faithful were confiscated, and they were forbidden to leave the daimiate as some others had done immediately after their former master's fall. Driven from their houses, they built huts for themselves in the fields and forests. Other people were forbidden to rent houses to them or sell them food. The Bishop and other Jesuits sent letters to comfort the afflicted Christians, and one missionary managed to reach them in disguise.

The persecution was kept up until the middle of 1602, when Kato, apparently moved by fear that his acts would be censured by Ieyasu, permitted those who desired to do so to depart from his domains. The most of them went to Nagasaki, where the Jesuits gave them shelter and provided for their necessities. We shall soon see that no long time elapsed ere still more bitter persecution arose in Higo.

Father Moralez, the prior of a Dominican convent in Manila, had asked some Christians who formed part of the crew of a Japanese vessel visiting that port, if there would be an opening for his order in their country. As their reply was favourable, he wrote a letter to the Daimyo of Satsuma offering to send missionaries. In due time a ship came from Satsuma bearing a letter that invited the missionaries to come and promised them a favourable reception. The merchants of Manila were desirous of having closer commercial relations with Japan. One of the early acts of a new Governor of the Philippines had been to give what was in the main a favourable response to a second envoy who had been sent by Ieyasu, though to his request for shipwrights the reply was made that the consent of the King of Spain must be obtained before any could be sent. The ecclesiastical and secular councils having been summoned to consider what ought to be done regarding the letter that had now come from Satsuma, they were agreed that "for the sake of the propagation of the Christian faith and for the service of the King of Spain" missionaries of different orders ought to go to Japan. The particular field that each society should occupy was also decided.

In accordance with these plans, several missionaries set out in 1602. The Dominicans sent Father Moralez as Vicar Provincial, with four others of his order, to Satsuma. Apparently they went on the Japanese ship last mentioned; and in accordance with the orders given to the captain by the Daimyo, they were landed on an island named Koshiki, where a Buddhist temple, from which the priests had been removed, was assigned for their temporary abode. In a few days they were summoned to the Daimyo's capital. The favour with which they were received awakened the opposition of the Buddhist priests, who demanded the expulsion of the foreigners. While the Daimyo did not yield to this demand, he became less cordial, disregarded his promise to give land to the missionaries, and failed to provide them with a due supply of the necessities of life. After waiting three months and seeing no improvement in his attitude towards them, they went back to the island of Koshiki.

The Franciscans, who were nine in number, went at once to pay their respects to Ieyasu, taking with them a letter and presents from the Governor of the Philippines, Ieyasu at first showed that the substitution of so many religious teachers for the ship carpenters that he had requested was far from pleasing to him. He soon, however, resumed his good humour, and on the whole they had little reason to complain of the treatment they received. Four of them went to Yedo, where, by his permission, they built near the church that was already there a monastery and a hospital. The others remained in Kyoto, where they also built a monastery.

Two Augustinians landed at Hirado and soon after went to Bungo, where, in accordance with permission received from Ieyasu, they built a church and a residence.

Thus, notwithstanding the monopoly once granted to the Jesuits, three other great orders had come to share their labours, their triumphs, and their sorrows. Little attention was paid to the conditions under which the Pope had finally assented to their coming; for, as has been seen, they sailed directly from the Spanish colony without taking the trouble of going first to Goa. Petitions had been sent to Rome asking that the restrictions be removed, and it was claimed that the Pope had given so much encouragement to believe this would be done that the missionaries were justified in utilising the present opportunities. The Jesuits were very much incensed at this disregard of the papal mandates.\* During the following years a bitter conflict raged between them and the other orders, especially the Franciscans. Each side tried in various ways to get the advantage over the other, and the letters written to Europe abounded with charges and counter-charges. These contentions had not a little to do with the increasing distrust excited among the Japanese against the missionaries. The division extended to the native Christians and did not cease with the expulsion of the foreigners. Two and a half centuries later, when descendants of these Christians were discovered in Kyushu, it was found that they were still divided into groups having to some extent different religious vocabularies, paying homage to different saints, and suspicious of each other.

A report written in January, 1603, by Bishop Çerqueira shows something of the methods of the Jesuits' and the condition of the work at that time. It says:

"In every daimiate where a body of Christians is found, there is a principal house or college with its rector. There are also other residences distributed among the villages. The Fathers in these residences are not only visited annually by the rectors, but they usually assemble a few days every two months in the principal house, where they confer concerning their spiritual progress and the care of souls. Each residence has usually a church of a size proportionate to the population. In these churches reside certain tonsured men called *Kambos*, who are held in great esteem among the Christians. They are charged with preserving good order and propriety, with giving doctrinal instruction to children, and with reading spiritual books to the people on Sundays and feastdays if there is no Father, Brother, or *Dogique* to preach. It is also the duty of the *Kambos* to visit the sick, to summon the Fathers for the confessions of such persons, to inform the Fathers about all disorders and about the temporal or spiritual needs of the Christians, and especially to baptise children in danger of death, when there is not time to call a Father. They help in burials and in other necessary offices for the good of souls. The Fathers likewise support in the seminaries, as also in other houses and in the residences, a considerable number of *Dogiques* \(as the native pupils are called\). These are much esteemed in Japan and are held in high honour because they have renounced the world in order to serve our Lord in the Church. These *Dogiques* are clad in long robes and live as *religieux.* In general, they all learn the method of catechising and are trained to preach, so that they may go into the villages when the Fathers and Brothers are absent. They chant the office in chorus and form a choir to aid in the celebration of mass, having learned for that purpose the full chant, the musical chant, and how to play the organ. There is already a large number of organs that have been made by the *Dogiques* themselves, as also harpsichords, viols, and other instruments. These on occasion help to give solemnity to worship. The presence of these *Dogiques* and *Kambos* supplies to a noteworthy extent the insufficiency of workers felt by the Fathers, and the Christian community finds itself greatly helped by them, I have elsewhere stated that, as shown by the appended reports, the number of Fathers and Brothers of the Society is one hundred and twenty-six; that of the *Dogiques* exceeds two hundred and eighty-four; and that of the *Kambos,* one hundred and seventy. Thus all the workers supported by the Society and helping in the conversion of this people amount to more than five hundred and seventy persons, not to mention the servants and the labourers for carrying baggage and performing other services, who live in the houses and residences. Such persons are numerous, for the Japanese by the customs of the country have their employment defined; each must perform work in accordance with his condition, and the labour of servants cannot be taken by the *Dogiques.* Hence, in fact, the Society usually supports more than nine hundred persons.

"I have stated that the Fathers in the residences are constantly making circuits among the villages in order to instruct the Christians and to administer the sacraments. In the midst of a thousand difficulties and trials they busy themselves night and day with the confessions of the sick, travelling through rain and snow as well as through excessive heat, and going with great zeal to places two or three leagues from their residences. I have found that among the *Dogiques* a large number learn Latin so that they may be more helpful in these ministrations and also in order that they may become Brothers or Seminarists. Great numbers of them have been received into the Society under these last titles. I myself have brought together many of these *Dogiques.* I keep them in my house, where they study theological themes in order to become clerics. Others learn painting and the art of engraving on wood so as to make pictures or blocks for printing in European as well as in Japanese characters, which is a great help for this church. I have found the churches very well provided with paintings in oil or distemper, which the *Dogiques* know how to execute marvellously well, many of them being excellent artists. The Fathers distribute a great number of pictures in water colours and of engravings. This helps arouse the devotion of the Christians. As reported by the Rector of Nagasaki, Latin and Japanese books have been published, a great number of European books and various spiritual treatises having been translated and printed in Japanese characters. I have personally seen and examined some of these books, and have given permission for printing them. Afterwards they are distributed by the same Fathers, to the very great benefit of the Christians.

"All of these things are not accomplished without costing the Fathers a large sum. I have made proof of this and have actually seen the expenditures that the Fathers make to erect and adorn the great number of churches under their care. In fact, the Japanese are usually poor and are oppressed by their lords, so that, although they contribute by means of their own labour as well as by gifts of timber and other materials used in the construction of churches, the expense in silver and commodities for paying the carpenters or supplying artisans and labourers falls entirely upon the Fathers. Notwithstanding that all the churches, like most other buildings in Japan, are constructed of wood, and that their size is proportioned to the localities where they are situated, the expense amounts to a large sum. In small villages the cost of a church is ten, fifteen, or even thirty cruzades; and in other places fifty, eighty, or one hundred. For the churches of the principal cities one hundred, eight hundred, or one thousand crusades are spent. In the city of Nagasaki three thousand were spent, although in fact the greater part of this sum has been realised from the alms of the Christians in that city, as is noted in the report of the Rector of Nagasaki. Churches like those of Nagasaki, Arima, and Omura are not and could not be built without the permission of the lord of the country nor without his providing at least a part of the funds. This is stated in the reports of the Rectors of Arima and Omura. Moreover, as all the churches are of wood, it follows that they are easily destroyed and annihilated by fires, persecutions, and wars.....I find, nevertheless, that at the present time, that is, at the beginning of 1603, the Fathers of the Society possess in Japan two colleges—that of Nagasaki and that of Arima—; a house of probation in the place called 'All Saints'; two seminaries—a great one in Arima and a smaller one in Nagasaki—; and independently of these establishments, twenty-one residences where Fathers are domiciled in different provinces; with more than one hundred and eighty churches, as reports presented to me declare. As to the number of Christians; before the war of 1600 and when the lands of Augustine, Simon Findecan, and other Christian lords were in their primitive condition, it may have reached three hundred thousand\*. . . Meanwhile, as a result of the war and the re-distribution of fiefs, all the Christian communities have suffered great loss. The Christians have scattered among the different provinces; some have apostatised because of the pressure of their gentile lords; and others are dispersed among the gentiles without constituting a company or a religious family."

In 1603 Ieyasu took the decisive step of having himself appointed Shogun. This rank had not been taken by Nobunaga or Hideyoshi; indeed Ieyasu was the only one of the trio who was a descendant of the Minamoto family, to which custom prescribed the limitation of the honour. By this step he placed himself above Hideyori, whom he left in possession of the strong castle of Osaka with a large revenue to be derived from three provinces.

Though Hideyoshi's edicts against Christianity had never been repealed, the new Shogun showed no inclination to have them enforced. Indeed, he himself gave financial aid to the missionaries. The only regular source of support for the Jesuits was in the subsidies sent by the Pope and the Spanish King. Often these were deficient or their payment was delayed. That of the King had fallen into arrears. These subsidies were sent by way of Macao, where with the Pope's approval the money was invested in merchandise that formed part of the cargo brought by the Great Ship that annually sailed from that port to Japan, Sometimes the failure of the vessel to complete the voyage caused the missionaries great trouble. It was thus in the year 1603, when it was captured by the Dutch. This misfortune came at a time when the care of the exiles from Higo was increasing the burdens of the missionaries. As a consequence, they were obliged to dismiss some of their pupils and to retrench expenses in other ways. On hearing of their distress, Ieyasu sent them a gift of three hundred and fifty taels and offered to lend them five thousand more until the arrival of the next annual ship.

In August, 1603, Father Bermeo, the newly appointed Commissary of the Franciscans, reached Japan and at once wrote a letter to Bishop Çerqueira enclosing communications from the Archbishop of Manila and from others in the Philippines, including the Vice-Provincial of the Jesuits. In his reply, the Bishop with courteous but plain words rebuked the zeal that led to disregard of the papal prohibitions. He said that his conscience compelled him to refuse the Franciscans permission to exercise their ministry in Japan, for he could not admit them as labourers in that vineyard until they proved that they had proper authorisation for doing what the Popes had forbidden.\* In utter disregard for his authority, the Franciscans proceeded to establish new residences in Osaka and Sakai, while at Kyoto a Japanese Christian, in fulfilment of a vow, built for them a monastery and a church.

Meanwhile the Dominicans, on the island of Koshiki, were living in great destitution. On hearing of their devotion and austerities, the Daimyo offered to assign to them the revenues of a small village. They replied that the rules of their order did not permit the acceptance of such a gift. They consented, however, to use for a time a boat with twelve oarsmen that he put at their disposal for conveying them to and from the mainland of Kyushu, whither they frequently went for evangelistic work. He afterwards gave them permission to build a church and a residence in the city of Kyodomari.

Persecution was renewed in Higo. It is asserted that Kato Kiyomasa at first gave orders for the execution of all his officers who were Christians, but was led to desist by the thought that such an act would excite horror and might enable the Christians, who were numerous in Ieyasu's court, to bring about his downfall. As he had done before with those who had been Konishi's leading retainers, so now he did with many others, confiscating their goods and driving them from their homes. In October, 1603, he visited several cities, coming first to Yatsushiro, where he gave the officers charge to do all they could to make the Christians apostatise. In November, all the under-officials were ordered to appear before a famous bonze who had been invited to the city that he might superintend a ceremony that implied an acceptance of Buddhism by all that took part in it. Some who had been numbered among the Christians shared in the exercises, but fourteen refused. Afterwards these yielded, with the exception of two, John Minami and Simon Takeda. The former of these had shown less bravery two years before when, in order to save his own life and the lives of his family, he had signed the promise to renounce Christianity, a weakness of which he soon repented. Takeda's name had also been signed to the paper; but this was done without his consent by a friend who wished to protect him. At this time, therefore, their sentences declared that, since they continued to adhere to Christianity after having abjured it, they with their families were condemned to die. Orders were given that the two men should be sent to Kumamoto for execution while the members of their families should be put to death in Yatsushiro. The officer that was charged with the duty of carrying out these orders was a very intimate friend of Takeda and, wishing to save him from the disgrace of a public execution, obtained permission that he also should suffer in Yatsushiro. He did his best to induce Takeda to abjure his faith and even offered to connive at his escape. The execution took place in Takeda's own house. An account, perhaps somewhat embellished, is given of the way in which the sentence was carried out December 9, 1603, a little after midnight, an executioner came bringing to Takeda a letter in which his friend told him that he must be beheaded that night. When Takeda had finished reading the missive, he thanked the bearer, and after kneeling a few minutes before a picture of Christ, went to awaken his mother, Joanna, and his wife, Inez. They prepared for him the bath that it was customary for the Japanese to take under such circumstances. After writing a few letters, Simon entered the hath and, on coming out, he clothed himself in his richest garments. He then said farewell to his mother, wife, and servants. From these last he asked pardon for any wrong that he might have done them, gave each of them a present, and exhorted those that were Christians to stand firm in the faith. Three catechists who resided in the city had been called to assist him in his preparations for death. They, the two women, and the Christian servants, joined with him in repeating the General Confession, three Paternosters, and three Aves. To his wife he then said: "The hour for separation has come. I go before you and thus show the road by which you also should reach Paradise. I will pray to God for you. I hope that ere long you will follow in my footsteps. "He repeated such words several times, although he was not aware that the wife had also been condemned to death.

The little company marched in solemn procession to the room chosen for the execution. At the head was one of the catechists bearing a crucifix, while the two others carried lighted candles. The martyr followed, holding the hands of his wife and mother. Then came the executioner with three attendants, and last of all, the household servants.

Arrived at the place where he was to die, Takeda first prostrated himself before an image of Christ and then took the appointed seat on the mats. Opposite him was the catechist with the crucifix, and on each side was one of those that held the candles. The three women sat a little behind him. Once more they repeated the Confession, the Paternosters, and the Aves. As they finished their devotions, a soldier, who had previously denied the faith, came in to pay his respects to the martyr, who obtained from him a promise of repentance. After Takeda had given his reliquary to Joanna and his chaplet to Inez, he loosened his robe and bent forward to receive the fatal blow. As the head fell upon the mats, one of the catechists, following the form that Japanese etiquette prescribes for taking up anything deserving of honour, raised it reverently as though about to put it on his own head. The mother then placed her hand caressingly on the severed head, saying: "Oh, my fortunate son, you have been deemed worthy to give your life for God's service. How blessed am I, sinful woman though I am, that I should be the mother of a martyr and that I can offer as a sacrifice this my only son, for whom during these many years I have so lovingly cared. "The wife also venerated the relic as though it were a sacred object, showing herself no less heroic than her mother-in-law.

In accordance with Kato's orders, the head was sent to Kumamoto that it might be exposed in a public place beside that of John Minami. The body was buried in Yatsushiro, but soon after was transferred to Nagasaki, that it might be placed in the church of the Jesuits.

Later in the day of Takeda's martyrdom, the two women, together with the wife and adopted son of Minami, were taken to the execution ground and there crucified. The corpses were left hanging on the crosses for a whole year in order that they might serve as a warning to the Christians. For some time, however, the believers were left unmolested, except that the three catechists were thrown into prison. The executioner who had beheaded Simon and superintended the crucifixion of the women, had been so much moved by their conduct that he soon after went to Nagasaki to ask that the missionaries would teach him the religion that enabled its followers to meet death with such joy and courage. On the day of his baptism he presented to the Bishop the sword with which Takeda had been beheaded. On his return to Yatsushiro, attempts were made to bring him back to his former religion. The next year he was banished and went to Nagasaki, whence a little later he removed to Siam.

An investigation of the complaints brought by the merchants of Kyoto against the quality of goods received from the Portuguese led in 1604 to the disgrace of Terasawa, the Governor of Nagasaki. He was replaced by a commission of five persons who were all Christians. Terasawa now changed the policy that he had recently adopted in Amakusa. He destroyed all but two of the churches, exiled some of his Christian retainers, confiscated their goods, and in other ways showed his hatred of their religion, until at last the fear that voluntary exile would seriously weaken his forces led him to desist.

In the suburbs of Nagasaki there had sprung up a new and flourishing settlement. In 1604 Ieyasu annexed it to the Imperial city, thus seriously lessening the revenues of Omura, to which it had previously belonged. The Daimyo considered that in some way the Jesuits were responsible for the change, and he took his revenge by apostatising.

In 1605 Ieyasu, then sixty-three years old, caused his son, Hidetada, twenty-six years of age, to be appointed Shogun in his place. His purpose was evidently to secure the office in the Tokugawa family. Ieyasu kept the real power in his own hands until his death eleven years later \(1616\). He caused a new castle to be built at Shizuoka, which he made his chief residence, though he often went to Kyoto, Osaka, and Yedo. This last city was the residence of the Shogun, and there too the daimyos built mansions in which they spent part of each year, while during their visits to their own domains their wives and children remained in Yedo as hostages. It will be seen that this was a great step towards establishing the centralised system that for the next two and a half centuries gave such power to the Tokugawa Shoguns.

For some time neither the nominal Shogun nor the actual possessor of power showed any inclination to annoy the Christians. The missionaries that from time to time obtained audiences with them were graciously received. The erection of churches and hospitals was permitted. Some of Ieyasu's own retainers publicly professed their belief in Christianity. In 1606, it is true, at the request of Yodogimi, Hideyori's mother, who was disturbed by the baptism of some of her relatives, the following edict was published:

"His Highness, having learned that several persons have embraced the doctrines and the religion of the Fathers, is exceedingly displeased at this infraction of the edicts. His Highness makes it known that he enjoins his servants, the nobles, and the ladies of the Household to observe the preceding law, and declares that in future the said servants and vassals must take great pains not to embrace the religion of the Fathers. Those that have accepted it must adopt another religion in its place."

It was evident, however, that there was no serious intention to enforce this order, which was issued merely to satisfy Yodogimi.

When, in 1606, Bishop Çerqueira went in ecclesiastical dress to pay his respects to Ieyasu, the latter also put on his ceremonial robes to show due honour to his guest, who was permitted to have his litter carried to the interior of the palace, a privilege usually reserved for lords of the highest rank. The next year Father Paez, the Vice-Provincial of the Jesuits, went with five others to Shizuoka. They were well received by Ieyasu and invited by him to visit the newly discovered silver mines in Izu. Hidetada also welcomed them in Yedo. On his journey back to Nagasaki, Paez waited upon Hideyori, thus giving great pleasure to Yodogimi, who from this time became less opposed to Christianity. In after years the missionaries frequently received subsidies from her. The missionaries were gradually extending their operations into remote provinces and the number of believers was increasing in all parts of the country, except where persecutions carried on by a few daimyos were causing defection and exile, or where the apostasy of feudal lords that had once been numbered among the Christians influenced their followers to return to the old religions.

The scientific and mechanical knowledge possessed by the missionaries helped them to gain the esteem of the upper classes. Hidetada asked that one of the Jesuits who understood clock-making might reside in Yedo, Feudal lords and other visitors to Kyoto were eager to see the astronomical instruments that showed the movements of the earth and planets. The missionaries improved the opportunities that were thus afforded for throwing ridicule upon the fanciful cosmogony taught by the Buddhists. The visitors, on seeing so much knowledge concerning mathematical and astronomical subjects, were more inclined to give respectful attention to what was said concerning religion. Even the Mikado asked the missionaries to come to his Palace and exhibit their wonderful instruments.

Ieyasu was more interested in commerce than in science. The favour he showed the missionaries was due to the belief that through them he could retain and increase foreign trade. Yet, as we have seen, he did not wish that this commerce should be monopolised by the Portuguese. He had tried to foster that with the Philippines. It was not merely for the sake of trade, however, that Ieyasu sought to have relations with the Spaniards. As has already been stated, he had asked for shipwrights and for experts who could help him to develop the mines that he had recently opened. The eagerness once shown by the Spaniards to share the profitable trade of the Portuguese had so far abated that they did not avail themselves of these opportunities. One reason may have been that their attention was being more drawn at that time towards the Spice Islands. Moreover, their experiences with the Japanese did not incline them to be very favourable to the nation. The *San Felipe,* driven on the coast of Tosa in 1596, had been confiscated, as has already been related. In 1602 another storm-tossed ship, seeking refuge in a harbour of the same province, was surrounded by guard-boats and escaped only by opening fire upon them. Though Ieyasu issued orders that such ships should thereafter be free from molestation, the merchants could not quickly forget these experiences. Many Japanese had gone to the Philippines, where they gained the reputation of being turbulent disturbers of the peace. In a despatch sent to the Spanish Governor in 1605, Ieyasu asked that these people should not be allowed to return to Japan. They were said to number fifteen thousand, and that same year they had been engaged in a quarrel with the Spaniards, which was kept from becoming serious by the intervention of a priest. In 1608 the Japanese residing in Manila engaged in a riot that had to be put down by force of arms. The Spaniards feared that the Japanese, if taught how to build European ships, would use these in piratical or military movements against the Philippines.

Two ships sent out by the Dutch East India Company reached Japan in July, 1609, and the kindness that the Daimyo of Hirado had shown to the Hollanders, who had been Will Adams's companions, was now requited by having that city chosen as the place for a new factory that was established by their countrymen.

Not quite two months after the arrival of the Dutch, two Spanish vessels on their way from Manila to Mexico were wrecked, one on the coast of Bungo, the other on the coast of Awa, about forty miles from Yedo. Among the passengers saved from the latter was Don Rodrigo Vivero, who had just finished a short term of service as acting Governor of the Philippines. Being taken to Yedo and afterwards to Shizuoka, he was treated with great honour by both Hidetada and Ieyasu. He took the opportunity to present three requests:

1. That Christian priests of different orders who came to Japan should be protected and have the free use of their houses and churches.

2. That an alliance between the Shogun and the King of Spain be confirmed.

3. That, as an attestation to this alliance, the Hollanders should be expelled, since they were the sworn enemies of the Spaniards, and the worst kind of pirates.

Ieyasu assented to the first two propositions; but, while thanking Vivero for making him acquainted with the true character of the Hollanders, he declared that he could not now withdraw the permission he had given for their residence in Japan. He offered to let Vivero have for his conveyance to Mexico one of the vessels that Adams had built in European style, and asked him to get the King of Spain to send out fifty experienced mining engineers who could teach the Japanese the best methods of working mines and extracting precious metals from the ore.

Vivero said that, before deciding what to do, he wished to visit Bungo and see if the vessel that had been driven ashore there could not be made seaworthy. Apparently he found it injured beyond repair, for he soon returned to take the ship built by Adams. He now proposed to Ieyasu that, if miners were sent from Spain, one-half of the metals extracted should belong to them, one-fourth to Ieyasu, and one-fourth to the King of Spain. The King should be allowed to have his agents in Japan to look after his interests in the mine, and these might bring with them members of different religious orders, who should be permitted to have churches and to conduct public services. Furthermore, Spanish ships coming to Japan should be protected from harm. If the King wished to construct war vessels or merchant ships in any of the ports of Japan, or if munitions of war or provisions were wanted for the Spanish fortresses in the East, the King's agents should be permitted to superintend operations and to make purchases at current prices. If an ambassador should be sent to Japan, he should be received with all the honours due to one who represented so great a monarch. A treaty incorporating these points was concluded July 4, 1610. Ieyasu, however, refused to grant the repeated request for the expulsion of the Hollanders.

To show his sincerity, Ieyasu decided that he would send an ambassador bearing rich presents to King Philip and to the Viceroy of New Spain. In response to his request that Vivero would choose one of the missionaries to be the ambassador, Father Munoz was selected. The despatches and presents were put in the care of Vivero himself, to whom were also given four thousand ducats for fitting up the vessel in which he and Munoz set sail, August J, 1610.

Meanwhile the relations with the Portuguese were becoming more strained. A Japanese vessel on its return voyage from Cambodia wintered in Macao. A quarrel that arose between its crew and the Portuguese developed into a fight in which many were wounded and some killed. Pessoa, the Portuguese Governor, quelled the disturbance and made the Japanese sign a document in which they acknowledged that the blame lay entirely with them. On returning to their own land, they made loud complaints that they had been treated with great injustice. The next January \(1610\) Pessoa came to Nagasaki in command of the annual ship, La Madre *de Dios,* Ieyasu sent orders to the Daimyo of Arima that he should seize the vessel and take Pessoa, alive or dead. The ship was therefore surrounded by a flotilla of boats carrying more than twelve hundred men. For three days a fierce fight was carried on. Finally Pessoa set fire to the magazine. The vessel, with a cargo valued at a million ducats, sank beneath the waves, and the few Portuguese who were not destroyed with the ship were massacred. As this disaster brought to the Jesuits the loss of their subsidy for two years, they were in such great financial straits that they were obliged to close their seminary and also to send home the pupils that were being educated in the residences of the missionaries.

The Portuguese in Macao were in consternation when news of this event reached them. They finally decided to send an embassy to Ieyasu carrying rich presents, offering excuses for what had been done at Macao, requesting that trade might be continued, and asking that compensation should be given for the loss of their ship and cargo. Ieyasu was not inclined to do much more than accept the gifts. He gave no definite answer to the requests. He felt more independent of the Portuguese merchants because of other channels of trade that were being opened. The Dutch had promised to send ships every year, and though a defeat of the fleet of which they formed a part prevented the coming of those that were due in 1610, one reached Hirado in July, 1611, about a month before the embassy from Macao met Ieyasu. Another embassy came from Manila, and moreover a vessel had just arrived from New Spain bringing the Viceroy's ambassador, Ñuño de Sotomayor, to return thanks for the favours shown to Vivero and to present a new set of proposals as follows:

1. That Spaniards be allowed to build in Japan such ships and as many as they might desire.

2. That their pilots should be permitted to survey the coasts and harbours of japan.

3. That the Shogun should prohibit the trade of the Hollanders, in which case the King of Spain would send men-of-war to Japan to burn their ships.

4. That when Spanish vessels came to Japan they should not be subjected to search and should be free to sell their goods to whomsoever they pleased.

Spanish pride came in collision with that of the Japanese and made the conduct of this last ambassador displeasing to Ieyasu. Sotomayor was told that he must kneel on both knees while in the presence of Ieyasu and remain with hands and head to the floor until bidden to rise. To this he objected and was finally allowed to follow the etiquette of Spain. Three friars were with the ambassador during the interview. Whenever they spoke to him, he made a low obeisance in order to show the respect that he had for their holy office. He says that this made a great impression on Ieyasu and his counsellors.

On St. John's day the ambassador with his escort attended mass; his object, as he says, being both to honour the saint and to give the Japanese an example of attendance at church and of respect for the priesthood. On his way to the convent where the service was held he was met by the powerful Daimyo of Oshiu, Date Masamune, whose name will appear later in this history. As soon as Date saw the ambassador he dismounted and sent a messenger to ask that the Spanish soldiers would discharge their firearms, as he wished to see and hear them. When this was done, many of the horses in the Daimyo's train were so frightened that they threw their riders, much to the amusement of the onlookers. Afterwards, at the elevation of the Host, there was another discharge of musketry and the royal standard was lowered at the foot of the altar.\*

With the exception of that concerning the Hollanders, the requests presented by Sotomayor were granted. When in accordance with the second of these the Spaniards came the next year \(1612\) and began to make soundings along the coast, Ieyasu's suspicions were aroused. Will Adams was his trusted authority in all matters concerning European customs and it is probable that when his advice was asked, he replied, as is asserted by Roman Catholic historians, that, since in the West it would be considered an act of hostility for one nation to take soundings in the harbours of another there was good reason to suppose that the Spaniards had designs upon Japan, the missionaries \(one of whom, Sotelo, had come with Sotomayor and was now on the ship engaged in the surveys\) being emissaries of the King and employed to seduce the people from their rightful allegiance. Since Spaniards and Portuguese were subjects of the same monarch, care should be taken to guard against the machinations of each

An end was put to the survey and the captain of the ship was told that, though merchants would still be welcomed, no more missionaries were to be brought to Japan. It was at this time that Ieyasu began to take active measures in opposition to Christianity Before describing these it will be well to retrace our steps in order to consider the conditions of the churches from 1605 to 1612. Pagés gives the number of Christians at the former date as. 750,000; but it will be remembered that Bishop Çerqueira in 1603 put the number of Christians under pastoral care at 200, 000. The adult baptisms administered by the Jesuits in 1605 numbered 5, 430; in 1606, 7,950; in 1607, 7,000; and after that until the general persecution arose, such baptisms averaged about 4, 000 a year. There are no reliable statistics for the other orders.

The daimyos were allowed to deal as they pleased with the Christians in their own domains. Kato Kiyomasa in Higo and Mori in the western part of Hondo were the most severe in their measures. No missionaries were permitted to enter their territories openly and many ways were found for annoying those Christians that would not give up their faith. In a few cases those that stood firm were put to death.

In 1608 the baptism of a prominent man in Satsuma aroused the active opposition of the Buddhist priests against the Dominicans. The Daimyo, to whom the priests appealed, was already vexed that the presence of the missionaries had not brought any ships from Manila to his ports. He told Father Moralez, the Superior, that Ieyasu was complaining because none of the Dominicans had gone to pay their respects to him, and he urged that some one be sent at once. Accordingly Moralez set out for Kyoto, where he was well received by Ieyasu. In his absence the Daimyo issued orders that the Christians must give up their faith. They were also told that they must not carry any food to the missionaries, and these were prohibited from leaving their residences. For some time the only means the latter had for communicating with the outside world was by means of a leper, who on account of his disease could go back and forth without exciting suspicion. When Moralez returned the next spring, he and his associates were ordered to leave Satsuma. He at once dismantled the church and, taking with him the inmates of the leper hospital, sought shelter in Nagasaki.

Nagasaki, which Pagés describes as being "all Christian and governed by the Bishop," was still the headquarters of the Jesuits. The merchants that came thither from all parts of the country carried back to their homes Christian books and reports of what they had heard and seen in the churches. The presence of many exiles who had been driven by persecution from their own homes greatly increased the burden of the missionaries, especially when their supplies were cut short by the delay of the annual ship from Macao. The Japanese Christians, however, showed themselves very charitable and ready to do what they could for their brethren in distress. Pagés praises them for being also so "very charitable towards the dead" that they would sometimes tear off their clothes in order to pay for the celebration of masses in behalf of departed friends.

In 1611, when news reached Japan that the Pope had two years previously issued a Bull declaring the beatification of Ignatius Loyola, the Jesuits of Nagasaki arranged for a great festival in honour of the founder of their Society. The Bishop officiated pontifically at a vesper service. The vocal and instrumental music was such that a hearer "might have thought himself in Europe." There was also a solemn procession through the streets of the city. The Bishop, shaded by a canopy, carried a piece of the true Cross and some relics of Loyola. Then came the priests, the lay brothers, and the pupils of the seminary, all chanting psalms to an instrumental accompaniment. The members of various confraternities carried torches ornamented with flowers. The heathen governor of the city was "so much impressed as to declare that, if he had foreseen there was to be such a beautiful ceremony, he would have had the streets decorated and would have ordered a platform to be erected for himself so that he might at leisure contemplate all the marvellous features of the procession." The next day there was a pontifical mass and two panegyrics, one in Japanese and the other in Portuguese.

The possibility of having such a festival shows how strong a position Christianity held in Nagasaki before the breaking out of the persecutions that were soon to desolate the city and to drive out not only the missionaries but also the Portuguese and Spanish merchants who had built up the trade on which its prosperity depended.

It was afterwards believed that the coming troubles were presaged by divine signs sent to strengthen the Christians for the trials they would soon have to endure. Near the close of the year 1611, a neophyte who was hewing the trunk of a tree found a black cross plainly marked upon the white wood. The arms of the cross and the title were of the proper proportion, while the lower part of the figure was shaped like a sword. Many Christians came to see the wonder. It is asserted that one of them who had long been ill was immediately healed by drinking a cup of water in which a chip of the tree had been placed. Other cures were effected in a similar way. When the matter came to the ear of the Bishop, he had the cross brought to Nagasaki, examined into the alleged facts, and then pronounced the cross to be truly miraculous. A public service was held in which a discourse was preached telling of the discovery of this cross and the miracles that had been wrought by it. A procession was formed, headed by the Vice-Provincial of the Jesuits carrying the sacred object, while the Bishop, the missionaries, and the principal men of the city followed after. The cross was exposed on the altar for the remainder of the day and afterwards was carefully preserved, A similar cross was found a few months later in a tree that grew on land connected with the residence of the Jesuits. Its miraculous character, as in the case of the other, was attested by the Bishop. According to Roman Catholic histories, similar crosses were found at various times in different parts of Japan; and there are frequent references to other marvels.

The change in Ieyasu's attitude toward Christianity began to manifest itself in 1612. Mention has already been made of the way his suspicions were aroused that year by the soundings that the Spaniards made along the coast. His displeasure was also excited against a Christian named Okamoto Daihachi, the secretary of an officer who was practically Ieyasu's prime minister and his chief adviser in matters concerning the distribution of territory among the feudal lords. The Daimyo of Arima, desiring to have certain lands restored to his domains, had bribed Okamoto to aid him. The secretary pretended to do this and indulged in considerable sharp practice that finally became known to Ieyasu. The Daimyo was exiled and afterwards put to death, while his lands were allowed to remain in the hands of his son, who had given information against the father. Okamoto was sentenced to be burned alive. The fact that both of the offenders were adherents of Christianity increased the prejudices of Ieyasu against the religion. He exiled some of the believers and forbade his retainers to become Christians.

Many of the feudal lords imitated the example thus set before them. In that one year the Jesuits lost eighty-six churches and residences. Other orders suffered in a similar way. The Franciscan church in Yedo, though it had been erected by the express permission of the Shogun, was destroyed. Itakura, the Shogun's representative in Kyoto, was friendly to the Christians and gave the missionaries permission to remain and to receive believers in their houses. At his request, the Franciscans demolished a church that had been erected without his authorisation. By means of bribes the Jesuits were able to save several of their buildings.

The young Daimyo of Arima openly abjured his faith and ordered his subjects to do the same. Some yielded; others prepared for exile or death. The Jesuit Fathers were kept busily employed in hearing confessions and strengthening the faith of those that might ere long be called upon to suffer. The next year \(1613\) persecution in Arima became violent. The churches were demolished, the religious teachers driven out, and many Christians sent into exile. More severe measures followed. A prominent believer, previously banished from two other provinces and now resisting all attempts to make him apostatise, was invited to a feast given by a high official. In the midst of the repast a sword was placed before him. Knowing very well what this signified, he raised it respectfully to his head as is done by Japanese when receiving anything worthy of honour, examined it carefully, praised the workmanship, and handed it over to the officer, who at once cut him down. His brother was slain in a similar manner. Afterwards their mother and the two children of the first victim were beheaded.

The Christians organised Confraternities of Martyrdom to strengthen themselves by prayers, exhortations, and austerities. The children, in imitation of their elders, formed societies of their own, and we are told that they often used their scourges until the blood flowed.

The Daimyo put forth every exertion to obtain the apostasy of eight of his principal officers. He even went so far as to quote Scripture in favour of such yielding to the necessity of the times, saying with tears in his eyes that St. Peter had denied his Lord not only once but three times and yet had obtained pardon, and they ought not to be more obstinate than the great Disciple. Five yielded for a time, The other three were condemned to be burned with their families at the stake. Thereupon, four of those that had fallen repented and asked to be included in the condemnation, since they were Christians at heart. As no one would listen to them, they sent a declaration of their faith to the Buddhist priest that had presided at a ceremony in which they called on the name of Amida Buddha. The execution of the others with their wives and children took place October 7, 1613. Those condemned to die were clad in festal robes sent to them by one of the confraternities, Each of the martyrs held in one hand a lighted candle and in the other a rosary; he was attended by two of his fellow-believers. The victims were bound to stakes and surrounded by fagots. The president of the united confraternities erected in sight of the martyrs a large image representing the Saviour bound to the column where He was scourged. All the Christians joined in chanting the Creeds, the Paternoster, and the Ave Maria. When the cords that bound one of the children burned away, he went to his mother, who said to him: "Look up to heaven. "He died while still clinging to her. The charred remains of the bodies of the martyrs were taken to Nagasaki for burial in the Jesuits' cemetery.

In most other parts of the country the persecution lagged during 1613. Ieyasu's hesitancy about cutting off commerce with Macao and the Philippines doubtless restrained him from active measures. He and Hidetada received with the usual marks of favour the envoys sent by the Bishop and the Provincial of the Jesuits.

The Franciscans, though they had been driven out from Kyoto the previous year, were left undisturbed in Fushimi and Osaka. The Jesuits were in those cities and also in Kyoto. It is said that the Mikado's aunt, who was the abbess of two Buddhist nunneries, came with her mother and sister to hear them preach, and all three would have asked for baptism had it not been for the restraints put upon them by their position. In Osaka, Hideyori and his mother were showing much favour to the Jesuits.

In August, persecution began in Yedo. Father Sotelo, after the destruction of the Franciscan church a year before, had built a small house and oratory on land connected with the hospital for lepers. There he held services for the benefit of any believers that ventured to attend. This reached the ears of the Shogun, who at once ordered a vigorous search for Christians to be made in Yedo and its suburbs. Those that were discovered, including many lepers from the hospital, were thrown into prison. Twenty-two of them were soon put to death, Sotelo himself was arrested, but was released on the intercession of Date Masamune, a daimyo who possessed large domains in northeastern Japan and who now took the priest to Sendai, his capital.

At this point it will be well to consider one of the most remarkable episodes connected with the political and religious history of this period. Father Sotelo, a Spaniard of noble birth, had come with other Franciscans to Japan in 1608. Four years later he aided Vivero in conducting negotiations with Ieyasu, and he was at first appointed to go as the latter's envoy to Mexico and Spain. Ill health, however, led to his being replaced by Munoz. Sotelo had become intensely interested in plans for promoting commerce with Spain by way of Mexico. He believed that this could be made a great aid to the evangelisation of the Japanese. In 1611, when Sotomayor came as the envoy of the Viceroy of Mexico,\* Sotelo again took a prominent part in the negotiations. He was on board the vessel that made soundings along the coast of Japan, and shortly afterward \(October 12 1612\), having been intrusted with a letter from Hidetada to the King of Spain, set sail from Uraga with a number of Japanese. The vessel was wrecked the first morning after leaving port, and it was subsequent to this failure that Sotelo established himself in the leper hospital at Yedo.

He had previously become acquainted with the great Sendai Daimyo. Date Masamune was one of the most enterprising men of his day. He did much for the advancement of commerce, agriculture, and forestry. Extensive canals were planned by him and partly excavated. As is shown by his statue at Matsushima, he had only one good eye; but it was commonly said that he could see more with this one than most persons could with two. Sotelo, who had managed to get into his good graces, excited his interest in plans for establishing commercial relations with Mexico and Spain. According to a Japanese authority, Sotelo wrote a letter to Date proposing that an embassy be sent to these countries, and the Daimyo promised to furnish the necessary men and means.\* It was probably while these negotiations were being carried on that Sotelo was arrested and by Date's intercession was soon released. That the favour was so readily granted may have been owing to Ieyasu's interest in the project, for we find that he sent some of his officials to take part in the preparations. Pagés says that in Europe, Sotelo claimed to represent the Emperor \[Shogun\] and that he bore an "Imperial letter" to the King of Spain; but this is probably a mistake, or else is to be explained on the supposition that he had kept the letter entrusted to him five years before, and at this late date took the opportunity to deliver it.

Sotelo's plans were not regarded with favour by the Jesuits nor even by his own order. It is asserted that his superiors had gravely censured him for his unsuccessful attempt in 1612, One reason for this and for the opposition afterwards encountered by Sotelo was that trade between Japan and Mexico would be against the interests of the Philippines and contrary to special privileges granted to them. Spanish colonies, with the one exception of that at Manila, were forbidden to trade with foreign nations, and most of them were also prohibited from trading with one another. All their commerce must be carried on through the port of Seville in Spain itself. Special privileges given to Manila allowed its merchants to trade with China, Japan, and the Spanish colonies of America. It is easy to see why they would not look with favour on any plans for direct commerce between Spain and Japan by way of Mexico, while that of Mexico with Japan would be contrary to the Spanish policy, and illegal unless the Spanish King should remove the prohibition, as Sotelo hoped he might be induced to do if the Pope's intercession could be secured. The Franciscans in Japan had come from the Philippines, and their relations with the merchants of those islands account for their opposition to Sotelo.

A letter written in 1615 by Bishop Çerqueira to the General of the Jesuits says: "The Jesuit Fathers here did all they could these last few months to prevent not only the embassy, but also the voyage of Father Sotelo to New Spain. They worked hard, though without success, to get him into their hands and send him to Manila. The reason for this opposition was declared to be that if, as Sotelo desired, a large band of missionaries should come to Date's dominions, "great inconvenience may be expected to come, not only to the Christians, but also to the Franciscans themselves for having taken a prominent part in the business." Moreover fear was expressed that "should any further mission of the Franciscans or any other order come here, it might greatly excite the King \[Ieyasu\] against them and against Masamune, whose real object in wishing the mission in his estates would then become too evident. As the King, for reasons we have before given you, is already very suspicious of the Spaniards, he may be led to think there is some ominous alliance between them and Masamune." The Bishop says that he has written to the King of Spam, urging him to use great prudence in connection with the embassy. In addition to the reasons for Cerqueira's opposition that are stated in his letter, there were those that arose from the ill-feeling that existed between the different orders. This would have been greatly increased if the Jesuits had known that the letters to be carried by Sotelo asked for his appointment as bishop for northeastern Japan.

With Sotelo was associated as Date's representative one of his retainers named Hashikura Rokuemon, To their care were committed letters from Date to the Pope, to the King of Spain, and to others. The one addressed to the Pope was as follows:

"I, Idate\* Masamune, King of Oshu in the Empire of Japan, while kissing with profound submission and reverence the feet of Pope Paul V., the great, the universal, and the most holy Father of the world, say as a suppliant:

"When Father Louis Sotelo, a monk of the order of St. Francis, came to my kingdom and preached the Christian faith, he visited me. I have learned from him about that religion and he has explained to me many mysteries concerning the rites and ceremonies of the Christians. I have received these teachings into my heart, and upon examining them have seen that they are true and salutary. I would not hesitate to profess them openly if certain affairs had not hindered and invincible reasons prevented my doing so. But, although personally I am for the time being held back, I desire that my subjects at least shall become Christians. That this may be brought about, I beseech Your Holiness to send me monks of the order of St. Francis, called of the Observance. These I especially esteem and reverence. May Your Highness grant to accord to them in abundance licenses, favours, and all else that will contribute to their success. On my part, from the moment they enter my domains, I will never cease to protect them. I will help them by erecting monasteries and in all other possible ways. I likewise earnestly entreat that you will dispose, govern, and institute in my kingdom everything that you judge useful for the propagation of God's holy law, and especially I request that you will designate and appoint some grand prelate,† under whose direction and zeal I doubt not that all the inhabitants will quickly be converted to Christianity. You need not have any anxiety concerning their expenses and revenues, for I wish to assume for myself the whole responsibility and care for seeing that ample provision is made.

"For these reasons I am sending to you Father Louis Sotelo as my ambassador, from whom you will be able to inquire at pleasure concerning my intentions, for he well understands my views upon the above-mentioned matters. I beseech Your Holiness to lend a favourable ear to him and to receive him with honour. He will be accompanied by a noble gentleman of my house by the name of Hashikura Rokuemon, who has likewise been made my ambassador so that the two may go to the very holy Roman Court as bearers of my homage and obedience, and there kiss your sacred feet. If by chance the aforesaid Father Louis Sotelo should die on the voyage, I wish that such other person as he may have designated be admitted to your presence as my ambassador the same as though he were there himself.

"I have also learned that my kingdom is not far from the states of New Spain, which form part of the dominions of Philip, the very powerful King of Spain, Desiring therefore to enter into relations with him and with his Christian states, I wish to enjoy his friendship, which I certainly hope to obtain through the intervention of your authority, I therefore humbly pray that Your Highness will undertake and accomplish this, and so much the more as these states are on the road necessarily to be taken by the monks that will be sent by you into this kingdom.

"Above all pray to Almighty God that I may be able to attain to His friendship. If you know of anything in our country that would be agreeable and acceptable to you, let Your Highness command and we will do all in our power to satisfy your wish. For the present, since they come from a distant country, permit me to offer with reverence and respect a few slight gifts from Japan, For the rest, we rely upon the aforesaid Father Sotelo and Rokuemon, and we ratify all that they arrange and conclude in our name.

"From our city and court of Sendai in the eighteenth year of the Keicho era, the fourth day of the ninth month, that is, October 6, in the year of Salvation 1613.
> > > > > > "Matsudaira Mutsu no Kami, Idate Masamune."\*
Attached to the letter addressed to the Spanish King were the following propositions and promises:

"1. I am willing that my people should become Christians. Send me therefore some Fathers who belong to the order of St. Francis. I will treat them kindly.†

"2. Send Fathers every year. In the ships now despatched to Mexico I send some of the products of Japan. Hereafter please send for my use some goods made in your land.

"3. When my ships return, you can send in them people or goods without expense. Should my ships suffer damage, please give my men what is necessary for repairs.

"4. When ships on their way from the Philippines to New Spain come to this land, I will protect those on hoard. If ships are injured, I will supply whatever is necessary for repairs. In case it is necessary to rebuild the ships, I will take like care to provide what may be needed.

"5. When yon wish to build ships in my country, I will supply wood, iron, carpenters, and whatever else is needed.

"6. When ships come here from your country, I will allow them to trade freely and will treat the people kindly.

"7. When Spaniards come here to live, I will give them houses and other things. In case any of them commit a crime, I will refer the matter to their own chief and look to him for punishment of evil-doers.

"8. If the English and Dutch, who are your enemies, come here, I will not honour them. Sotelo will tell you in detail about this.

"9. Having once assented to these articles, our agreement should be perpetual."

Sotelo and Hashikura set sail October 21, 1613, from the small port of Tsukinoura, about forty miles from Sendai. In addition to some seventy persons directly connected with the embassy, there were a number of merchants, who laded the ship with screens, chests of drawers \(the *tansu* for which Sendai is still noted\), and other articles to be sold in Mexico, Acapulco was reached January 24, 1614, and the ambassadors went on to the city of Mexico, where they were received by the Viceroy with due honour. Sixty-eight of Hashikura's suite were there baptised. It was decided that his own baptism should be postponed until his arrival in Europe, As several months were spent in Mexico, it was not until October that the embassy reached Seville. This, as has been said, was the port through which passed all commerce with the colonies. Moreover, it was the birthplace of Sotelo, and the city received him and his associates with the greatest enthusiasm. In Madrid they were welcomed by the King, and there, February 17, 1615, Hashikura was baptised. Three of his followers expressed a desire to become monks, but "this was opposed for prudential reasons."\*

In the Italian cities the embassy was honoured by a succession of magnificent fêtes. At Rome the ceremonies were similar to those witnessed thirty years before at the coming of the young men from Kyushu; though the Jesuits, by arousing a feeling of suspicion concerning the nature of the new embassy, caused some abatement in the warmth of the welcome. A despatch from the Venetian Ambassador at Rome speaks of Hashikura's reception by the Pope and mentions one speech that would be likely to make trouble if a similar report of it ever reached Ieyasu;

"A Franciscan monk made a very able exposition of the embassy and said that the King \[Date\] wanted a prelate to instruct him, and also a number of missionaries; that the King, being next in power and dignity to the Emperor \[Shogun\], would endeavour to supplant him and then would not only declare himself an obedient Christian to the Church of Rome but would afterwards compel all other princes in his country to be the same. Most of the people here in Rome think there are other interests at the bottom of this affair."

Pagés says that the Pope had some thought of appointing an archbishop and four bishops for Japan, and even of conferring on Sotelo the dignity of a cardinal. Such strong influence was brought against this that the Pope finally did not go beyond nominating Sotelo as Bishop of North Japan. It was probably because of the Jesuits and of the letters against Sotelo that came from the Philippines that Philip III. objected to having one of his subjects created bishop before the royal assent had been obtained. He succeeded in having the appointment withdrawn.

In 1617 Sotelo and Hashikura, returning towards Japan, reached Acapulco and from there went to Manila, where Sotelo fell into the power of his enemies. In accordance with orders from the Council for the Indies, his papers were taken from him and he was not allowed to proceed to Japan. It was not until 1620 that Hashikura, as will afterwards be related, reached Sendai, where Date was then proving to be anything but a patron of Christianity.

Ieyasu's sixth son, Tadateru, became disaffected with his father and was suspected of having plans for supplanting his brother in the shogunate. It is thought that Date, who was Tadateru's father-in-law, may have had something to do with the plot. If Ieyasu had learned the contents of the Sendai Daimyo's letter to the Pope and what was said at Hashikura's reception, he might well have thought there was need for scrutinising sharply the conduct of his vassal and the work of the missionaries. Date's later attitude toward Christianity may have been dictated in part by a desire to turn away the suspicion that had arisen against him.

Some Japanese books speak of another conspiracy whose discovery had much to do in increasing Ieyasu's suspicions against the Christians. A petty daimyo by the name of Okubo had been made superintendent of the gold and silver mines in the island of Sado. After his death, it was found that he had been guilty of financial irregularities. This led to a close scrutiny of his books and papers. It is alleged that several documents were found that showed that Okubo had been in communication with foreigners and had entered into an arrangement with them by which they would furnish troops to aid in overthrowing the Shogun's power. Tadateru was more or less involved in this affair. The discovery of the plot led to the punishment of several persons, among whom was a brother of Takayama Ukon.

It is easy to see how the different events that have been narrated—such as the soundings made by the Spaniards, the trickery of Okamoto and Okubo \(especially if there is any foundation for the story that the latter's fellow-believers were involved in his schemes\), and the embassy sent by Date—were likely to make Ieyasu think that the missionaries and their followers ought to be closely watched. He had about him those that were ever ready to fan his suspicions by repeating the old charges and inventing new ones. In a letter written to the Pope by Carvalho, the Jesuit Provincial, he says that the chief reasons leading to the persecution were that the enemies of Christianity had persuaded Ieyasu that it taught its believers to hold in high honour those that disobeyed their feudal lords, and even to worship common criminals. These accusations, he said, were grounded on the veneration shown by the Christians for those who suffered death rather than obey the Lord of Arima when he commanded them to give up their faith, and on the fact that when a professing Christian had been executed for some crime, others knelt upon the ground in order that they might pray for him. When Ieyasu was told that the Christians worshipped criminals, he angrily exclaimed: "A religion teaching such things is devilish\!" and gave orders to the Governor of Nagasaki that he should expel all Christian teachers.

The Annual Letter of the Jesuits for 1614, quotes a letter that this Governor wrote to the Rector of Kyoto in which he said: "When Ieyasu heard that some of the Christians had gone to worship a citizen of Nagasaki named Jieobioe, who was executed for violating the law against the purchase of silver bullion, he said that it must be a diabolic religion that led its followers to worship persons executed for crime and also to venerate those that were burned or cut in pieces by order of their lords. Those that teach such a religion must be the most wicked of all men."

It is doubtless true also that the Dutch were only too willing to do their part in inciting Ieyasu to take action against their rivals. There was none too friendly a feeling between the different nations trading with Japan. We have seen how the Portuguese tried to shut out the Spaniards, how the Spaniards urged Ieyasu to drive away the Dutch, and how Will Adams said that the Spaniards were acting the part of enemies when they sounded the harbours of Japan. It is asserted that in 1611, the Dutch, in translating a letter sent to Ieyasu by Maurice of Nassau, took the liberty of changing its meaning so as to make it accuse the Spanish and Portuguese merchants of being engaged in plots with the missionaries and Japanese Christians.

The rivalry of the merchants found its counterpart in that between the different orders. This could not fail to be a source of weakness, and there are indications that in trying to further the interests of the Portuguese or Spanish traders, with whom they were in close relations, the missionaries increased the amount of suspicion that had arisen against themselves and against the merchants.

Apostates from Christianity were ready to foster the feeling against it. Thomas Araki, a Japanese priest who had been ordained at Rome, returned about 1605 to his own country and declared that while in Madrid he had discovered that Spain was using the missionaries to pave the way for the conquest of Japan. It was largely through his influence that the Daimyo of Omura was led to give up Christianity and become one of its persecutors. Japanese books tell of a native priest from Yatsushiro, Higo, who in 1611 told Ieyasu that the King of Spain every year devoted large sums to sending merchandise into lands as yet unconquered in order to help in gaining converts to Christianity. He declared that the missionaries sent hack annual reports telling how many persons they had succeeded in winning, and that valuable goods were distributed among them in proportion to their success in gaining converts. When a sufficient number of the people in any land had been made allies through their religious faith, possession was taken of the country and its precious metals were sent to Spain.

January 27, 1614, Ieyasu issued his celebrated decree against Christianity. After an introduction dealing with Chinese philosophy and Buddhism, it said:

"But Christians have come to Japan, not only sending their merchant vessels to exchange commodities, but also longing to disseminate an evil law and to overthrow right doctrine so that they may change the government of the country and obtain possession of the land. This is the germ of great disaster and must be crushed.

After speaking of the crimes condemned by Buddhism, the decree continues:

"The faction of the missionaries rebel against this dispensation; they disbelieve in the way of the gods, blaspheme the true law, violate rightdoing, and injure the good. If they see a condemned fellow, they run to him with joy, bow down to him, and do him reverence. This, they say, is the essence of their belief. If this is not an evil law. what is it? They truly are the enemies of the gods and of Buddha. If this be not speedily prohibited, the safety of the state will assuredly be hereafter imperilled; and if those who are charged with ordering its affairs do not put a stop to the evil, they will expose themselves to Heaven's rebuke.

"These must be instantly swept out, so that not an inch of soil remains to them in Japan on which to plant their feet, and if they refuse to obey this command, they shall pay the penalty."\*

To this decree were appended rules for the guidance of Buddhist priests, who were directed to examine into the orthodoxy of their parishioners. Among these rules are the following:

"Because the Christian law teaches that those who despise death can pass through fire without being burned, or be plunged into water without being drowned, and that those who die by shedding their own blood are saved, the law of the Empire is most strict. Therefore you must examine such as make light of death."

"To those who follow Christianity a daily allowance of seven cash is made from Dattan\(?\) Land in order to convert the Empire to Christianity. It is an evil law which injures the Country of the Gods, As the persons who follow these doctrines do not observe the law of Buddha, they object to paying contributions to their parish temples and dislike the establishment of the Buddhist law. Such you must examine."

". . . . By the help of their God, if they look in a mirror, they see the face of a saint; but if they have changed their religion, they appear as dogs."

"Although the parents for generations past may have belonged without the slightest doubt to one of the eight or nine Buddhist sects, it is impossible to be sure that the children may not in their hearts have been persuaded to join the evil law. The temple of the sect to which they belong must examine them."

"To every person in the Empire who clearly follows the true law a sect-certificate, authenticated by a seal, shall be given. *Samurai* shall put their seal in the certificate registry of the temple to which they belong. Those who cannot make a seal with blood shall send a certificate attested by a guarantee."\*

The daimyos received notice that they must send to Nagasaki all the missionaries living in their territories, that the churches must be destroyed, and that the Christians must be forced to give up their religion. Itakura, the Shogun's representative in Kyoto, was ordered to make out a list of the Christians living in that city. Father De Mattos at once sent his assistants from house to house that they might encourage the believers to stand firm. On the other hand, relatives and neighbours were beseeching them to renounce their faith or at least to conceal it. Though the whole number of believers in Kyoto is asserted to have been more than seven thousand, only four thousand of these were put upon the lists, and then, in order that Ieyasu might not be too much irritated, Itakura, who was friendly to the Christians, sent him the names of only sixteen hundred.

In February, the Jesuits in Kyoto were told that they must be taken to Nagasaki in order to be transported to their own countries. There were then fifteen members of the Society in the city, three of whom managed to conceal themselves. The others with some of their followers were put on boats and floated down the canal to Fushimi, where some Franciscans were added to their number. At Osaka they were joined by still others, so that there were seven boatloads, besides the two boatloads of soldiers sent to escort them as they were taken by sea to Nagasaki. There they found other missionaries and Japanese Christians brought from different parts of the country. Among the latter was Takayama Ukon. Since there were no ships ready to sail, their embarkation was delayed until October.

The tribulation through which they were passing ought to have united the hearts of those belonging to different orders; but, strange to say, it was at this time that the dissensions broke out with more virulence than ever. On the twentieth of February, Bishop Çerqueira died. Before his death he had asked Father Carvalho, a Jesuit, to care for the interests of the Church,\* and soon after this the seven Japanese secular priests had come to throw themselves at Carvalho's feet asking him to administer the bishopric until some one could be appointed by the Archbishop of Goa. This was not pleasing to the Franciscans and Dominicans, who, in addition to their jealousy of the Jesuits, were moved by a desire to have Japan under the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Manila. They therefore got the secular priests to act with them, and chose a clerk in minor orders to be their notary for drawing up an act in which they declared the deposition of Carvalho. In his place they elected Father Moralez of the Dominican order. Carvalho was not ready to be set aside in this way. He affixed to the door of the church an edict in which he pronounced a censure against his opponents and excommunicated the notary. Moralez retorted by excommunicating Carvalho. For some reason the Vicar General of the Dominicans disapproved of these proceedings and ordered Moralez to desist. The Japanese Christians and the Portuguese residents of Nagasaki became involved in these dissensions, which continued long after the deportation of many that had taken a prominent part in them.

After the missionaries had been sent away from Kyoto, efforts were renewed to secure the apostasy of the Christians who remained. Itakura would gladly have left them in peace, but Okubo Tadachika, Daimyo of Odawara, who was under suspicion of being connected with the alleged plot of the Christians to overthrow Ieyasu and Hidetada, was sent to his assistance. Okubo, who supposed this to be Ieyasu's way of testing his sentiments, made the most of the opportunity to clear himself He posted a notice in which he said that, as all obstinate Christians were to be burned alive, those unwilling to give up their faith would do well to prepare the stakes to which they must be bound. Many of the Christians followed this order to the letter.

Some women who had taken vows of celibacy were living in a community under the care of Julia Naito, a sister of John Naito, the former Daimyo of Kameoka. Okubo had a number of them tied up in straw sacks, which were suspended on poles and carried through the city in order that the women might be subjected to the derision of the populace.

According to a Japanese account, Okuho destroyed the churches in Kyoto and put some sixty Christians to death. European histories do not mention the executions, but say, what is in accord with the Japanese account, that the persecution, after being carried on for eight or nine days with great vigour, was brought to a sudden end by the recall of Okubo, who was sent into exile. Apparently he had been sent to Kyoto in order that Ieyasu might in his absence gain easy possession of his castle in Odawara.

Nagasaki was still a Christian city. Its officers were little inclined to annoy believers or to put any restraint upon the missionaries, whose numbers were greatly increased by those that had been sent there for deportation. At first it was thought wise to desist from such public religious exercises as would attract attention. After a while, however, a different policy was adopted and the orders began to vie with one another in religious processions. The first of these was arranged about the end of April by the Franciscans. After their Superior had delivered a sermon, he washed and kissed the feet of twelve poor lepers. He then threw off the ecclesiastical robes that he had been wearing over a garment of sackcloth, sprinkled his head with ashes, took a large cross upon his shoulders, and had a boy lead him through the streets by a rope that was fastened about his neck. With him were the other Franciscans, scourging themselves until the blood flowed as they walked along the streets. Among the believers that joined the procession was Murayama Toan, the Deputy Governor.

The Dominicans chose the day of Pentecost for a similar service. Two thousand women dressed in white, but wearing dark veils, led the procession. They had crowns of thorns on their heads, and in their hands carried crucifixes and other sacred emblems. They were followed by eight thousand men who marched three abreast, the one in the middle carrying a lighted candle, while the two others scourged him and themselves. At the end of the procession was a large cross covered with a black veil.

The next day came the Augustinians, and shortly after, the Jesuits. These last exerted themselves to outdo all their predecessors. As a representation of the sufferings that they must be prepared to bear, some of the Christians were tied up in straw sacks, some carried great crosses on their shoulders, some were ranged in companies of eight or ten with their necks compressed between wooden planks, some had the upper part of their bodies enveloped with thorns over which they wore heavy reed mats that pressed the points into their flesh, while still others were bound to crosses and scourged by their companions who walked beside them.

From this time until October there was a constant succession of such spectacles. In some cases they were under the charge of missionaries; often they were arranged by the native Christians. Nagasaki was crowded with believers who came from other places to see the ceremonies and to receive the sacraments before their teachers should be sent out of the country.

The time drew near for deportation. All attempts at inducing Ieyasu to withdraw his orders had been unavailing. The month of October was occupied with many sad ceremonies. The Dominicans uprooted the two large crosses that stood before their cloister and in their cemetery. These with other sacred objects that could not be taken away nor concealed were burned so that they might not be left for the insults of heathen. The Jesuits dug up the relics of martyrs that had been deposited beneath their churches, and had them conveyed to a safe place. Many of the Christians disinterred the bones of their friends and hid them away. This was not a vain precaution, for afterwards, when the persecution became more severe, the Christian cemeteries were desecrated and the remains of those buried in them were insulted.

In some of the churches solemn services were held in which the lamps of the sanctuaries were extinguished and the altars dismantled, while the worshipers looked on with grief at what was being done. "It was like a scene from the Last Judgment."

The embarkation of the exiles took place on the seventh of November. Three small junks, in such poor condition as to be hardly seaworthy, were employed. One of these was sent to Manila. Among those on board were Takayama Ukon and John Naito with their families, Julia Naito with fourteen of her companions, two secular priests, and about thirty members of different orders. The other two vessels were ordered to go to Macao, taking seventy Jesuit priests and a number of Japanese Christians.

Not all of these persons actually left Japan, The Deputy Governor, Murayama Toan,\* whose son was one of the secular priests, was probably privy to a plan by which, when the junk hound for Manila had sailed about two leagues and had been freed from the guards, small boats put off from shore and took back two Dominicans, two Franciscans, and the two Japanese priests. Some of the Jesuits also escaped, and the number would have been greater if it had not been that by mistake too few boats were sent. Many of the persons that were carried to Manila and Macao soon found ways of returning disguised as merchants, sailors, or even as slaves. There also remained in concealment a number of missionaries who had not been found at the time their associates were deported. Some of the feudal lords showed little zeal in hunting them up or in taking action against the Christians. One of those in Tamba joined with his son in openly resisting the orders, an act of nullification to which Ieyasu is said "to have shut his eyes."

The exiles that went to Manila were given a magnificent reception. The Governor, the Bishop, members of the religious orders, nay, the whole Christian populace, united in doing them honour. A splendidly decorated galley was sent to meet the junk as it entered the harbour. The booming of cannon and the ringing of bells welcomed the exiles, who were taken in carriages to the cathedral, where a religious service was held. Takayama, the most illustrious of the company, died in February of the next year \(1615\). His funeral was attended by a great concourse. Many kissed his feet as those of a saint that had suffered much for his faith. The Governor, in the name of the Spanish King, assigned the rents of certain lands to his family. He was buried in the church of the Jesuits. Eleven years later, the body of John Naito was placed beside his. Some of their associates afterwards returned to Japan. The descendants of those that remained, together with those of later exiles, form no inconsiderable element of the mixed population now found in the Philippines.

One of the most active persecutors of the Christians was Hasegawa Sahioe, the chief Governor of Nagasaki. In that city he was somewhat restrained by various privileges that had been granted to the Portuguese, by fear of an insurrection, and by the apprehension that he might be blamed if his acts put an end to foreign commerce. He had for a long time desired to be put in possession of Arima. He had already been given some oversight of the apostate Daimyo of that fief and it was partly because of this that the persecutions there had been particularly severe. He now succeeded in getting that daimyo transferred to Hyuga, while he himself obtained the coveted territory. He determined to purge it from the hated religion. For this purpose he made use of a large force of soldiers from Satsuma and Hizen. He is said to have issued the following directions to his subordinates:

"The Christians desire death in order that they may be honoured as martyrs. Hence it is not desirable to slay them, but rather to prolong their lives, subjecting them to such severe punishments as will finally overcome their resistance. The most effective trial will be to enslave their women, sending the most beautiful of them to the houses of prostitution in Kyoto. If the people will renounce the religion of Christ, they shall be exempted from imposts and other obligations; moreover, Chinese ships will be induced to come to their ports for trade, and this will be for the great enrichment of the country."

As most of the Christians in Arima stood firm, arrests and persecutions soon began. Most of the soldiers that were sent to scour the country had little taste for attacking unarmed men, women, and children. In many cases, they sent warnings before them to the villages so that the inhabitants might escape to the mountains. The men from Satsuma soon reported that they could find no Christians in the section allotted to them. Not all the soldiers, however, were so indulgent. Many Christians were arrested and subjected to torments. Notwithstanding what Hasegawa had said about disappointing the desire of the Christians for martyrdom, he caused a number of them to be put to death.

After personally supervising these proceedings in Arima, Hasegawa returned with his soldiers to Nagasaki, where he threatened that he would compel all the Chris-bans to apostatise. It is asserted that an order from Ieyasu directed him not to cause any check to commerce by taking action before the arrival of the next Great Ship from Macao, and also to be careful not to adopt such methods as would excite the people to revolt. However that may have been, another reason for the temporary cessation of persecution was that Hasegawa and his soldiers were called to take part in Ieyasu's military operations against Hideyori.

The last great struggle, which was to establish the Tokugawa family firmly in the shogunate and to put an end to the hopes that Hideyoshi's son might recover the power his father had wished to bequeath him, was now beginning. Hideyori held the strongly fortified castle of Osaka. Many powerful lords remained faithful to his cause. In various ways Ieyasu had tried to involve him in undertakings that would diminish the treasure inherited from his father, and to increase the difficulties that the young man had found in asserting his claims. At last, when the time seemed propitious, Ieyasu found means for picking a quarrel that opened the way for laying siege to Osaka Castle. After a long struggle and as much through trickery as by good fighting it was captured June 4, 1615. Hideyori with some of his retainers committed *harakiri* in the innermost citadel, which was then set on fire.

A large proportion of the Christians had been inclined to favour Hideyori. Pagés says that because of the promises he had made, all the inhabitants of Nagasaki desired his triumph. We are not told what these promises were; but among the English and Dutch traders there was apprehension that, if Hideyori were victorious, the Spanish and Portuguese priests would obtain so much power that they themselves as heretics would be driven out of the country. It was believed by many that the missionaries stirred up Hideyori to oppose Ieyasu. Will Adams wrote:

"He mad warres with the Emperour allso by the Jessvits and Ffriers which mad his man Fiddeyat Samma belleeue he should be fauord with mirracles and wounders; but in fyne it proved to the contrari." 

One of Hideyori's prominent generals was a Christian named Akashi Morishige, who found that military necessities required the burning of about two hundred temples, including three of the most important in Osaka and Sakai, A son of Takayama Ukon with three hundred of his father's former retainers joined Hideyori's forces, as did sons of John Naito and Otomo Yoshishige, besides many Christian warriors who had been banished from their homes. We are told of six great banners that, in addition to the cross, had representations of Christ or of St. James, the patron saint of Spain. Some even bore ideographs signifying "The Great Protector of Spain." Moreover, five missionaries, together with a Japanese priest, the son of Murayama Toan, were in Hideyori's camp. It is asserted that this priest led a band of four hundred Christian warriors. He was slain; but the foreigners managed with great difficulty to escape. One of them, Father Porro, wrote a vivid description of the destruction of Osaka and of his own adventures. Two of the Christians had persuaded him to leave the castle and had brought him to the mansion of one of Ieyasu's followers, where it was thought he would be safe. While there, he saw the burning of the castle and city. A high wind increased the fury of the flames. The buildings of the mansion where he had found shelter caught fire one by one, so that he was forced to take refuge in a clump of bamboos. While there, he heard the confessions of several Christians and even baptised a new convert. The next morning a company of soldiers came up and threatened him with death. They stripped off most of his clothes, but finally let him go free. Making his way among the ruins of houses and the corpses of the slain, he reached the camp of Date Masamune, who had been among the besiegers. Porro says:

"I was noticed by a soldier who, thinking I might be one of the Fathers, called to me in a very respectful manner, led me to his tent, and said that in the present circumstances he would never consent to my going farther at the very evident risk of my life. I remained with him all that day. On the morrow, which was the fifth of June, my host started for Kyoto, while I, falling once more into extreme peril, took my way toward Masamune. I found this lord on the point of mounting his horse as he started for Kyoto. I explained briefly that I was a foreigner from the city of Nagasaki and that, having found myself in Osaka during the recent occurrences, I had been reduced to the sad condition in which he saw me. I asked that he would generously assist me to go to Morro and from thence to Nagasaki. Masamune replied through a page that he would have acceded to my request gladly and at once if I had not been a Christian."

This reply of Masamune is the more noticeable because it was just at this time that his ambassador Hashikura, after being specially welcomed in Mexico, was about to proceed to Europe, where he represented his master as ready to become the protector of the Christians. After this repulse, Porro passed on through other dangers until he found persons who treated him kindly, gave him clothing, and sent him on his way until he found shelter among believers.

Although many Christians were among the soldiers in Ieyasu's army, it is not strange that the presence among his enemies of religious teachers whose deportation he had ordered, and the prominent display of Christian emblems increased his dislike for the foreign religion. Will Adams wrote:

"The Emperour heering of these jessvets and friers being in the kastell with his ennemis, and still from tym to tym against hym, couminandeth all romische sorte of men to depart out of his countri, thear churches pulid dooun and burned."

There were reports that Hideyori was still alive and that he was being concealed by the Christians. The diary of Richard Cocks, who was in charge of the English factory at Hirado, makes frequent mention of these rumours. He tells of a search that was being made in all parts of Japan "to look out for such as escaped out of the fortress of Osekey when it was burned. Soe that prive enquirie was mad in all howses in Firando \[Hirado\] what strangers were lodged in eache howse, and true notis thereof geven to the justice. It is thought the padres at Langasaque \[Nagasaki\] and else where will be narrowly looked after."

During the contests in Osaka the church had a season of calm. There had remained in Japan twenty-nine Jesuits, six Franciscans, six Dominicans, and one Augustinian. Their numbers were increased by the secret return of some of those that had been banished. Disguised in various ways and travelling mostly by night, they went about the country visiting the sick, encouraging the faint-hearted, baptising children, and even gathering new converts. One of the Franciscans, assuming the garb of a soldier and mingling with those of Ieyasu's army, managed to get to Yedo itself. He lodged for a time in the leper hospital, which was kept up under the direction of one of its inmates, who belonged to a distinguished family. This seemed a safe retreat, for the lepers were so avoided by other people that it was unlikely any search would be made among them. He frequently made his way into the city, and for a short time lived in a house belonging to the retainer of a high officer. Finally he was arrested, as were also fifty of the lepers. The hospital itself was destroyed.

This missionary, with ten or twelve of the Christians, was confined in a single room so closely packed that any person wishing to sleep had to support himself by leaning against his neighbour. There were many other prisoners, and these were constantly quarrelling about the amount of space each could have and the length of time he could sleep. In summer it was so hot that objection was made to any person's wearing clothing, because he thus made those near him warmer. The missionary, as a special favour, was allowed to wear a thin garment, though at times he himself found it unendurable, The food was so scanty that many died for lack of nourishment. The Father was kept alive by food that outside Christians bribed the guards to give him. Many prisoners committed suicide. Others were murdered. Frequently the corpses were not removed for seven or eight days. All the prisoners soon became covered with frightful ulcers. In the midst of these horrors, the missionary was at first able to perform religious exercises with his fellow-Christians; but afterwards the prison received a rougher set of men, who put an end to preaching and the open performance of any sacred ministry. The missionary remained in the prison for more than a year, when he was released by the intercession of one of the Shogun's officers, who desired to conciliate the Spaniards so as to facilitate certain commercial enterprises.

**Footnotes**

\* Kuroda was a zealous supporter of Ieyasu. Charlevoix asserts that the same was true of the daimyos of Arima and Omura; but in fact they seemed inclined to hold a neutral position until after Ieyasu's victory was assured. Oda Hidenobu \(grandson of Nobunaga\), the Christian Lord of Gifu, was among leyasu's foes.

\* *"Offrit de la part de l'évêque, à lui et aux siens, un sauf-conduit pour aller* *à Nagasaki, et de la,* *où ils voudraient." "*Hist. de la Rel. Chrét. au japon," vol. i., p. 114. One wonders how the Bishop had authority to make such an offer.

\* In the Appendix to Pagés's "Religion Chrétienne au Japon," pp. 14-28, is given a letter written in 1602 by the Bishop of japan to the Vice-Provincial of the Jesuits in Manila, It criticises \[he action of the other orders in coming to Japan and declares that the invitations they had received from different places had been dictated only by the desire to utilise them as a means for attracting foreign commerce. The Bishop asks that the letter be shown to the Governor, who is urged to forbid the coming of other missionaries from the Philippines and to recall those already in Japan.

\* It will be noticed that this number is much below what is given in the extravagant statements of many books. Bishop Çerqueira says the reports show that, exclusive of unrepentant apostates and of scattered believers living in places where they were without pastoral oversight, the Christians at the time he wrote numbered about two hundred thousand.

\* This letter is given by Pages, vol. ii., p. 33.

\* Nuttal, "Early Historical Relations between Mexico and Japan."

\* According to Pages \(vol. i., p. 202. See also vol. ii., p. 103\) Sotelo came from Mexico with Sotomayor. If this is correct, he may have gone with Vivero as far as that country.

\* See Meriwether's "Life of Date Masamune" in As. Soc. Trans., vol. xxi.

\* This form of the name is said to have been used by Masamune as a special mark of honour to the person addresssed.

† What was intended by Masamune, or rather by Sotelo, who evidently had much to do in deciding the contents of this letter, was that the latter should come back as a bishop or perhaps as an archbishop.

\* As. Soc. Trans., vol xxi., contains the Latin of this document taken from a facsimile of the original. Several other documents are given in Latin or in translation. See also some of these documents in Pages, vol. ii.

† In some versions this article begins with Date's promise to join the Christian church; but since his letters say that there were insuperable obstacles to his doing so at that time, the above version is probably the correct one.

\* Pagés \(vol. ii., p. 132\) quotes from Sotelo's account of the royal reception a letter addressed by Hashikura to King Philip. After stating the religious motives that had furnished one reason for the embassy, Hashikura goes on to say: "The second reason is that the King of Oshu, my master, having learned of Your Majesty's grandeur and of the kindness with which you shelter under your wings all those that seek your protection, has desired that I should come in his name to put his person, his kingdom, and all that it includes under Your Majesty's wings, and to proffer his friendship and his services in order that, if now or hereafter any or all of these offers can be of any advantage for Your Majesty's service, he can with zeal and affection carry them into effect."

Meriwether \(As. Soc. Trans., vol. xxi., p. 80\), quoting from Berchet, reduces this paragraph to a request for a treaty of perpetual friendship.

\* A translation of the whole document may be found in As. Soc. Trans., vol. vi., p. 46.

\* The above follows with slight changes Satow's translation in As. Soc. Trans., vol. vi., pp. 48-50. The "Hekija Kwankenroku," from which he takes it, is a collection of historical notes concerning Christianity which was printed in 1861. It bears a stamp which signifies that the buying and selling of the book was prohibited. It appears to have been compiled for the use of Buddhist temples at a time when the re-opening of Christian missions suggested the need of renewed efforts for opposing them.

The custom of having temples vouch for the orthodoxy of their parishioners was kept up until recent times. The following is a translation of one of the certificates.

"This is to certify that Jimbei and his younger brothers, Monnojo, Gonkichi, and Jinshichi, and their sister Tome, of Ishigasaki Ward in the city of Hikone, are parishioners of my temple and belong to the Jodo Sect, as did their ancestors. I will maintain against all accusers that they do not belong to the Christian sect, and if they should be examined and condemned as Christians, I hold myself ready to be condemned as guilty of the same crime.
> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > "Oyo, Priest of Soan Temple. First month, twelfth year of Kyoho \[A. D. 1728\]."
\* According to Charlevoix, a papal brief had provided that, in case of Çerqueira's death, Carvalho should act in his place.

\* Murayama Toan apostatised not far from this time. In 1618 a rival official charged him with having connived at the escape of his son and with permitting missionaries to reside in Nagasaki He was deposed from office and the next year was beheaded.




