+++
title = "10 THE RESURRECTED CHURCH 1855-1867"

+++



THOUGH the United States in 1854 negotiated a treaty with Japan, this and the similar arrangements made by other Western nations did not provide for the residence of foreigners in the country. It was, however, evident that the first breach had been made in the barriers that shut the Japanese away from other peoples and that the time could not be far distant when it would be possible for even religious teachers to enter within the walls. In accordance with the plans made by M. Colin, Messieurs Girard, Furet, and Mermet were sent in February, 1855, to Loochoo, which was again chosen as the point from which to watch the progress of events in Japan. No more cordial welcome was given to them than had been received by their predecessors. On the arrival of the French merchantman that conveyed them to Napha, the captain of the ship said to the officials:

"I have on board certain doctors, men of prayer, who are desirous of obtaining information for themselves and of communicating to you the knowledge that they already possess."

On hearing this, the officials used all sorts of excuses and arguments without being able to turn the Frenchmen from their purpose. On the ship were three other missionaries on their way to Shanghai, and one of them has left us an account of the way in which the landing at Napha was accomplished:

"After having offered up the Holy Sacrifice, M. Girard went on shore with the captain. We were to join them by another road with the luggage and to meet all together at the house of the bonzes formerly occupied by our confrères Messrs. Adnet and Leturdu. At mid-day we were on our way reciting the *Vent Creator* and *Memorare.* Some magistrates of the island came to us on our landing. We shook hands with them cordially, and having exchanged gracious salutations with them, we left these mandarins with our two confrères Messrs. Boyer and Mermet, and made our way to the bonzery. On seeing our trunks brought in and put down, the bonzes went out, looking anything but pleased One of the youngest of them asked us in Chinese: 'Why do you come hither?' We answered: 'To stay here and learn the language.' Meanwhile our luggage continued to arrive, and the bonzes with the other authorities present held a conference. One of these priests of error, putting on a long black gown and assuming an air of gravity and severity, came and bade us pack up our trunks and begone. We gave an affirmative nod, but continued to receive and dispose of our luggage."

One of the officials told the foreigners that they must go to see the Regent On reaching the latter's residence at the time appointed, they were told that the Regent was so vexed at their landing that he could not speak to them until two hours later. When they were finally admitted, a statement was read in which the Regent said that, since the people of Loochoo had a religion of their own, they did not need Christianity. If the Frenchmen were allowed to remain, other Europeans would come in such numbers as to cause great trouble to their country, which was so small, poor, and unproductive that it scarcely furnished sufficient food for its present inhabitants.

After the question had been discussed for a while, M. Girard said: "We are brought here by duty. The captain cannot take us on board again. You may be as severe as you please against us; but we cannot go away. You shall kill us rather."

The letter that we have been following says:

"At last the Regent, seeing our firmness and unshaken resolution, and fearing lest the French Admiral should refuse him his assistance against the pirates, permitted Messrs, Furet, Girard, and Mermet to occupy the bonzery on condition that in the course of two or three months they should be fetched away."\*

When Admiral Laguerre heard of this arrangement, he sent orders to the commandants of the vessels under his charge that they should not go to Loochoo for the purpose of taking the missionaries away, but only to see that they were well treated.\*

In May, however, M. Furet was taken on board a vessel of the French navy that was on its way to Nagasaki. Much to his disappointment, he was not allowed to proceed from that port to Hakodate, the commandant expressing his fear that the presence of a missionary on board would prove prejudicial to the interests of France. He was accordingly given passage to Hongkong, where he found M. Mounicou, another missionary assigned to Japan. Under the instruction of a Japanese from Nagasaki, they gave themselves earnestly to the study of the language. The next year both of them were permitted to go on a man-of-war to Hakodate, where they spent four days. They went on shore and took walks into the neighbouring villages, though they were always accompanied by policemen, who hindered their attempts to converse with the people.

In October, 1856, Messrs. Furet and Mounicou went to Loochoo. They found that their associates there had profited but little by the concessions that had been gained for them by the French naval officers. They had, indeed, succeeded in obtaining a house in the middle of the city; but it was soon found that, although guards were not posted on the premises, they were placed on the road that led thither so as to turn back intending visitors. M. Mermet wrote: "It is like living in a desert. This was formerly one of the busiest streets; now it is overgrown with grass and thorns. The houses that once faced ours have turned their backs upon us and have their entrance on the other side. The people are forbidden, under severe penalties, to come near us." Those appointed to teach them the language did their best to mislead and discourage them. Workmen and servants could be engaged only through the officials. Domestic servants were changed every month, and were ordered to talk about nothing that was not immediately connected with their work. Notwithstanding these precautions, one of the servants, a young man twenty-two years of age, listened with interest to what the missionaries said about Christianity and was baptised by them. Soon after this he disappeared and the missionaries believed that he had been put to death.

With various changes in its personnel, the mission in Loochoo was continued until 1862. At times there were individuals for whose conversion hopes were entertained; but with the exception of the young man already mentioned, none went so far as to receive baptism.

M. Mermet's health was so impaired by his devotion to study that it was found advisable for him to remove, in 1857 to Hongkong. The next year he accompanied Baron Gros, who negotiated a treaty between France and Japan, This, which was similar in its provisions to the American treaty that had just been negotiated by Hon. Townsend Harris, permitted French citizens to reside in certain ports.

Unknown to the missionaries, descendants of the ancient Christians of Japan were being subjected to a new persecution the same year that this treaty was arranged. Eighty persons living near Nagasaki were suddenly arrested, and though the majority were at once set free, thirty of them were put in prison. There they endured tortures and privations under which ten of them died, while the health of others who were released in a year or two was so shattered that most of them did not long survive.\*

M. Girard, who had been made the Superior of the Mission, was eager to improve the advantages to be gained through the new treaty. His letters to the Directors of the Seminary in Paris were filled with pleas for men and means. He urged that four missionaries be sent at once so that the ports, as soon as opened, should be provided with priests who could administer the sacraments to the European residents, and also seek out the Japanese Christians who, there was reason to believe, were to be found in different parts of Japan.

M, Girard himself arrived in Yedo, September 6, 1859. A few days later, at the formal ratification of the French treaty, he was present in ecclesiastical dress and was officially recognised as a priest temporarily serving as interpreter for the Consul-General of France. Apparently the fact of his being an ecclesiastic did not excite any prejudice, and the Government graciously furnished three persons to instruct him in the language. A few months later, he commenced to teach French to a number of young officials. Some of their superiors were always present during the lessons, probably to prevent too intimate relations with the pupils and the introduction of dangerous subjects.

In November, 1859, M. Mermet reached Hakodate. His experiences in Loochoo and the knowledge that he had already gained of the Japanese language enabled him to confer directly with the Japanese officials and to set aside the many obstacles that they at first put in his way. The vigour with which he began his labours is shown by a letter that he wrote only eight days after his arrival. In it he said:

"I wish I could tell you of being already settled in my house, which is to cost a hundred dollars; but that cannot be for another week. Every day the house is getting into shape. I spur on the workmen, and cheer them with *sake* at an expense of four hundred cash a week. I am very busy. I am giving lessons in English and French; I help the Consul; I go about among the ships; I measure rafters and beams; I plan out work that Mrs. Hodgson \(wife of the English Consul\] is doing for the adornment of my chapel, which will be very handsome, thanks to the cheapness of silks and embroideries. . . . I have had an audience with three Japanese princes. I have seen and conquered. A fine piece of land has been granted to me temporarily, that is, so long as I remain in Hakodate. This has made all the consuls jealous, since none of them had been able to procure it for even a term of six months."

A month later he had commenced the erection of a chapel. He appeared to have won the good will of all classes of people. He wrote:

"I have visited the principal officers of the city and have been visited by them. On showing them my modest chapel, I said that I had built it for them and for all the Japanese. . . . They have given me all necessary aid for the pursuit of my studies. Everybody knows me and salutes me with respect. Alt the Japanese strive to find some excuse for coming to see me. There are some sick people for whom I am caring, and they do not know how to express sufficiently their gratitude. My little chapel is frequented by Russians as well as by some American and English Catholics. Foreign residents, seeing that I am on such good terms with the authorities, come to visit me. I have opened a school for teaching French."

In March of the next year he wrote:

"Everybody comes to talk with me, even the bonzes, who in the bottom of their hearts hate me and who every week preach against me sermons whose invariable conclusion is: 'May the holy Amida drive out the erroneous doctrine of the Frenchman. this, however, does not prevent them from coming to taste my wine nor from sending me presents of little cakes,"

With all his interruptions, M. Mermet found time for study. He prepared an English-French-Japanese dictionary, and also a phrase-book. Obtaining from the Governor permission to visit a village of Ainu, he made a collection of the words of their language.\*

M. Mounicou removed in 1861 from Loochoo to Yokohama and was entrusted with the work of superintending the construction of a church on land that had already been procured by M. Girard. This building was consecrated January 12, 1862. Though the church was nominally for the use of Europeans, it was hoped that ere long it would be frequented by the people of the country. As soon as it was thrown open to visitors, large numbers of Japanese came to see it. M. Girard wrote February 25:

"During a month our chapel has been visited every day by crowds of Japanese of every class and every rank; men, women, and children, old people, officers, bonzes. There have been a thousand on one day. We joyfully yielded to the pressing solicitations of their praiseworthy and pious curiosity; we explained the meaning of the religious pictures which adorned it, making use of them as an introduction to the more complete instruction of these people in. our holy law; when suddenly there was communicated to us sorrowful news which threw us into consternation. Thirty-three of our listeners were seized coming out from our hounds, chained, and thrown into prison. On the morrow, nevertheless, the visitors continued numerous; the same anxiety was manifested to question, the same respect and docility to hear us. Was what we heard false? Unfortunately, our new hearers soon learned by their own experience that the arrests were too true. Twenty-two of them met the same fate as the former. Immediately the panic spreads in all directions. The news of the persecution is confirmed, and the strangers in the land are everywhere agitated. Our church is deserted."\*

When the French Consul-General conferred with the Governor of Yokohama, the latter said that the Japanese subjects who had been arrested could not escape the penalty for violating the laws of their country. Finally, however, the prisoners were released after the missionaries had given a promise that they would not preach to Japanese until the French and Japanese governments had come to an understanding upon the matter. "We could not preach sooner," wrote M. Girard," and we hope to secure freedom for the prisoners and to remove the odium with which their punishment has loaded us."

The Governor of Yokohama also tried to induce the Consul-General to order that the three Chinese ideographs signifying "Church of the Lord of Heaven" be erased from the front of the building. "Of what advantage," asked he, "is it to write the name of the edifice in Chinese characters which Europeans cannot read? I see in them only a means for tempting the Japanese, and you know very well what are our ideas on this point." The French representative did nothing to comply with this request.

Soon after the consecration of the church, M. Girard left the care of the mission to M. Mounicou during his own temporary absence in China and Europe. He took with him a young Japanese who, on Good Friday, 1863, received at Rome the three sacraments of baptism, confirmation, and the eucharist.

Though the number of missionaries in the open ports was increased in 1863 by the transfer of those formerly stationed in Loochoo, there was little to be done besides caring for the foreign residents, studying the language, teaching classes in French, and waiting for more favourable conditions. In Nagasaki, a church was commenced that was to be dedicated to the Twenty-six Martyrs who, in 1597, had suffered on a hill near the city. Already at Rome, June 6, 1862, Pius IX., in the presence of two hundred and fifty cardinals, patriarchs archbishops, and bishops, summoned from all parts of the earth, had solemnly proclaimed the canonisation of these martyrs. To devout Romanists, the events occurring soon after at Nagasaki "seemed like a visible answer to the honours thus so splendidly rendered to these heroes of the Faith."

The construction of the church went on but slowly and as it neared completion in December, 1864 the builder invented more difficulties than ever. He even threatened to suspend work altogether. Just at this time the Governor asked M. Petitjean, one of the missionaries, who after two years in Loochoo had come in 1862 to Nagasaki, if he would not become the teacher of French in a school that was about to be opened "I should be glad," said the missionary, "to do what is desired; but until I am free from the cares connected with the construction of my building, it will be impossible to assent.

"When," asked the officers, "do you wish that your temple should be finished?"

"By the first of January."

The next morning three times the usual number of carpenters appeared. Work went on by night and day so that the church was completed at the close of the year. The gilded crosses on its three towers glowed in plain sight of all Nagasaki opposite the Sacred Hill \[where the martyrdoms are supposed to have occurred\]. Young and old, men and women, soldiers and citizens came to visit what they called the French Church The boys drew pictures of it with charcoal on the pavements of the public road. The old men repeated to each other stories about ancient Christians and their churches."

The dedication of the church took place February 19, 1865. The European vessels in the harbour were dressed out with flags. The French Consul and the commandant of a French naval vessel came with a guard of honour. The commandants of Russian, English, and Dutch vessels, each accompanied by a dozen Catholic marines, were present. A Russian naval band assisted in the musical part of the service. At noon, salutes were fired by all the men-of-war. To the great disappointment of the missionaries, the people of Nagasaki, usually so curious to see anything out of the usual course of things, appeared indifferent to all this ceremony. Shortly before this, their visits to the church had almost ceased. Evidently the authorities had warned them to keep away.

As we have seen, the missionaries from the first had hoped to find descendants of the early Christians still retaining a knowledge of the faith of their ancestors. Their enquiries, however, brought no intelligence that seemed trustworthy. To M. Fetitjean was given the great joy of learning that their hopes had not been without foundation. The story is best told in his own words:—

"On March 17, 1865, about half past twelve, some fifteen persons were standing at the church door. Urged no doubt by my guardian angel, I went up and opened the door. I had scarce time to say a *Pater* when three women between fifty and sixty years of age knelt down beside me and said in a low voice, placing their hands upon their hearts:

"'The hearts of all of us here do not differ from yours,'

"'Indeed\!' I exclaimed, 'Whence do you come?'

"They named the village, adding: 'All there have the same hearts as we.'

"Blessed be Thou, O my God, for all the happiness which filled my soul\! What a compensation for five years of barren ministry I Scarcely had our dear Japanese opened their hearts to us than they displayed an amount of trustfulness which contrasts strangely with the behaviour of their pagan brethren. I was obliged to answer all their questions and to talk to them of O *Deusu Sama, O Yasu Sama,* and *Santa Maria Sama,* by which names they designated God, Jesus Christ, and the Blessed Virgin, The view of the statue of the Madonna and Child recalled Christmas to them, which they said they had celebrated in the eleventh mouth. They asked me if we were not in the seventeenth day of the Time of Sadness \(Lent\); nor was Saint Joseph unknown \(o them; they call him O *Yasu Sama no Yofu,* ' the adoptive father of our Lord.' In the midst of this volley of questions, footsteps were heard. Immediately all dispersed; but as soon as the newcomers were recognised, all returned laughing at their fright.

They are people of our village, ' they said, ' They have the same hearts as we have.'

"However, we had to separate for fear of awakening the suspicions of the officials, whose visit I feared,"

What follows is a condensation of M. Petitjean's account, omitting some minor details.\*

"Saturday, March 18. From ten o'clock in the morning until night there has been a constant stream of visitors. The Japanese officers, not knowing what to make of this extraordinary concourse, redouble their vigilance, and there does not pass a quarter of an hour without some of them coming into the church. Wanted by what happened in Yokohama, M. Laucaigne and I hold ourselves somewhat aloof About noon, however, I cannot resist the entreaties of a man about seventy-six years old and two women of nearly the same age who ask permission to adore the crucifix. The good old man repeated some prayers in Latin,—*Te Sancte* and others that I was not able to catch perfectly. The entrance of officers interrupted us.

"Sunday, March 19. A crowd like that of yesterday. Some of the Japanese remained in the church even during the mass. Among them I recognised some of our Christians. To four or five who came to adore the crucifix I was able to teach the sign of the cross. They appeared, indeed, never to have made it as we ordinarily do. 'We make it thus,' one of them told me as with his right thumb he signed his forehead and breast.† Then he told me: 'In the village of Urakami not all are like us. There are some spies who watch us; and among those whose hearts are one with ours, there are some who have received but little instruction.'

"Monday, March 20*.* The number of visitors increases. The officers station themselves so as to guard the approaches of the church. In order to protect the interests of these dear souls, who would be compromised by a slight indiscretion or. our part, we abstain as much as possible from appearing in the church. When able to slip in a word, we say to them: 'Return home. The officers are watching you. Come again later and not so many at a time.'

"Tuesday, March 21. Christians and pagans come in a crowd and mingle together. We recognise the former by their lifting their hands to their breasts when their eyes meet ours. We speak to many of them, telling them not to come again for fifteen days so as not to give alarm to the Government and thus expose themselves to danger.

"Wednesday, March 22. Our Christians have doubtless transmitted our advice to others. They come in smaller numbers. The officers have disappeared or else have laid aside their swords. We are able to speak to some persons and have made an appointment to meet three men to-morrow upon a mountain near the city. We hope to find out about many matters. First, have our people at Urakami always had baptism? If not, we will teach them the formula and get them to administer the rite to infants in danger of death. In the second place, have they preserved the essential mysteries of the Christian faith? In any case, it will be useful to recall these to their minds. Finally, we will learn how they recite their prayers, and teach \(hem where they are ignorant.

"Thursday, March 23. We have returned from our appointment. Only one of the men was on hand, but what he told us is of the highest importance. In spite of persecutions, Urakami has never been without Christians. Baptism has always been administered. Paul, the man who gave us this comforting information, was not able to repeat the words used in the sacrament, for these are known to only a small number of persons. He told us: 'When a child is born, we call the person in the vicinity who knows how to administer baptism. He pours water on the head of the child while making the sign of the cross, gives it a name, and repeats some prayers that we do not know.' He added a number of points that confirm us in the belief that they observe the sabbath and feast days. They are now keeping Lent. Finally, in their prayers they frequently invoke God, the Holy Virgin, their guardian angels, and their patron saints. It was arranged that next Thursday we shall meet the baptiser of Urakami in a house that Europeans frequently visit and whose master is a Christian. It is a small house in the country where visitors go to admire the flowers and dwarf trees. We were there last year without suspecting that we were with a Christian family."

Various causes led to delay in meeting the baptiser. In the first place, the gardener, who had been imprisoned a few years before on suspicion of being a Christian, was afraid that he might again draw attention to himself, He therefore asked that the interview might be held elsewhere. On going to a mountain that was next appointed as the place of meeting, it was found to be occupied with parties of picnickers. Soon after this the baptiser came to the church, where he met M. Laucaigne and made another appointment. The following condensation of M. Petitjean's narrative tells of how this was kept:

Domingo, the baptiser, was surrounded by three or four relatives and friends. He told us that he had greatly longed for this day. for he knew we were their priests. Only the fear of compromising our holy cause had kept him from coming often to the church. But to the important point—the formula employed by him in baptism. Here it is: *'Kono hito wo paotizo in nomne Patero, Hilio, et S'ra Spiritou Sancto, Iamoun.'* The word *ego* is lacking, but in Japanese the pronoun is often understood. The *te* is replaced by *kono hito* meaning *this child, this person.* Before and after the formula are prayers to our Lord and to St. John the Baptist. Is this formula valid? Until a contrary decision has been made, we shall regard it so. At least, we shall keep ourselves from allowing the lightest doubt of it to arise in their minds To make it agree with ours I have told Domingo that the words he employs are the same with a slight difference of pronunciation which the Japanese vocal organs have gradually introduced. He has promised that henceforth he will employ the formula which I have given him in writing and he has repeated over to me. Domingo assures us that he is the only survivor of the last baptisers of the valley. In case of death or disability he will be succeeded by his son, a young man of twenty-five.

"Domingo has given us much precious information concerning the Christian community of which he is the head. Every day there is family worship. On one week the father of the family repeats the prayer aloud; on the following week, the mother; and then the children do it in turn. When any person is at the point of death, his friends gather about him to pray. For eight days after his death, supplications are made to St. Peter to open the gates of paradise for the departed one, who after that is not forgotten in the daily prayers. Domingo recited to us in Japanese the *Salve Regina* and many other prayers. He has put into our hands a unique book of Christian doctrine that he possesses. It has for its title: 'The Commencement of Heaven and Earth' *\(Tenchi no Hajimari no Koto\).* It begins thus: 'The Lord of Heaven, Deus, to whom our adoration is due, is the Ruler of heaven and earth, the Father of men and of all created things.' It was written from memory in 1832 or 1823, We find in it accounts of the Creation, the Fall, the promise of the Messiah, etc. We have found in it some errors, but they are of little importance."

The missionaries soon learned of Christian communities in other places. A young man who came to Nagasaki from the Goto Islands followed a crowd of sightseers to the church. Great was his surprise on seeing the cross and other Christian symbols. Finding an opportunity to speak to the missionaries, he told them that in the island where he lived were a thousand Christians, Only a few days later they were told of fifteen hundred more living among the mountains twenty-five or thirty miles distant. By the eighteenth of June they knew of twenty Christian communities, and were in direct relations with seven baptisers. In boats and on foot companies of believers came to see the church and to ask for crucifixes or medals. Their leaders often spent the night in the house of the missionaries.

The organisation of the communities was nearly the same in all the villages. There were usually two leaders. When possible, the first of these was a man who knew how to read and write. He presided at the prayers on Sunday and came to the beds of the dying. The second was the baptiser. He always had a pupil in training to be his successor. The baptiser did not hold office for longer than ten years; and the pupil, as a rule, studied the formula and assisted in administering the rite for at least five years before succeeding to the office. Sometimes the offices of baptiser and prayer-leader were held by the same person. The Christians had some books and religious emblems that had been handed down from generation to generation. One treatise on "Contrition" had been composed in 1603.

Traces were still to be seen of the distinctions that existed in the work formerly done by the different religious orders. One community often looked upon another as not belonging to the same religion. They used the names Kirishitan sect, Bateren sect,\* and Dogio sect according as the original teachers had been Franciscans, Jesuits, or Dominicans. Saints honoured in one village might be unknown in another, and there were differences in the days observed for fasting.

Among the prayer-leaders that visited the church was a fisherman named Michael, who came from an island near Nagasaki. At the end of the interview, the mis«manes gave him a discipline with which to scourge himself when imploring pardon for his sins. His zeal in its use soon led to his being known by the name Michael of the Discipline." He offered to put his boat at the disposal of the missionaries and take them to his own or other islands for secret interviews with the Christians. In September, M. Petitjean thought that he might venture to accept this invitation. His account of the trip, with some abbreviation, is as follows:-

"At evening Michael came to the house at the appointed hour to conduct me, disguised as a Japanese, to his boat, which was waiting for us near the station of the harbour police. The night was so dark that I did not need the disguise. Wearing my cassock, 1 went to the shore with my guide. We set out at eight o'clock in the evening and by half past eleven had reached our destination. On arriving at the hut which was to be my hiding-place, I found there more than thirty persons. It was a meeting of the leading men of the place, who for a long time had been urging me to visit them. The remainder of the night and all of the next day were spent in religious conversation. People were constantly coming and going. The village numbers at least three hundred houses, in each of which live six or seven people There is not one of them who has not been baptised. The general spirit of this Christian community is excellent. It is surprising to find among them so much knowledge of our Faith The doctrines of the Holy Trinity, of the Fall, of the Incarnation, and of the Redemption, seem to be as familiar to them as to most of our French Catholics, They know and keep the Commandments. They lead a life of penitence and perform frequent acts of contrition, especially at the hour of death. There are no books in their village; yet most of the inhabitants know by heart the-Lord's Prayer the Angelic Salutation, the Apostles' Creed, the *Confiteor,* the *Salve Regina,* and the Act of Contrition Many of them repeat the treatise on Contrition of which I have before spoken In the house whose hospitality I received they showed me with much reverence an image representing the Fifteen Mysteries of the Rosary, and below it were represented St. Francis of Assisi, St. Anthony of Padua, and a third saint whose name I could not tell. I have learned from the leaders of the community that in their village and a number of others the ceremony of trampling on the cross had not been practised from time immemorial. This exemption was due to the feudal lords, who were willing to show their independence of the Court at Yedo The same persons tell me that at the time when the ceremony was in vogue the Christian officers used frequently to substitute images of Shaka for those of Jesus Christ and the Holy Virgin."

As the officials in Nagasaki sent warnings to the people that they ought not to visit the foreign church, it was arranged that the prayer-leaders and baptisers should come to the residence of the missionaries once a month, by night, in order to receive instruction, which afterwards they should convey to the other believers. These visitors were required to give a password when they came to the garden-gate. The servants employed by the missionaries then admitted them to their own apartments as though they were personal friends, and then saw that all the gates were securely fastened so that there might be no danger of interruption.

In the last months of 1865, notwithstanding the commands given by the officials, many deputations of Christians came to the church, among them being several from the Goto Islands. M. Girard in sending to Paris for more missionaries said that in the communities known to be in the southwest of Japan the Christians were estimated at fifty thousand. M. Petitjean at about the same time put the number of those in and around Nagasaki at twenty thousand; but in 1868, he informed the United States Minister that, so nearly as could be estimated, the number in the whole empire was about twenty thousand. In 1892, the Vicar Apostolic of Southern Japan said that, in all, fifty thousand descendants of the ancient Christians were discovered, though only about one-half of them re-entered the church, the remainder—"the rich," as he put it,—refusing to do so.

As the missionaries became better acquainted with the conditions of the different communities, they were much perplexed over the difficult problems awaiting solution. The Roman Catholic Church places so much stress upon baptism that there was much anxiety concerning the validity of the rite as it had been administered, The formulas used by different baptisers were found to be more or less corrupted.\* In some cases the water had been applied without pronouncing the words: in others, the formula had been pronounced upon the water, which was then sent by a messenger, who sometimes poured it on the head of the child and sometimes made him drink it.

Difficult, too, were the questions connected with marriage; for the Christians, deprived of their teachers, had fallen into the ways of the people about them. It was estimated that one-fourth of the families were in an irregular condition, because of divorces; while the unwillingness to contract marriages with unbelievers had increased the number of those within the prohibited degrees of relationship.

It was thought that no time ought to be lost before beginning to prepare men to be teachers of these companies of Christians. The missionaries fitted up in their own house a room that they named "The Hall of the Immaculate Conception." This was used as the abode, or rather hiding-place, of boys and young men, who received instruction in Christian doctrine, and to some extent, in Latin, It also served as a retreat for visitors who needed to spend more than a single evening at the Mission.

Messrs. Petitjean and Laucaigne felt the necessity of having a catechism to be used by the leaders of the Christian communities. They thought it best to keep the terms that were already current among the Christians. Meanwhile, Messrs. Girard and Mounicou in Yokohama, were preparing a catechism in which these terms—half Portuguese, half Latin—were replaced by those used in China. The difference of opinion over this matter caused some friction. The Yokohama catechism was the first to be completed, but when copies of it were sent to M. Petitjean, he would not distribute them. M. Libois in China, made this difficulty an argument for urging the officers of the Seminary in Paris to try and obtain the making of speedy arrangements for the governing of the Mission. It was partly in consequence of this that, in 1866, M. Petitjean was appointed Vicar Apostolic of Japan.

On the feast of the Twenty-six Martyrs in February, 1866, the sacrament of the Eucharist was for the first time administered to the Japanese. The service was held in the secret Hall of the Immaculate Conception where, on the previous night, "conditional baptism" had been administered to the intending communicants, in order to set aside any question about the validity of that which had been received before. These communicants were three young men who desired to devote their lives to the service of their Church. The missionaries would gladly have sent them for study to the seminary in China; but at that time it was difficult for a Japanese to leave his country. In the vicinity of Nagasaki there was a strict registration of all the inhabitants, with a yearly inspection by the police to see that none were absent without due authorisation.

Other first communions soon followed. A regular organisation of the catechumens was made so that they should come for instruction at appointed times and in companies of not more than twelve or fifteen at once. Those that were taught became teachers in their turn, as they returned to the villages and communicated to others what they had been told. Especially in Urakami there was great zeal to receive instruction. It was soon said that every one there, from the children six years of age to the old men and women, knew the prayers and more or less of the catechism. Tomokichi, who was now the baptiser, had so many asking for instruction that he felt obliged to limit the numbers, and so he refused to teach the girls. Thereupon, several of them, aged fifteen to eighteen, came as a deputation to remonstrate.

"Have you received religious instruction in order to teach everybody except us? Do you not wish that our souls should be saved? If we die, what will become of us?"

As Tomokichi remained inflexible, they became more importunate and said:

Wretch that you are, do you wish then to keep everything for yourself? Do you despise us because we are women? Have we not as much need as others for salvation? We have fully decided that we will remain unmarried in order that we may give ourselves body and soul, to God."

They withdrew in tears, many of them resolving that they would learn to read in order that they might make use of the catechism. Copies of this, made in the Hall of the Immaculate Conception, were in circulation among the Christians. When the missionaries learned what had occurred, they advised Tomokichi to teach the girls provided they came accompanied by some of the mothers and at a time when young men were not present. Afterwards he might choose one or two widows for special instruction, who should serve as catechists for the women.

The Christians manifested great solicitude for the souls of their ancestors. To one who came, asking if it would not be possible to obtain paradise for those that had died before hearing the Gospel, M. Petitjean said: But your progenitors for several generations have been Christians." "Yes, for seven generations; but before that all were pagans." The missionary told him that he should confine his prayers to those of his relatives who, according to Roman Catholic theology, might be in purgatory.

In 1866, M. Furet came to Nagasaki, and the Mission was increased by four new missionaries. M. Petitjean was absent through part of the year, having gone to Hongkong for episcopal ordination. On his return he spent a few days in Tokyo, where he told M. Roches, the French Minister, of his fears that the believers might be persecuted, and received the assurance: "I give my word that in case your Christians are disturbed they may count upon the French Minister."

M. Furet considered that M. Petitjean was altogether too timid in trying to prevent the Christians from flocking to the church in such numbers as would arouse the opposition of the Government; but it was not long before events showed the need for caution. In November the head officer of Urakami assembled the chiefs of the villages, together with some of the principal Christians, and addressed them as follows:

"I supposed that after the misfortunes coming upon you ten years ago you had ceased to be Christians. On the contrary, I know that you often go to the European priests. I know that for a year you have been going to them for instruction, that your children are employed as their servants, and that you have carried many plants to ornament the grounds about the church. I wished to warn you earlier, but was prevented by illness. Believe me, you are doing wrong. Cease from such acts if you do not wish to be severely punished. I say this to you, who are the principal men of our village, so that you may prevail on your people not to provoke the Governor's anger by continuing to frequent the church."

All listened in silence to this exhortation and departed without making any reply. The visits by day to the church became infrequent; but every night many men came to the residence of the missionaries to receive instruction and prepare for the communion.

In January, 1867, M. Laucaigne began to make visits to the Urakami valley, remaining several days at a time in the retreats that the people prepared for him in the different hamlets. He himself has given to us some details of the methods that he used:—

"When nearly every one had gone to bed and there were but few people in the streets, I would lay aside the cassock that I usually wore and put on a Japanese dress that our Christians had made for me, a wig that was a gift from one of them, and some straw sandals, which, if it were muddy, served for but a single trip. The girdle about the waist and a kerchief around the head completed my costume. In this disguise I went among the Christians accompanied by two young men who carried a lantern and what I needed for saying mass. When I reached the Christian quarters, I was sure of meeting a company of the faithful who came out in front of their houses or walked along the fields on the edge of the road that they knew I would take. As soon as I came near them, they would kneel and make the sign of the cross; it was their way of saluting and of asking the blessing of their spiritual father. The Christians prepared for my reception little hiding-places in the most retired parts of their houses. Sometimes the little altar before which I was to say mass would be set up in a barn that on the outside had all the appearance of a shepherd's hut. It was always in the middle of the night that I said mass; all was over by dawn. Those that had been in attendance returned at once to their homes; there remained with me only so many persons as I could hear confess during the day it goes without saying that I took good care not to go out by day lest I should be recognised by the heathen. It was only by night that I went to visit the sick or changed my residence I remained but little more than a week consecutively in one place. Those were the happiest moments of my life,"

M. Cousin, a new missionary who had arrived the previous year, spent eleven days in the Goto Islands, where he administered baptisms and communions. By the first of March those in the islands and in Urakami who had been admitted to the Eucharist numbered about four hundred.

Many among the Christians showed much zeal in carrying to others the instruction that they had received. Michael of the Discipline used to set out in his boat every day, as though to engage in fishing, but in reality to visit the Christians. Though not possessed of much education, he had so thoroughly learned the catechism and some of the prayers that he could teach them to others. After a while he began hunting up believers in more distant places, as in Hirado, where there were said to be about a thousand Christian families.

As believers in remote communities learned of the presence of missionaries in Nagasaki, many of them came for instruction. Since the Hall of the Immaculate Conception could give shelter to only about twenty persons each night, others had to await their turn. The Urakami people, although most of them were poor, gladly offered hospitality to their fellow-believers. One of the leading Christians sometimes had more than twenty of these visitors lodging with him. Another was zealous in hunting up any Christian travellers who were ill. Often he would carry such on his shoulders to his house, which was thus transformed into a hospital. If any of these persons seemed in danger of death, M. Laucaigne was summoned to their side.

**Footnotes**

\* "Annals Prop. Faith," 1855, English Ed., p. 322 sq.

\* Bouix, "Martyrs du Japon," p. 241.

\* "La Relig. de Jésus Res.," vol. i., p. 547.

\* M. Mermet withdrew from Japan in 1863, giving as a reason that family matters required his presence in France He afterwards came again to Japan in the employ of the French Legation, but rendered no further service to the Mission.

\* "Annals Prop. Faith," 11863, English Ed., p. 259.

\* Fuller accounts of these and subsequent events may be found in" La Religion de Jésus Ressuscitée au Japon."

† This is said to have been the method used by the Spanish and Portuguese.

\* The name "bateren," as applied by Japanese to Roman Catholic priests, is a corruption of the Portuguese word *padre.*

\* Some examples of these corruptions are seen in the following forms.

"Iogo te baotiz'no mono i nomoune Paiter, iets Hirii, iets Seu Santi. Amen."

"Iego te paoteren'zo in nomidz Patiris, Hirii, iets S'bi-rito Santi. Amen."

"Ego te baterinzo in nomine Pater, et Hirio, et Spirito Santo. Amen.

"Iogo te baotizo mono ni nomine Pater, et Hirio, et Spirito nome eo Santi. Iesamen."




