+++
title = "12 DEVELOPMENT OF THE CHURCH 1873-900"

+++

THE telegram in which Mgr. Petitjean informed his society of the release of the Roman Catholic exiles called for the sending out of fifteen new missionaries. Evidently the officials of the society felt as he did. that the needs of Japan were very pressing. The thousands of believers now in connection with the missionaries ought to be instructed, other descendants of the ancient believers were to be gathered in, it was necessary to plan for the training of native workers, and there was reason to hope that the changes now going on in Japan would open the way for winning many new converts. By September, eleven of the fifteen missionaries that had been asked for were on the field. M. Laucaigne was raised to the episcopate and made an auxiliary of Mgr. Petitjean. A seminary for the training of evangelists was opened in Nagasaki. One was already in operation at Yokohama. In the latter city twenty young men received instruction in lithography, so that they might multiply copies of the catechism and other books.

At the close of 1873, there were connected with the Mission two bishops, twenty-nine missionaries, six sisters, two hundred and twenty-seven catechists, and two hundred and fifty baptisers. There were three churches and twenty-seven oratories, two seminaries with seventy pupils, six boys' schools with two hundred pupils, one girls' school with fifteen pupils, and two orphanages with thirty-six inmates. The baptisms that year of "heathen adults" numbered one hundred and twenty; of "converted schismatics," five; of children of Christians, two thousand and seven; and of children of heathen, one hundred and ninety-seven.

The year 1874 brought severe trials to the Christians of Kyushu. An epidemic of dysentery in Urakami and other places caused the death of about one hundred of their number. The missionaries gave medical aid, while catechists and others nursed the sick. While the epidemic was still raging, a severe typhoon accompanied by heavy rains caused much damage. The barracks put up by the Government for the returned exiles yielded to the fury of the storm, which also blew down a large part of the houses in Urakami and some other villages. The fishermen in one place lost all but one of their boats. The rice-fields, which had given promise of abundant crops, were devastated. The price of food at once rose rapidly, and the condition of the Christians was so pitiable that an appeal to European charity was made by Mgr. Petitjean.

Another trial to the Mission was the burning in December of the residence of the missionaries in Yokohama. Religious utensils, books, and printing presses, were lost in the conflagration.

One consolation in the midst of these trials was that some of those descendants of the ancient Christians who had formerly held aloof from the missionaries now showed an inclination to enter into relations with them. Some of these "separated ones" *\(les séparés\),* as they were called, had known so many cases of betrayal by pretended brethren that they were very suspicious, fearing that, if they did not keep their faith a complete secret, they might be arrested and put to death. Even their children were left without instruction until they had arrived at the age of discretion, so as to avoid any danger that might come from their not keeping silence. After these persons were convinced that the missionaries were indeed the spiritual successors of those who had taught their ancestors, they held aloof because of hesitancy about associating with other Christians. Some even united with unbelievers in inimical acts towards those whom they ought to have regarded as their brethren. Yet some of them, when at the point of death, sought the services of the priests. The kindness shown to them by other believers at the time of the epidemic did more than almost anything else to lead many of them to give up their policy of separation.

Not only in the open ports, but also in the interior, there was an increasing number of conversions. In August, 1875, one of the missionaries baptised in the village of Matsunaga \(Suruga\) thirty persons who had received instruction from a catechist. Soon after this, the number of worshippers at the annual festival of a Shinto shrine in the neighbouring city, of Numazu was much smaller than usual, whereupon those that mourned over the diminution of revenue decided that the advent of Christianity must be held accountable. They accordingly induced the officials to call together the heads of families to read to them the following document:

"Every one knows that Japan is the Land of the Gods, and that the one hundred and eighty-two Emperors, commencing with Jimmu Tenno, have for 2,535 years ruled the country. Certain foreign religions that came from India and China have already spread through the land and have lessened the respect paid to the gods. In our days the religion of Jesus also, although its followers are still few, is striving to possess the land. From a patriotic point of view this is greatly to he regretted, since it is not right that a person by allying himself with a foreign faith should become unmindful of the claims of his own country. Therefore we have this morning assembled the inhabitants of Numazu in order that we may administer to them a solemn oath, which shall be confirmed by the ceremony of offering a cup of *sake* at the shrine. By this oath they shall make a promise that neither they nor their descendants will ever accept the Christian religion. If any one violates the promise, may the gods crush him under the weight of their curses."

The people, with the exception of one man, signified their willingness to take the oath. This one declared that, since he was a Christian, he could not do it. That evening he was called before the officers, who told him that he must write a statement declaring that he was a Christian. When he had done this, they asked him what were the chief teachings of his religion, whereupon he produced a catechism, from which he read the Ten Commandments and other important sections.

When the Christians of Matsunaga heard what had happened, they informed the missionaries, who at once sent two catechists, one of whom was well known in that region, as his father was the chief officer of Matsunaga. The catechists went to see the officials who had been responsible for forcing the oath upon the people, and got from them an acknowledgment that they had not received from their superiors any authorisation for such an act. Having also procured a copy of the document to which the names had been signed, the catechists next went to the Governor of the prefecture and gained his assurance that he was not responsible for what his subordinates had done. Returning to Numazu, they advertised that for a week they would hold preaching services in the house of the man that had refused to take the oath. Though the people at first were timid, the house was afterwards crowded with persons wishing to listen.

In other places there were similar attempts to get the people to sign promises that they would not accept the foreign religion. In one village, when a Christian refused to obey the summons to attend the assembly where the document was to be presented, half of the other villagers followed his example. The Buddhist priests in Numazu were now aroused to action. They did their best to decry Christianity, urging the people not to have even business relations with its followers.

"Paganism is not the only enemy of Catholicism," wrote one of the missionaries about 1874, as he commenced to describe the missionary efforts of the Protestants and of the Russo-Greek Church. He considered that the work of the latter was inspired by the political ambitions of Russia, and said:

"The popes exert all their efforts to gain adherents to schism and thus to Russian ideas. . . . For three years the Russian schism has established its centre of action at Tokyo, from which it extends its influence to the most distant provinces. The pope, with a zeal worthy of a better cause, has educated many catechists whom he sends into the interior, where he supports them at great expense."

In 1876, Mgr. Osouf wrote that the Russian schism was losing ground, while Protestantism was "increasing and was paralysing the efforts of our missionaries by means of the publications that it lavishly scatters, and of the schools that it multiplies."

To meet what it regarded as dangerous heresies, the Mission published several books in opposition to the Protestants and Russians. Indeed, its literary efforts at this time were largely expended upon works of this kind. The most elaborate book was one in four volumes, "Seikyo Bumpa Ron" \("A Discussion of the Divisions of Western Religion"\), This, which was written as though by a Japanese, described the founding of the Christian Church, the way in which the Greek and Protestant divisions arose, and the evil nature of these great heresies. The spirit in which the book was written may be judged by the opening sentences of Vol. Ill., which treats of Protestantism:

"Having already in the Second Volume investigated the origin of the Russo-Greek Sect and shown its falsehood, evil, sin, and error, it is necessary in this Third Volume to speak of the myriad sects of Protestantism so as to show their falseness, stupidity, error, sin, and atrocious evil. Protestantism had its origin in such great sins as uncleanness, licentiousness, robbery, and tyranny. If I describe it, Japanese will look on it as so shameful and unclean that they will not wish to listen to its teachings or give their assent to it."

In speaking of the evils of schism, the writer says, that in America there are more than three thousand sects. Of Luther he writes: "From the creation of the world, never has such another wicked person been seen." Henry VIII., however, is described as being a close second, and Cobbett's "History of the Reformation" is utilised as a valuable witness for showing how even Protestant writers acknowledge the evils that accompanied and followed England's separation from Rome. The Greek Church does not fare much better than Protestantism in this exceedingly bitter polemic. Though the book may have furnished weapons for the opponents of all forms of Christianity, it may be doubted whether it helped the cause of those who issued it.

In 1876, the Propaganda decided that Japan should be divided into two vicariates; that of the south being committed to Mgr. Petitjean, who now removed to Osaka; and that of the north to Mgr. Osouf, who now made his residence in Tokyo.

At first but few converts were gained in Osaka. After having his hopes in many persons disappointed, M. Cousin in 1877 baptised seventeen adults; in 1878, twenty-one; and in 1879, forty. Hoping that descendants of the ancient Christians might be discovered in that part of the country as they had been in Nagasaki, he took care to follow up every promising clue. Information was received of several villages where it had been the custom for the officials to attend every burial in order to thrust a stake into the grave so as to prevent the resurrection of the dead person. It was thought that the apprehension implied by this act might be due to some misinterpretation of the Christian doctrine, and catechists were sent to explore the region. They found there a woman that knew the *Ave Maria.* She said that the officers still kept up the practice of driving stakes into the graves. When her husband returned from the fields, he declared that all the people of the village had once believed in Christianity; but he professed to have forgotten all that he ever knew about it. A few days after this, one of the missionaries went to see if he could find any believers; but the chief of the village, after learning of the visit of the catechists, had so threatened the people that only two families could be found whose members were willing to acknowledge that they were Christians.

In March, 1879, there were church buildings "worthy of the name" in the six cities of Tokyo, Osaka, Yokohama, Nagasaki, Kobe, and Hakodate. There were also fifty-five chapels and oratories. The Christians connected with the Mission numbered 20,146.

In 1880 Mgr. Petitjean removed to Nagasaki, he having become convinced that it was still the most important centre for the work of his vicariate. In the city itself some conversions had occurred, so that the number of Christians was about two hundred and fifty. A judge, who had taken part in the persecutions, expressed, shortly before his death, a desire to receive instruction, and he was finally baptised. The patience and resignation that he showed during his last days were so marked as to astonish the physician, who asked him how he was able to endure his sufferings without complaint, and to face death so courageously. "You would not be able to understand the reason, were I to tell you," was the reply; "let it suffice for me to say that I count myself happy in being permitted to suffer and then to depart from this life." In the Urakami Valley the Roman Catholic population was then reckoned as 3,370. Although one hundred families once included among the "separates" had returned to the pale of the Church, two hundred other families still held aloof. To a considerable extent the village had recovered its former prosperity. Strengthened by the persecutions through which they had passed, the Christians were fervent and zealous in good works. A missionary wrote of the valley as being one of the most Christian places in the world. There were chapels, schools, orphanages, a hospital, and a community of women who, while supporting themselves by tilling the ground or other occupations, also cared for the sick and orphans, taught the catechism to the children of the valley, and held themselves ready to do any work of charity to which they might he called. A large building, which had formerly been the residence of the officers charged with enforcing the laws against Christianity, where the ceremony of trampling on the cross had formerly been performed, and where ten years before the Christians had been convoked to hear the decree for their banishment, was purchased, and on July 7, 1880, the Feast of the Japanese Martyrs was celebrated by beginning the work of transforming this building into a church. Dominic, the old hero, who had stood so firm throughout the persecutions, obtained from the Governor of Nagasaki permission to erect a large stone cross on the summit of one of the hills that overlooks the valley.

At Nagasaki, on the last day of the year 1882, three young men, who the previous year had been made deacons, were ordained as priests. They had been in that company of boys that M. Cousin had taken to Penang in 1868. One of them was a son of Dominic. It is the belief of the Roman Catholic missionaries that, as a rule, it is unwise to induct to the priesthood those who have been converted from heathenism or even their children since they yet bear in their blood, as it were, such corruption as makes it doubtful whether they will not bring dishonour to the sacred office. The candidates for the priesthood should have behind them at least two or three generations of Christian ancestors. The discovery of the descendants of the ancient Christians has made it easier to follow this policy in Japan.

In Hirado and its neighbourhood were five or six thousand Christians under the care of the missionaries. They had constructed several chapels, and in 1883 they built a large church in the centre of the city. When they petitioned the local authorities to support them in their refusal to make contributions for Buddhist temples and festivals, not only was their request granted, but the Buddhists were ordered to restore property that they had taken from the Christians ten years before.

A letter written in 1883, by M. Fraineau gives such a vivid picture of some features of missionary life that the following abridgement of it will not be out of place:—

"I started, May 30, for Ichimanda, which is about twenty leagues south of Oita. In that village there were a few catechumens. A peasant who possessed the best house in the place had consented to take out an inn-keeper's license so that I might lodge there He was led to do this by no desire for religious instruction, for which he has always shown the most complete indifference, but by the love of the twelve *sous* that I promised to pay him daily for food and lodging.

"I installed myself in his house, with fleas, mosquitoes, and lice for my companions; for never have I seen a richer collection of these pests. It is the season when work in the fields is at its height, the farmers being busy harvesting wheat and preparing the fieIds to be planted with rice. The people that now serve as our landlords are labourers, in the morning, after absorbing a kettleful of a kind of vermicelli boiled with cabbage-leaves and wild greens, the whole household, including the cows and the horse set out for the field without paying any attention to my catechist and me. I ought to say in excuse for my hosts that the person who came to Oita to consult about my entertainment arrived on a fastday and so reported that I ate only one meal in \(he daytime. Thus, unknown to us, the fast had become a *sine qua non.* Behold then the catechist and me condemned to an enforced Lent three weeks long. I at one time thought of installing myself in the kitchen and leaving the people of the house free to reap their wheat and plant their rice in peace; but in the midst of heathen I could not indulge myself in such liberty. Dignity is more precious than life, and here it would be better for a person to perish with hunger than to lose prestige by condescending to occupations not appropriate to his sex and condition. Moreover, let us be patient; we shall be obliged to wait only until about two o'clock in the afternoon. It is at that time every day that the woman of the house, who has neither clock nor sundial. leaves her work and comes to see if we are still alive. In accordance with the rules of Japanese etiquette she always begins by bowing her head three times to the mat, asking us at the same time if we are in good health. She then makes many excuses, though without any real contrition, for having kept us waiting so long, and says that we shall be served with food immediately, this meaning about an hour later, since it is now that she lights the fire and begins to heat water for cooking the rice.

"In the evening it is about half past ten before we get anything more to eat. Here, as in a regiment of cavalry, the animals take precedence of the men. Before our needs are supplied, it is necessary that food should be prepared for the cows and the horse, to say nothing of the five goats that have been left from morning to night without food and are now stunning us with the noise they make in one corner of the house. However, a person that has had dinner at two o'clock can wait until half past ten for his supper. These two grand meals whose preparation has given our hosts so much trouble consist invariably of a dish of rice and some boiled bamboo-roots that have no other seasoning than an ancient flavour of salt fish with which the wooden cover of the family kettle seems to be saturated as the result of years and perhaps ages of use. Apart from such trifling defects, this is a very palatable dish. By adding vinegar and wearing green spectacles a person might make himself think he was eating asparagus.

"Let us come to more serious matters. The bonzes follow me everywhere, and I at least have the consolation of being able to say that, if they make me trouble, I also on my side give them abundant anxiety and annoyance. It is certain that at night they do not lie down in so tranquil a state of mind as I do. Yet it is not my laurels that keep them from sleeping; for thus far, in appearance at least, my labours have not been crowned with very great success.

"I had hardly set foot in the village of Ichimanda at ten o'clock of a dark night and in a pouring rain, before the temple more than a league distant that cares for this section of the country learned of my arrival and prepared a pastoral letter to warn its people of the danger that menaced them. At daybreak the next morning this letter was carried from house to house, read to the members of each family, and re-enforced by the comments of its bearer. This letter was the fifth or sixth edition of what the bonzes had already said or written elsewhere. Not only was it a tissue of calumnies, but it also contained menacing prophecies and invoked the anger of Japan's guardian deities upon all that dared to come near me. It said I was the cause of the rain whose constant fall for fifteen days had made the grain rot; the cause of the thunder which, as it appears, is more frequent than usual, while lightning has set fire to a farmhouse more than two leagues from the place where I am stopping; the cause of the floods that after the heavy rains inundated the fields to the destruction of the crops; etc., etc. These calamities are but the preludes of yet greater ones; for since my arrival flocks of crows frequently pass over the village by night with mournful croaks, and this is regarded by the heathen as a very evil omen.

"To the written lies are added such as the bonzes did not dare to put on paper, probably because they would appear too absurd; but these are propagated by word of mouth and are readily accepted by the credulous peasants. Here are some samples Leaves of trees are changed in my hands to bank-notes that afterwards resume their original form, so that a merchant who at the day's close shuts up in his safe the money received from me is likely at some future time to find in its place only a handful of oak-leaves. Hence it is always with fear and but poorly concealed hesitancy that people receive paper money from me, and I have to take special care that the notes are not of too high denominations. One day the people of a wayside inn where my catechist and I had eaten rice preferred to make us a present of it rather than give us change for a one *yen* bill. It is said that my glance will cause all sorts of evil to people that happen to meet me on the road when I am in ill humour; their bodies are likely some day to crumble into dust as suddenly as though they had been struck by lightning. By my mere wish I can poison the water in the wells, and I can confound my enemies while they are at a long distance from me.

"In the midst of these ill-disposed and hostile people I have found some friendly persons. There are some souls here that the good God seems to have chosen, and it was for their sakes that I came. Their instruction had been begun by Peter, a poor labourer who was baptised in March. On his return home he tried to teach others and succeeded in leading some families of the neighbourhood until there were more than a dozen applications for baptism. To them I was not a mysterious being, half man and half demon; I was not even a stranger; but I was the Lord's messenger, whose coming they awaited with impatience and who was able to induct their souls into a new life I was also received as a priest that had come among his children. It was a great joy for me to see the ardour with which, notwithstanding the labours of the day in what was a busy season of the year the poor people came every evening to hear an explanation of the truths of our holy religion. The catechetical instruction began immediately after our supper, that is to say, according to the custom of our hostelry, between half past ten and eleven o'clock in the evening, and it always ended after midnight by all reciting the evening prayer, which, as you see, ought to be the morning prayer. I need not tell you of the annoyances and troubles to which my new catechumens were subjected. Knowing already that the disciple is not above his Lord, they were resigned to all. There was only one thing that they could not bring themselves to accept. They did not wish that any one should insult them by calling them Christians. The doctrine of the Lord Jesus Christ appeared to them too good and its morality too pure for them to be able, notwithstanding what the bonzes said, to confuse it with the tissue of crimes and magic of which the reports had come down to them from ancient times; and they persuaded themselves that the 'Religion of the Lord of Heaven' was certainly not the same as that preached by Saint Francis Xavier to their ancestors. With all their favourable disposition and their ardour to receive instruction, they would have been ready to give up everything the day they should learn positively that they were on the point of joining the sect of ancient Christians, so much does that name, sullied by the calumnies of the bonzes, arouse hatred and repugnance in the popular mind. In the beginning I had respect for their weakness and took the greatest care to avoid what would enlighten them too quickly. They needed to be prepared for the reception of that unwelcome truth.

"Finally the time came when I could no longer leave them in ignorance. It was a very solemn moment when on a beautiful sabbath evening, in commencing a catechetical exercise on the First Commandment, I told them that the religion they were about to embrace by receiving baptism was the very one that had been reviled for three hundred years, and that the God whom they ought to worship was even the same Jesus Christ who had been so despised in their country. This declaration came to them like a clap of thunder. The questions and cheerful remarks that had made our lessons so pleasant came to an end; all the heads sank in consternation to the mats; and the deep sighs that escaped from the breasts of these poor men attested the terrible struggle going on in their hearts. I was the only one to speak and often my voice betrayed even to myself how great was my emotion. It might be that this evening would see the end of all the hopes I had been cherishing. At the close of the meeting, when I asked them whether they were willing to give way before the calumnies of the bonzes or whether they would not have the courage to make a momentary sacrifice of their reputation for the sake of God who had so loved them and had died for them, all replied with a magnificent profession of faith:—

"'Not only of our reputation, but also of our property and of our lives. If we must be called Christians, we will use that name ourselves; and far from being ashamed, we will glory in it.'

"The news of this caused a great commotion in the village. The annoyances took a new turn and became a real persecution. The village mayor and the physician, the two great men of the village, were induced by the bonzes to put themselves at the head of the movement against the Christians. Especially did the mayor, aided by a subordinate, display an ardour worthy of a better cause. When he learned that our catechumens, instead of yielding, had thrown away their idols and were preparing for baptism, his anger could no longer be kept within bounds. Unmindful of the fact that he was acting not only against human rights but also against the laws of his country, which placed him in office to serve as a peacemaker rather than as a judge, he called all the heads of families to his office and opened a court as a Roman governor in the time of Nero or Diocletian might have done. He ordered our people to apostatise under penalty, in case of refusal, of having all their goods at once confiscated and given into the hands of their creditors, and of having all the village cease from having friendly relations with them. They would be forbidden to draw water from the village well, to cut wood on the mountains, to hold communications with other people, etc., etc. The mayor thought that in view of such threats the catechumens would hasten to submit. None of them, not even of the women, appeared alarmed or affected by his words, and all openly declared that, although they had not yet received baptism, they were already Christians at heart, so that, even though their heads were to be cut off, no one could make them give up their faith.

"Our catechumens held meetings by themselves—holy assemblies in which they exhorted one another to preserve carefully in their hearts the gift of faith which God had bestowed upon them and which the devil was trying to take away. Let me cite especially the noteworthy meeting where the patriarchs of the band addressed the little company to the following effect:—

Since our relatives and friends reject us, let us form a new family. Persecuted as we are for the same cause, let us unite our efforts so as to sustain each other. Let us have only one heart and one soul. Let us strengthen our courage by a mutual agreement, and though men may try to force us to deny Jesus Christ, let us here take an oath that we will remain faithful and be ready for any sacrifice rather than abandon Him.'

"Ere the meeting adjourned the form of the oath was settled upon, and the paper on which it was written was passed around the assembly. The men affixed their seals, while each woman pricked the point of a finger with a needle and so signed with her own blood."

Soon after this M. Fraineau returned to Oita. The last of July the catechist brought intelligence of the progress of events in Ichimanda. The threats made against the Christians had to some extent been put into execution. One man had been deprived of all his property, and it had been divided among the people of the village. Probably he had been in debt to the community. After having been driven from his house, this man was cared for by his fellow-believers. Two families, whose members were preparing for baptism, had been frightened by a visitor from Nagasaki, who said it was well known in that city that when any Christian was sick the priest knelt at his side and either sucked out his blood or drove a nail into his head. After this, whenever the catechist visited these families, the women and children kept out of sight, while the men made it evident that his presence was unwelcome.

During M. Fraineau's sojourn in the village the man in whose house he lodged had overheard much of the instruction that was given to the catechumens, and had himself shown some interest in Christianity. After the departure of the missionary he had ventured to take down his idols. Two nights later his horse suddenly died. Regarding this as a punishment for his rash deed, he had called a bonze to appease the anger of the deities, whose images he now restored to their former place.

The Christian charity of the believers had been shown by their treatment of a leper who had come to their village. The daughter of a *samurai,* she had become the wife of an Osaka merchant. Soon after the death of her husband, she found that she was a victim of the terrible disease of leprosy. Her brother shut her up in a sort of cage in order to keep her from the rest of the family, and she saw no one except the servant that brought food to her. After two years of this seclusion, she broke out from her cage with the intention of drowning herself. It was January. On reaching the river's bank, she could not get up courage to jump into the cold water. She therefore decided to make a pilgrimage to noted Buddhist temples in order to pray that she might be healed. As she was begging her way, she came to Ichimanda, where the Christians were so moved by pity, that one of them took her into his house while others saw that she was always supplied with food.

The two missionaries that had taken the most prominent part in the events connected with the discovery of the Christians in Nagasaki were taken at about the same time from the scene of their earthly labours. Mgr. Petitjean had for some time been aware that he had not long to live. It was his hope that before passing from earth he might be able to establish a station of his mission in the Loochoo Islands, where he had begun his labours for the Japanese. He had gone to Kagoshima with the intention of taking passage for those islands, but became so ill that he was taken back to Nagasaki, where he died October 7, 1884. Three months later, January 10, 1885, Mgr. Laucaigne, who had shared with him the hopes, the disappointments, the joys, and the perplexities of the early days of the Mission, also passed away.

M. Cousin was then made Vicar Apostolic for Southern Japan. M. Osouf, who was appointed to the like office in Northern Japan, was raising funds in America at the time these deaths occurred. He was at once summoned to Rome. Leo XIII. had just addressed a letter to the Emperor of China, and he now put a similar one for the Emperor of Japan in the care of Mgr. Osouf. The new Vicar Apostolic arrived in Yokohama in August, 1885, and through the French Minister made arrangements for being presented to the Emperor, by whom he was graciously received as the bearer of the Pope's letter.

About 1886, there was begun a charitable work that soon attracted the notice and admiration of European residents in Japan. A woman suffering from leprosy, and for that reason abandoned by her husband, had found shelter beneath a miserable roof that was built over the wheel of a rice-mill. Her bed was a coarse straw matting spread over the boards that formed the cover of the sluiceway. Her food consisted of a cup of rice bestowed daily by her relatives, who otherwise did hardly anything for her relief. The disease made rapid progress and she was soon totally blind. It is not strange that the temptation to take her own life often presented itself to her mind. In some way, however, she gained a knowledge of Christianity and desired to receive baptism, M. Testevuide, who was asked to administer the rite, says:

"While I was seeking upon her brow, disfigured as it was with leprosy, some place to apply the water, the woman wept; but it was now with a joy that brightened up her face, notwithstanding the sores with which it was entirely covered."

He could not bear to leave her in such a place. Her brother, who was displeased that a foreign priest had come to see her, showed no disposition to help in bettering her condition. M. Testevuide wished to get her into a hospital; but at that time there was in all Japan no place where such a patient would be received. His interest in this woman led him to reflect on the sad lot of thousands of Japanese who were suffering from the same disease. The desire grew strong in his heart to do something for the relief of these unfortunate persons. In a letter telling the bishop of his wish to devote his life to such work he said:

"I am not ignorant of the dangers to which I shall expose myself. Some day, perhaps, I shall see myself shut off from your society and that of my brethren. If God" in His just and merciful designs should permit me to be infected with the evil that I desire to heal in others, I will remind myself of the promise of our Lord Jesus Christ not to leave without reward a cup of water given in His name, and I will present myself at His tribunal with a greater degree of confidence. I will ask of you as a last favour only this, that you will permit me to live and die among my poor lepers."

Some friends gave him a small sum of money with which he hired a house in the neighbourhood of Gotemba, a town at the base of Mount Fuji. Though the house was far removed from other habitations, the people did not like the idea of having a leper hospital so near them, and they tried to get the owner to refuse to rent the house. M. Testevuide insisted for a time that the bargain already made should be kept; but finally, in order to avoid trouble, he sent away the few lepers he had gathered and set himself to collect money for the erection of a building of his own. The foreign communities in the open ports, always quick to respond to charitable appeals, soon furnished him with funds that enabled him to purchase a tract of about six acres, on which he erected a small hospital. There he lived in close intimacy with the lepers, alleviating their sufferings, cheering their hearts by his kind words, and giving them religious instruction. The best known methods of medical treatment were used. In some cases the external signs of the disease so far disappeared that the patients could go back to live once more with their friends. As M. Testevuide did not believe that complete cure could be effected, he always told such persons to come again for treatment the moment that there was a reappearance of trouble. Such patients as were able to do so, worked in the garden, which was thus made to furnish much of the food needed by the community. Japanese Christians were found who gladly gave themselves to the work of nursing the sufferers. Mention is made of one man that shut himself up for life among the lepers, making only the one condition that food should be provided for his own family. Such kindness as was shown by M. Testevuide and his associates could not fail to touch the hearts of its recipients and make them willing to listen to the Gospel that had inspired such love and self-sacrifice. Though M. Testevuide did not become infected with the dread disease, his years of labour for the lepers were but few. He died in 1891, but the work begun by him has been continued with similar devotion by others.

An extract from the *Japan Weekly Mail* of November 26, 1887, gives a bird's-eye view of the educational work of the Roman Catholic Mission at that time:

"The missionaries. . . are exclusively French. It is a large and powerful mission, numbering nearly sixty fathers and over forty Sisters of Chanty. Most of the staff is attached to the seminaries and convents in the capital and the outports. The rest are scattered over the country. The two parent seminaries of the Mission, which were established simultaneously at Nagasaki and Tokyo, date from the year 1872, and the Yokohama Convent School was founded in the same year. Tsukiji Convent School followed in 1874, Osaka and Kobe Convent Schools in 1877 and Nagasaki Convent School in 1880. There are also convent schools in Hakodate and Niigata, besides stations at Sendai, Morioka, Okayama, Kyoto, Hiroshima, and Kochi. . . . The educational work of the Mission in its higher branches is devoted almost exclusively to the training of youths for the priesthood and does not suffer itself to he diverted into secular channels. Instruction is ever restricted to a subordinate place as the handmaid of religion. Even where a technical education is given, as at Osaka, the lads are trained to be carpenters and smiths for the service of the Church. In the convents it is somewhat different; since many girls attend these establishments merely to receive a foreign education. Great attention is paid by the sisters to sewing, crocheting, and all kinds of fancy work. Many of the pupils are enabled to pay something for their board by the sale of their handiwork; a contribution which is welcome, seeing that almost everything has to be supplied gratis to the pupils. In Protestant mission schools it is a question under debate whether pupils shall be admitted before the age of nine or ten; in these Catholic homes there are babes two months old. The orphans whom the sisters adopt are mostly placed with Christian women outside the convent who receive a small fee for their services. Some of the most difficult or delicate cases are attended to within the convent walls. The care and attention which the good sisters bestow on these wretched waifs, the diseased and unsightly offspring of poverty and sin, is beyond all praise. The Mission has no less than nine orphanages with nearly a thousand inmates."

An interesting event in 1.888 was the discovery of descendants of Ishikawa Kizaemon, one of the Twenty-six Martyrs of 1597. There were now two branches of the family; one living in Okayama and the other in a neighbouring village. The tiles on the roofs of Japanese houses are often decorated with some emblem, and in the house occupied by the Okayama branch of the family the decoration included a cross. Though the present members of the family had apparently lost all knowledge of Christian doctrines, some of them were soon afterward baptised.

In 1879, the Propaganda had established several districts between which the vicariates of China and adjacent countries had been distributed. For the promotion of unity in ecclesiastical matters it had been ordered that each district should hold synods at regular intervals. Since the conditions in Japan and Korea did not justify their inclusion in this arrangement, it was not until 1884, that these countries were set off as together forming one district. In March, 1890, the first synod was held in Nagasaki. The time was so chosen that the twenty-fifth anniversary of the discovery of the Urakami Christians occurred while the synod was in session. To increase the importance of the occasion, the Pope accorded a plenary indulgence to all Christians who should at that time make a pilgrimage to the Church of the Twenty-six Martyrs in Nagasaki, and he accorded to the bishops the power to bestow the papal benediction upon the people. The first solemn session of the synod was held on Sunday, March 2. On that day also, the pilgrimages were inaugurated by twenty-five hundred Christians from Urakami. Early in the morning six hundred of them had received the communion in their own valley and then, forming a procession, they had marched over the same road that had been trodden by many of them twenty years previously, as they went into exile. The women, as before, wore the white head-dresses received at the time of their baptism; but now, if tears were in the eyes of any, it was as a sign of joyful thankfulness, and not of grief. With banners and songs the pilgrims made their way through the streets of Nagasaki and up the flight of steps that led to the church.

Certain days had been appointed for the coming of Christians from other communities. As the ancient Jews made their way to Jerusalem at the time of the Passover, so the Japanese believers came from different parts of Kyushu. Some journeyed by land, bands of happy pilgrims rejoicing in the religious liberty that had been assured to them a year before, by the National Constitution. Dwellers on the islands came by boats, on which they lived during their stay in Nagasaki. At early dawn and in the evening, their prayers and songs could be heard floating over the placid waters of the bay. On the day assigned to a company for its visit to the church, its members gathered upon the shore and awaited the summons for climbing the hill. When the bell sounded, the missionaries in charge of the section of the country from which the pilgrims came would put themselves at the head of the procession as it made its way to the church. Often the number of those who came was too great to allow all of them to enter the building at one time. It was estimated that in all, some ten or twelve thousand Christians took part in these pilgrimages.

The great day of the feast was March 17, the anniversary of the discovery of the Christians. Throughout the commemorative service that was observed, two women remained kneeling before the tomb of Mgr. Petitjean, Twenty-five years before, this mother and daughter, the latter then but a little girl, had been in the company of visitors who had said to him whose body was now lying within that tomb: "We have the same heart as you."

In 1888, a third vicariate—that of Central Japan— had been created, and this was followed in 1891, by a fourth, comprising Yezo and the Kurile Islands, that was named the Vicariate of Hakodate. Almost immediately after this, the Pope established an episcopal hierarchy in Japan. The vicariates were replaced by three bishoprics and one archbishopric. In carrying out this arrangement, Mgr. Osouf became the Archbishop of Tokyo; Mgr. Cousin, the Bishop of Nagasaki; Mgr. Midon, the Bishop of Osaka; and Mgr. Berlioz, the Bishop of Hakodate.

At this time the prospects of rapid growth seemed bright. In Oshima there were thousands\* asking for instruction preparatory to baptism, and in a short time the rite was administered to about fifteen hundred of them. From 1880 to 1890, the "Catholic population" had grown from 23,909 to 42,378. Included in this increase were many people that had formerly been reckoned among the Separates," and this source of enlargement was from the necessity of the case becoming of less importance, so that the growth of the next five years to 50,302 was very encouraging. The effects of the reaction that retarded the advance of Protestant Christianity were not felt so quickly by Roman Catholicism. They appeared later in the slower growth of the next two five-year periods, the population in 1900 being 54,602, and that of 1905 being 59,437.

The following account, abridged from that given in 1895, by M. Marnas,\* will serve to show some of the methods by which the work was carried on:

"In each diocese there are useful auxiliaries to second the efforts of the bishops and missionaries, who without them would be unable to perform the many duties of their apostolate. Some are Japanese. These are priests, catechists, and school-teachers. In the south, eight native communities of nuns devote themselves to the religious instruction of children and to charitable efforts of the most varied forms. Other nuns have come from Europe. The Marianites, a congregation of men, including both priests and lay brothers, devoted solely to education, have established a college. The Dames of Saint-Maur, the Nuns of the Holy Child Jesus of Chauffailles, and the Sisters of Saint Paul of Chartres have seminaries and schools for girls, direct the orphanages of the Holy Infancy, and give themselves to labours among poor, sick, and needy persons of all kinds.

"History will not be able to bring against modern missionaries in Japan the reproach urged by Rohrbacher against those of former times that they did not pay sufficient attention to raising up a native clergy. This work, which holds the first place in the solicitude of the bishops, is in excellent condition. Up to the present time twenty-three priests have been ordained. Three of these have died: one of them by disease after a service of four and a half years, and the other two by being drowned at sea in a typhoon.

"Whoever has seen the first native priests of Japan engaged in their labours can bear of them the general witness that they are as well instructed, as pious, and as devoted to God's service as could reasonably be expected. Since 1890, as a result of an understanding between the bishops, a single seminary—that in Nagasaki—receives from all four dioceses those who by previous examinations have been judged fit persons for ecclesiastical studies.

"The studies are exacting. The pupils show much interest in them. They apply themselves closely to their work and are successful. In the lower classes they study Latin, the Japanese language, and the Chinese ideographs. In the following grades, history, geography, literature, the sciences and philosophy are added. Finally they come to the study of dogmatic theology, moral theology, and the Holy Scriptures. The entire course requires over fifteen years. In rare cases, candidates for holy orders are admitted before reaching the age of thirty. They are tested before being made sub-deacons. The rules require that they shall leave the seminary for one year and be sent into the country districts as catechists under the direction of missionaries. If any then feel appalled at thought of the irrevocable vows that every priest must make before ascending to the altar, they have the option of remaining in an inferior position. Those that persist in their desire for ordination are tested at the seminary for one more year before being allowed to take the decisive step.

"These young men are attractive in appearance. They are simple-hearted, refined, good-natured, and animated. They show the same zeal in their sports as in their studies. They have clear brows and frank faces. At the altar they are reverent and grave. They carry out the ceremonies with great perfection and chant the liturgy in a very appropriate manner. For the most part they are sons of confessors of the faith. At the time of the last persecution many of them shared the prisons of their parents, and in childhood had the honour of suffering for Jesus Christ. The children of heathen are fewest in number and belong to dioceses that have not the advantage of possessing descendants of the ancient Christians.

"The catechists, a class of helpers whose preparation is easier and quicker, have not for that reason failed to render most important service. Not only did they at first give effectual aid in the restoration of the ancient Christian communities, but they have been and still are indispensable agents for the conversion of the heathen. It is doubtless true that the work of the catechist cannot supply the place of that done by the missionary; but it supplements the latter and serves to extend its influence. It can readily be seen that a Japanese layman, who is ordinarily a mar-Tied man not distinguished from others by his dress or behaviour, can mingle much more easily with his fellow-countrymen, talk with them on matters of common interest, and gradually lead them to a religion of which he himself is already a convert. A foreign priest, especially at first, is the object of a certain amount of suspicion. Heathen have no idea of the spiritual motive that has brought him to them, and they often think that he has been led by some secret and selfish purpose.

"In Japan two methods are employed for the training of catechists. The first is that of having them study for a while in special schools. The other is to choose from the most talented and earnest members of a Christian community one or more men who are willing to serve in the desired capacity, and the missionary himself instructs these persons, furnishes them with books, replies to their own doubts or to those proposed to them by others, has them preach in public when he is present, and otherwise directs their education. While in the case of a native priest, who to a sufficiently thorough knowledge of the sacred sciences must add the practice of lofty and stern virtues, there must be a special, call well tested by means of long studies and training, a catechist, since he is not constrained to celibacy or to a particular form of life, can be prepared for effective service in a few months, especially if he has bad some previous education.

One very remarkable thing in Japan is the taste that the people have developed for public speaking Perhaps there is no country in the world where there is more of this and where the people listen so well without signs of weariness.\* The Japanese are naturally eloquent and it is not rare to find, even among men of meagre education, a real talent for extemporaneous speech. Whoever has anything to say can always find an attentive audience, All that it is necessary to do is to hang out through the day before the gate a paper lantern on which is written in Chinese ideographs a notice of the lecture; and at evening the speaker, whether he be a politician, a preacher, or a simple story-teller, finds seated on the mats before him an audience made up of people of all ages and classes, who smoke their tiny pipes and sip tea while they willingly listen until late at night to whatever may be said.

"The catechist's mission does not end here. He remembers the Chinese proverb: 'A chance word often accomplishes more than a well-prepared discourse.' All the time not given to study is devoted to interviews with the heathen and especially with the catechumens. He teaches them the holy doctrine; he prepares them for baptism; he shows an interest in children, invalids, and poor people; he takes part in the joys and sorrows of the family whose confidant and friend he becomes; and it often happens that it is by his deeds rather than by his words that he gains for God the souls of his brethren. The work of the catechist therefore completes that of the missionary. He prepares the way for the latter by winning for him the minds and hearts of men. Without him the evangelisation of the people, if not impossible, would at least be very difficult. In the midst of the Christian communities the catechist fills a different place but one no less useful. In the absence of the priests it is he that gathers the Christians for the recital of prayers, that exhorts them to remain faithful, that instructs the children, and prepares them for the reception of the sacraments.

"Women can serve as catechists for persons of their own sex. While keeping within their sphere, they often prove no less successful than the men. The communities of nuns in the Nagasaki diocese are veritable nurseries of female catechists. At the direction of the bishops these workers often go to the most distant places; for in Japan women are not shut up as they are in China, and they are often better able than men to exert a helpful influence upon families.

Important as is the part taken by catechists, they do not suffice for fully attaining the end sought by the Catholic apostolate. Schools are also needed. These are necessary for Christian children, whose faith and morals must be safeguarded. They are necessary for the heathen themselves, since the schools often furnish the only means for reaching these persons. The Japanese Government has established educational institutions of all grades. Before the movement that makes Japan to-day enthusiastic in educational matters had become so marked, the Catholic missionaries, when as yet they had no Christians, gathered many heathen pupils or accepted positions as teachers in the government schools. The institutions founded by them did not survive the persecution of 1870-73. After that outbreak few efforts were made in the same direction. Although the zeal of the missionaries was chiefly directed to the care of the Christian communities and the evangelisation of the heathen, they opened primary schools wherever their resources made this possible. These primary schools have continued to increase in number until the present day. The teachers are Japanese chosen and supported by the Mission. The pupils pursue the same studies as those of the government schools, with the single addition that the catechism is taught outside of the regular class-hours. Heathen children are usually admitted to these schools in the same way as Christian children, and it often comes to pass that they and their parents ask to become Catholics.

"In order to reach the upper classes of society the bishops appealed to the Marianites to establish colleges in the principal cities. The first members of this order, who arrived at Tokyo in 1887 under the direction of the Abbé Heinrich, were favourably recommended to the Japanese authorities by the French Minister. When permission had been obtained for opening a school in the capital, they rented a building and commenced their first term with sixty pupils. These belonged to the best families in Tokyo and Yokohama, Protestant as well as Catholic. Among them were some Japanese. In 1895 the pupils numbered one hundred and sixty, divided about equally between Japanese, Europeans, and Eurasians. In 1891 the Marianites established a second institution in Nagasaki with the intention of having it serve for a novitiate as well as for a school.

"Long before the Marianites arrived in Japan, the Dames of Saint-Maur, the Nuns of the Holy Child Jesus, and the Sisters of Saint Paul had been called for the purpose of opening girls' schools. There are in Japan no communities of nuns that do not have schools. Besides the orphanages under their care, where Christian education is given to about fifteen hundred children they have established several schools for daughters of well-to-do families. It is remarkable that after a little while most of those who come as heathen ask of their own accord to be Christians.

"Some missionaries have engaged in literary labours They have published in Japanese fifty books that treat for the most part of religious matters. Since 1880 they have conducted under various names a review which discusses important theological philosophical, historical, and scientific questions, besides giving the religious news of Japan and the Catholic world. There is also a weekly journal.\*

"If words are powerful, works are much more so. When an epidemic breaks out, when the cholera rages as it did in 1886 and 1890, missionaries, nuns, and Christian believers are to be seen carrying help to the sick in the unostentatious manner of persons that are performing the most elementary duties. In 1890 MM. Brotelande, Vigroux, and Lecomte saw their devoted labours in the hospitals of the capital rewarded by the baptism of five hundred cholera patients. In Tokyo the older orphan girls under the care of the Dames of Saint-Maur aroused the admiration of the physicians and hospital officers, who gave to these improvised nurses the recompense usually bestowed on attendants of the first class; but what was more pleasing to these orphans was the number of baptisms that they were able to administer. In 1891 and 1892, when influenza prevailed, a single Christian obtained the baptism of four hundred adults It is not only under unusual circumstances and at the lime of great epidemics that Catholic charity is manifested. Among the nuns are some that care for the sick, either visiting them in their homes or bringing them to the convent. They have pharmacies and dispensaries where every year they give remedies and help to thousands of people and where they obtain many conversions or prepare the way for them. Others have small hospitals where they receive sick people who have no other refuge and who for the most part find there the benefit of a Christian death. But the most extensive work conducted by the three sisterhoods is that done in the orphanages. Thanks to the Society of the Holy Infancy, they are bringing up in ten institutions about fifteen hundred orphan girls who find all the care that could have been given by their own parents, the affection that such parents often refuse, and beyond all this the inexpressible advantage of a Christian training and education. The nuns teach these children such industries as will give them a means of support in future days. Nearly all these young girls are Christians when they leave the orphanages. The greatest obstacle to their continuance in the faith is the difficulty of finding suitable husbands; the number of Christian young men being much less that that of Christian young women. Most of them are compelled to marry heathen, and this gives rise to many inconveniences.

"There are also orphanages for boys. Every diocese has its own, but the number of inmates is much less than that in institutions for girls. One reason, and perhaps the principal one, is that in Japanese families boys are always preferred to girls. Hitherto the young men going out from the orphanages have shown little inclination to marry the orphan girls.\*

"Infirm and friendless old people cannot fail to have a claim on Catholic charity. At Nagoya, M. Tulpin has brought together on land belonging to the Mission about forty old persons whom he lodges, either in families or singly, in detached buildings, thus leaving them at liberty and under the pleasant illusion of dwelling in their own homes. Finally, there is the work for lepers inaugurated by M. Testevuide, and since his death in 1891 continued by M. Vigroux."

At about the time described by M. Marnas, the Roman Catholic missionaries were feeling, with others, the results of the reaction against Western ideas. M. Bulet wrote: "The characteristic note of the period we are passing through is, if I am not mistaken, a real religious indifference, which is more difficult to overcome than the ancient hostility, which made martyrs." Archbishop Osouf reported: "Nearly all the missionaries complain of a want in their Christians, the absence of zeal to propagate their religion around them." One missionary wrote of a place where about thirty catechumens had "fallen away during the year, under the influence of political excitement and the revulsion of feeling against foreigners;" while another said: "This year has been the most painful of my life. To judge by the number of baptisms I have to report, one might doubt of the zeal of my five catechists. Nothing could be more unjust. St. Paul \(2 Tim. iv.\) has well described the state of my district: 'There shall be a time when they will not endure sound doctrine, but will turn away their hearing from the truth and will be turned unto fables.'"\*

**Footnotes**

\* *"Milliers d'antes."* "La Relig. de Jésus Ressus.," vol. ii., p. 540.

\* "La Relig. de Jésus Ressus.," vol. ii., 554 sq.

\* This interest in public speaking of which M. Marnas writes is a matter of recent growth, and to a considerable extent it is due to Christian influence. In former times there was, of course, no public discussion of political questions, and Buddhist priests did but little preaching. Among Japan's noted men it would be hard to select any who were famous as orators. As soon as the public proclamation of Christian doctrine became possible, Protestant missionaries and afterwards the native evangelists began to preach. Those of the Roman Catholic and Greek Orthodox churches did the same somewhat later to a less degree. The Buddhist priests found that in order to retain a hold upon their followers it was necessary to do more than formerly for their instruction, The advocates of popular rights soon saw the advantage of public discussion as a means for arousing the people, and so political lectures became common.

\* Among the books issued at about this time was a translation of the New Testament made from the Vulgate. The translator was a Protestant Japanese.

\* Father Steichen, writing in 1904, says that the Catholic Church then had 21 orphanages, where 1,378 girls and 182 boys were sheltered at an annual expense of 100,000 *yen.* He questions whether the results correspond to the expenditure. "It may be asked," he says, "whether it is really practical to confer baptism on these waifs. Some persevere, but the great number when once put back into the pagan environment forget little by little that they are Christians. In general the Japanese have not much will power, but in the environments from which come the children of our orphanages it is even impossible to give it to them. . . . This essentially Christian work is the despair of the missionaries. On the one hand they would not abandon these poor unfortunates to their sad fate and on the other hand they ask themselves whether with the same resources they might not undertake some less ungrateful work."—"The Christian Movement in Japan," II., p. 195.

\* Casartelli, "The Catholic Church in Japan," pp. 37-38.




