+++
title = "14 THE BEGINNING OF THE MISSION 1861-1872"

+++





JAPAN'S nearest neighbour is Russia. For a long time subjects of each nation had settlements in Saghalien, and the resulting disputes over territorial rights continued until 1875, when Japan waived its claims to that island, and at the same time received the islands of the Kurile group that had hitherto belonged to Russia. The Kuriles had been visited in the eighteenth century by Russian priests, and not long ago there were still living on one of the islands about a dozen families of Christian Ainu, the descendants of those that had been taught by these missionaries. It is said that some of the priests penetrated into Yezo.\*

There was a professorship of the Japanese language in a school that was established by Catherine II. in Irkutsk It was filled by Japanese who had been shipwrecked on the coast of Siberia. When Klaproth was sent in 1805, as interpreter of an attempted embassy to China he remained for a while in Irkutsk, where, among other things, he studied Japanese at this school. The occupant of the professorial chair at that time had become a member of the Greek Church.

In 1854, the Chaplain of the Russian ship *Diana* then anchored at Shimoda, was one day walking on the shore when a Japanese, whose attention had been attracted by the cross on the priest's breast, asked to be taken on board the ship, and there, when secure from the observation of any of his countrymen, he drew from beneath his robe a cross, repeated the names of Jesus and Mary, and said that he was a descendant of Roman Catholic Christians. He was taken to Siberia, where he probably joined the Russian Church.\*

M. Mermet, the French missionary who visited Hakodate in 1861, was vexed at the growing influence of the Russians. In one of his letters he wrote that their houses and shops were springing up on all sides, as though by magic, that Russian men-of-war were numerous in the harbour, and that "an army of popes," having large sums of money at their command, was spreading over the country. These popes, he said, were very zealous and by their benefactions were purchasing the good will of the people.† The Frenchman's zeal for his own church and his desire to arouse the emulation of his supporters must have led him to an exaggerated view of the activity of the Russians. It may be doubted whether his army of popes equalled in number that of the band that set upon the doughty Falstaff; certainly, there seems little reason to believe that, with a single exception, any Russian priests connected with the navy or the consular service were deeply imbued with a missionary spirit.

A Russian consulate had been established at Hakodate in 1859. The priest that served as Consular Chaplain had been there less than a year when poor health compelled him to withdraw. The Holy Synod, when called upon to appoint his successor, asked the authorities in the St. Petersburg Ecclesiastical Academy to find a suitable person. The one chosen was Ivan Kasatkin, a young man twenty-four years old, of deep faith and fervent piety, who had been earnestly praying that God would show him the work he ought to undertake. Before this, he had become deeply interested in Japan through reading Golownin's account of his captivity in that land. Moreover, he longed to preach the Gospel to those that had not yet heard it. Hence, the position of Consular Chaplain at Hakodate was attractive, as it might possibly open the way for him to carry out his desires.

He was soon ordained to the priesthood, taking at that time the name of Nicolai, by which he has since become so well known. In July, 1860, he left St. Petersburg and with only two days' delay at his home, pushed on through Russia and Siberia until, at the end of September, he reached the town of Nicolaievsk at the mouth of the Amur River. Since it was too late to get a boat to Japan, he remained in that place through the winter. His missionary zeal was strengthened by intercourse with Bishop Innocent, who was seeking to convert the tribes of eastern Siberia.

When spring came, Père\* Nicolai proceeded on his journey and reached Hakodate in June, 1861. His duties in connection with the consulate were so light that he had abundant time for studying the Japanese language. Among the teachers that he employed was Joseph Neesima, who, after being with him about a month told him of Ins purpose to leave Japan, and asked his assistance in carrying it out. Père Nicolai warned him of the danger and offered to teach him English; but on returning from a summer vacation, the Chaplain found that the young man, in whose care he had left the house was no longer to be found in Hakodate.

Another person who was engaged as a teacher failed to appear at the appointed time, and when Père Nicolai sent to enquire the reason he said: "Please excuse me-for if I go to your house, I shall be killed." Père Nicolai afterwards thought that some young men who were studying Russian had frightened away the teacher, so that more time might be devoted to them.

A *samurai* by the name of Sawabe, who was a native of Tosa in the island of Shikoku, had come to Hakodate and there married the daughter of a Shinto priest After the death of his father-in-law, he succeeded to the care of the shrine. He did not take much pleasure in the duties of the priesthood and, like so many others of the military class, his thoughts were much occupied with the political questions of the time. Hakodate had become a rendezvous of the *ronin—*military men who had detached themselves from the service of their feudal lords, and who were restlessly agitating various plans for advancing what they considered the interests of their country. Many of them had adopted the watchword *"Bono joi"* \("Honour the Emperor; drive out the foreigners"\). They were waiting some favourable opportunity for action. Sawabe was on intimate terms with many of these men.

The Russian Consul wished his son to take lessons in fencing, and Mr. Sawabe, who had formerly been a teacher of that art, was employed for an instructor. In his visits to the consulate he often saw Père Nicolai, whom he regarded with special dislike as being not only a foreigner, but also a priest of the European religion. For a long time he refused to have any conversation with the Chaplain, though he took every opportunity to show his aversion by scowling upon him. Believing that the danger of intercourse with foreign lands came largely from their religion, he, as an ardent patriot, desired to do what he could towards warding off the threatened evil. He decided to have a discussion with Père Nicolai and to slay him if it proved impossible to defeat him by argument. Wearing the two swords belonging to the military class, he one day broke abruptly into the Chaplain's room, calling out in an angry voice:

"Is it because you wish to get possession of our country that you have brought hither your corrupt doctrines?"

"Are you acquainted with the doctrines that I teach?" quietly asked Père Nicolai.

"I at least know that they are evil."

"How can you be sure of that? Before making such an assertion, ought you not to examine my religion to see whether or not it is so hateful as you suppose?"

"Well, then, tell me about it and I will listen."

Père Nicolai therefore began to speak about the Creator of the universe. Gradually Mr. Sawabe became so interested that anger gave way to respectful attention. After a time he began to jot down notes of the principal points. At the close of the conversation he asked that he might come again for further instruction. This was the beginning of earnest study that finally led Mr. Sawabe to the conviction that Christianity is true. He did not conceal from his old friends the change that had come in his views. They were amazed that one who had been prominent in advocating the expulsion of foreigners had become a believer in their religion. Some of them thought he had become insane.

Among the friends to whom Sawabe told his new faith was a physician named Sakai, an upright man who had the reputation of standing firmly by whatever he believed to be true. He brought forward many objections against Christianity, some of them being such as Mr. Sawabe was unable to refute. He was therefore in the habit of repeating them to Père Nicolai, who supplied him with answers to carry back to his friend. Finally Dr. Sakai became sufficiently interested to go himself to the Chaplain for instruction. A third inquirer was a man named Urano.

There were rumours that a new official that had been sent to Hakodate was about to enforce the old laws and punish as rebels those persons that had anything to do with Christianity. This frightened some of those who had hitherto been ready to listen to what Mr. Sawabe toId them. Some went so far as to cut off all social relations with him and Dr. Sakai. They would probably have been ready to give information against their former friends. Mr. Sawabe had most reason, however, to fear his mother-in-law. She was bitterly opposed to Christianity, and would not have hesitated to betray him to officials searching out followers of that religion.

Sawabe, Sakai, and Urano, following the advice of friends, decided to seek safety by flight to some place where they were not known. They earnestly desired to receive baptism before leaving Hakodate. On an April night in 1868 they slunk through the streets to the house occupied by Père Nicolai, where all the preparations had been made for the ceremony. A young Russian, who was accustomed to act as reader in the consular chapel, was stationed on the stairway to guard against intrusion, while within a dimly lighted room the rite was administered. Following the custom of the Greek Church, the three men received Christian names, and were henceforth to be known as Paul Sawabe, John Sakai, and Jacob Urano.

At the close of the ceremony, Père Nicolai bade farewell to these men, the first fruits of his missionary labours. It was doubtful whether he would ever look upon their faces again. They as yet knew but little of Christian truth. They greatly needed the instruction that it would be impossible for him to give. He was indeed sending them forth as sheep—nay, as new-born lambs-—into the midst of wolves.

The three men went out into the darkness and made their way to the house of a friend by whose aid passage had been secured on a junk that was about to sail. Joined by Dr. Sakai's wife and daughter and by Mr. Sawabe's serving-man, they were soon on board; but the wind and waves were so high that the captain did not dare to set sail. For a whole day they remained in the harbour, apprehensive lest their absence would cause a search to be made for them. The next day they started. Hardly had they cleared the harbour when the violence of the sea made it impossible to proceed. The ship put back to port. Dr. Sakai with his wife and daughter went to the house of a friend who had helped them to escape, and there lay concealed in the attic. The others found refuge elsewhere. On the fourth day they again set forth and after three days at sea reached a port in the northern part of Hondo.

As it was thought safer to divide into two bands, Dr. Sakai with his family at once set out toward his native town in the province of Rikuzen. Mr. Sawabe's servant, who was an intemperate man, gave so much trouble that it was found necessary to discharge him. Mr. Sawabe decided that Yedo would be the safest refuge for himself; and as Mr. Urano's home was in Rikuzen, the two travelled thus far in company and then separated.

At this time the country was in a troubled state, the northern daimyos, who sided with the Shogun, being in arms against the Imperial forces that had been sent to compel their submission. The Tosa clan, to which it will be remembered that Mr. Sawabe belonged, had taken a leading part in the overthrowal of the Shogunate. It is not strange that, being betrayed by his dialect, he was soon arrested on suspicion of being a spy. Fortunately he was able to obtain release by presenting satisfactory proof that he had come from Hakodate. Soon afterwards he reached the home of Dr. Sakai, who gladly welcomed his friend and fellow-believer. The house, however, was small and not well fitted for concealing a stranger, whose presence was likely to give rise to unpleasant enquiries; therefore, Mr. Sawabe was sent to Mrs. Sakai's parents in a neighbouring village. They at first received him kindly; but when it became known that he and Dr. Sakai were Christians, the family feared that they would be punished for giving shelter to a follower of the proscribed religion. The relatives had several consultations over the matter, and though they did not openly refuse to keep Mr. Sawabe, there were various indications that he was no longer a welcome guest. Among other gentle hints, they frequently discharged muskets before the house, saying that they were trying to frighten away evil spirits. Mr. Sawabe, being well aware of what they had in mind, was unwilling to cause them annoyance, and soon decided that it would be better for him to move on towards Yedo.

He had not gone far when he was again arrested as a spy. The officers that examined him differed among themselves as to whether his story about coming from Hakodate ought to be believed. They finally decided that in any case the best plan would be to send him to the city from which he professed to come. He was therefore sent under escort to the northern boundary of the province and there left to pursue his own way. As all places seemed dangerous and the direct road to Yedo was not open to him, he decided that he might as well obey orders by returning to Hakodate. Before landing there he heard that such a strict search was being made for all persons that had any connection with Christianity that it would be perilous to go to his own house, and difficult to find a safe retreat anywhere in the city. He sent some one to call his wife, and then with her and his child went to the house of her uncle, a petty official living in a village not far away. The fact that this official was giving shelter to the refugees probably became known to his superiors, for he was soon summoned to the office, where his attention was called to the regulation by which any person who concealed a Christian became Hable to severe punishment. He did not like to send away his relatives, but Mrs. Sawabe happened to learn what had happened and told her husband, whose unwillingness to have others suffer on his account made him decide to return to Hakodate. There he called on Père Nicolai who, in surprise at seeing him, asked why he was so rash as to venture into the very jaws of the tiger that was waiting to destroy him.

"There is no place," said Mr. Sawabe, "where I am safe. After seeking various refuges, I have been forced to return to Hakodate. Here everybody knows me and it will be useless to hide. I shall simply go on my way to meet whatever may be God's will."

At this time the remnants of the Shogun's army were gathering at Hakodate, where it was said they planned to make the last stand. The city was in confusion and the excitement over military and political matters prevented the paying any attention to the enforcement of the laws against Christianity, Mr. Sawabe was therefore left undisturbed.

Père Nicolai saw reasons for believing that the time was near at hand when it would be possible to engage in active evangelistic efforts. He was teaching Russian to some of the officials, and when he occasionally referred to Christianity, he saw no indication that they wished to evade the subject. Conversations that he held with *samurai* coming from different parts of Japan showed that a great revolution was taking place in the thoughts of the people. The movement in favour of adopting Western civilisation had begun and some people were saying that there must be a new religion, since Buddhism was losing its influence and the attempt to revive Shinto was not arousing much enthusiasm. It would be impossible for a consular chaplain, working as an individual and having no resources beyond his own salary, to utilise properly the great opportunity that was close at hand. He therefore sent to Russia asking for a furlough, during which he could appeal to the Holy Synod and to his friends for help. Having thought much about the way in which missionary work ought to be conducted, he had already prepared a set of rules for a society of evangelists that he hoped sometime to organise. These rules are interesting as showing his early recognition of the importance of making converts work for the salvation of others, and also because the plan here marked out is in the main the same that was afterwards used with good results.

RULES

"The evangelists shall be organised as a deliberative body.

"These evangelists shall teach Christian truth to other people while still continuing to study it for themselves.

"There shall be two kinds of meetings. In the first the evangelists, together with others who know the essential doctrines but desire further study, shall meet to read and explain the blew Testament. Such meetings shall be held twice a week the evangelists taking turns in conducting them. None of the number should fail to attend; if any person is unavoidably prevented from coming, he ought before the next meeting to learn from some one else what was said. The second meeting is for the benefit of those—whether men, women, or children—who are commencing to study Christian doctrines. The evangelists shall explain to them the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments. This meeting shall be held twice a week. The evangelists shall divide the people into classes for instruction. If for any reason a person is not present at a meeting, the evangelist shall ask some one of the absentee's family to inform him of what was said or shall go himself to the person's house for that purpose.

"In neither kind of meeting shall there be discussion until after the explanation is finished, although the meaning may be asked of anything that has not been understood

"Besides conducting the two kinds of meetings already mentioned, the evangelists shall go about the city every day trying to win new enquirers. If among those interested are persons unable to attend the meetings, \(he evangelists shall go to their houses in order to explain the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments. This is to be regarded as of prime importance and should be done even if, for lack of time, the evangelist is obliged to omit the meeting for reading the New Testament.

"When persons have thoroughly learned the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, and are established in the faith, they shall be presented to the priest for baptism.

"Whenever any point of doctrine is not understood, it shall be brought to the priest for explanation, and, if it is a matter of importance, the explanation shall be written down in a notebook.

"On Sundays the Association of Evangelists shall meet at the house of the priest to report what has been done during the previous week, as well as to consult together and decide on what shall be done in the week to come. These decisions shall be recorded by the evangelists in their notebooks.

"A record shall be kept of baptisms, births, marriages and deaths.

"A book for recording receipts and expenditures shall be prepared and put in the care of a person to be chosen by the Association.

"The money first collected shall be used for the propagation of Christianity.

"When sufficient money has been gathered, a young man shall be taught the Russian language and sent to a theological school in Russia. On the completion of his education, he shall return to Japan and there establish a school for teaching Christian doctrine and the sciences. He shall also translate religious books Another young man shall be sent to a medical school in Russia and on completing his studies shall return to found a hospital and a medical school.

"When the number of baptised believers reaches five hundred, one of the evangelists shall be chosen for sending to Russia that he may be ordained to the priesthood. Afterwards, one person shall be ordained for every additional five hundred converts. When there are five thousand believers, a request shall be made for the appointment of a bishop.

"The evangelists who go to teach Christianity in the different provinces shall strictly observe the above rules."

While Père Nicolai was awaiting the reply to his request for a furlough, Mr. Sawabe brought him two men whom he was trying to interest in Christianity. One of them was Mr. Kannari, who afterwards became a prominent evangelist. The second, named Arai, though only a youth, had the reputation or being a talented scholar. Both were deeply impressed by what they heard, and until Père Nicolai's departure for Russia they frequently came for further instruction.

These new enquirers were taking an active part in the political movements of the time. With others of the Sendai clan, to which they belonged, they favoured an attempt that was being made to rally the adherents of the Shogun and establish a republic in Yezo. Seeing that their numbers were insufficient for the impending conflict with the Imperial forces, they returned in April, 1869, to their province in the hope of getting others to join them. They found Sendai occupied by the Imperial troops and such a sharp watch being kept that they were obliged to remain in concealment. In conversation with those whom they met clandestinely they repeated what they had learned about Christianity.

As education had been highly valued by the Sendai clan, it possessed many men of superior ability. They were now, however, regarded as rebels. A few of the more prominent were put to death and the others had no opportunity of using their talents in the direct service of their country. Many of them became farmers or else went into retirement while they watched the course of events and hoped for better times. It was among such men that Mr. Arai found persons ready to hear about a religion whose nature they did not clearly understand but which seemed to offer a ray of hope for their own future and for that of their country, which they considered to be in a deplorable condition. The speedy defeat of the rebels in Yezo overthrew the plans of those opposed to the new order of things. Might not the Christian religion be used as a means for averting some of the evils that threatened the land?

In January, 1870, Mr. Arai went again to Hakodate. Père Nicolai was in Russia; but Mr. Sawabe heard with joy that the *samurai* of Sendai were ready to listen to Christianity. It seemed to him that by their help a movement could be commenced for the spiritual and political renovation of Japan. He therefore had Mr. Arai write a letter in which these men were urged to come to Hakodate for the study of Christianity. The reasons presented were chiefly political; the argument used being that the new religion would be the best instrument for uniting the hearts of men who, discontented with the present trend of national affairs, were working for the good of their country. With Mr. Sawabe himself at this time, patriotic motives were probably more powerful than those that were directly religious.

Several of Mr. Arai's friends decided to heed the call. Some of them thought that a movement could be inaugurated that would restore the clan to its former position of influence, others agreed with Mr. Sawabe's view that a new religion would provide a bond of national unity, and some had the idea that by association with the foreign priest in Hakodate a way might open for their going to Europe. The writer of the Japanese history of the Mission compares these men to those who at first followed Christ because they thought He would free Judea from the Roman yoke, hut who afterwards learned to know His real mission and became the pillars of the early Church.

Those who decided to go to Hakodate sold their goods, bade farewell to their friends, and set out in two or three small companies. They had somewhat misunderstood Mr. Arai's letter. It had not, as they supposed, urged them to come at once. When the first party, consisting of three men, reached their destination, they learned to their surprise that Père Nicolai, who was to be their teacher, was not in Japan. On going to Mr. Sawabe's house, they found that he was temporarily absent, and, moreover, that, instead of being, as they had supposed, a wealthy man able to become their patron, he had hard work to provide for his own support. Mrs. Sawabe sent a messenger to call Mr. Arai, who was surprised to learn that his friends had come so promptly. Until late at night he talked with them about what should be done, and answered their questions concerning Christianity; for during his own stay in Hakodate he had gained from Mr. Sawabe considerably more knowledge than he had possessed when talking with the same men a few months before. He also had a small manual of doctrine which he read and explained. The next day this instruction was continued. The new-comers soon saw that Christianity was much different from what they had supposed, and some of the doctrines they found difficult to understand. There was some talk among them about the advisability of returning to Sendai; but they thought they would be ridiculed by their friends if they returned so soon, and so they decided to remain long enough to give Christianity a thorough examination.

The Japanese historian remarks that if these men had found Mr. Sawabe in flourishing circumstances and had immediately met Père Nicolai, it is probable that they would have been unable to see anything save in the light of the motives that had brought them to Hakodate, and thus their selfish purposes would have been so strengthened as to blind their eyes to the truth. Disappointed as they were, they were now willing to listen humbly to what was taught them by Mr. Arai and by Mr. Sawabe, who soon returned home. Ere long they became deeply interested in their study of Christianity. Before this, Mr. Sawabe and Dr. Sakai had come into possession of a Chinese translation of the New Testament. This they had divided into two parts, each taking one. The men from Sendai spent much time in making copies of the half that Mr. Sawabe possessed.

Meanwhile four others were journeying towards Hakodate. On their way they passed through the village where one of their friends named Kageta was in hiding. Being one of the prominent *samurai* of the clan, he was in special danger of being punished as a rebel. On going to the house where he was supposed to be, they were told that he was not there. They had not proceeded far on their way when a messenger came running after them to say that Mr. Kageta was really in the house and desired to see them. They turned back and after some persuasion induced him to go with them to Hakodate.

These new additions to the company were heartily welcomed by Mr. Sawabe. His house had been burned a short time before, so that he was living in a shed on the grounds connected with the shrine where he had once served as a priest. Though everything was in a confused state, there was considerable room in the building, and he gladly gave shelter to all of the men from Sendai except two who found lodging elsewhere.

Mr. Sawabe is described as having been at this time a rough, fierce-looking man, who from his outward appearance might have been taken for one of the bloodthirsty swashbucklers whose riotous conduct gave so much annoyance in the troublous times of revolution. He looked like a man who in argument would never rest until he had completely silenced his opponent. His heart, however, had already been so softened by Christianity that his words and acts were gentle. He was particularly careful not to do anything that could offend these new friends. As they were well-educated men, they asked many questions that he found it difficult to answer. Hitherto he had despised learning, considering it a sign of effeminacy to spend much time over books. Now he mourned over the difficulty he had in understanding the meaning of his Chinese Testament. He saw that he needed to study if he did not wish to be put to shame, and he recognised that his lack of literary culture would greatly limit his usefulness. Hence he set himself to studying the Chinese classics, and also borrowed books on various subjects in order that by their perusal he might remedy some of his defects.

Of all the men from Sendai, Mr. Kageta was the least ready to give assent to the new teaching. While the others busied themselves in copying the Bible, he said that he would not take the trouble to do so until he had found out whether its doctrines were true or false. When some of his companions who thought they were making great progress attempted to argue with him, he would meet them with a few simple, but keen questions that sufficed to show them how little they really understood the subjects under discussion.

It would be instructive if we had a record of what was said in this interesting class whose very teachers had so slight knowledge of the doctrines they taught, doctrines so different from anything these men had before believed. One day, for instance, a discussion arose over Christ's words, "Love your enemies." Did this mean that revenge should not be visited upon the enemies of one's feudal lord? Some one asserted that it could mean nothing less. Then there was great excitement. These men had from childhood been taught the Confucian precept, "Live not under the same sky with the murderer of thy lord or father." They said that they could not accept the new teaching which was so contrary to the fundamental principles of loyalty and filial duty. It would he a shame even to sit in the same room with a person that could approve such a doctrine. When one of their number, who had at first kept silent, ventured to say that this new idea ought not to be set aside so lightly without due consideration, the others glared at him as though he too were one with whom they ought not to live under the same sky.

Mr. Ono, the man who had thus spoken, had from the beginning been very susceptible to Christian ideas. Even with such imperfect teaching, he had become convinced that the fundamental doctrines of Christianity were true, and he had become desirous of teaching them to others. He had been very earnest in trying to convince Mr. Kageta, who came to Hakodate later than he, of the existence of God. To the latter this teaching seemed at first the height of folly, and he could not understand how an educated person like Mr. Ono could hold such silly views.

After a time the funds of these men ran low. Messrs. Ono and Arai therefore returned to Sendai, hoping to get some help for the support of the company and also to interest others in the new thoughts they had received.\*

The others also began to talk about the necessity of returning. Mr. Sawabe was anxious to detain them until Père Nicolai should reach Japan. In providing for their support he went so far as to sell his sword, a great sacrifice for a *samurai* to make. At last he proposed, for he was still imbued with the old ideas of his people, to sell his wife in order to gain funds for the same purpose. The others would not consent to this, and all but two of them went back to their homes. They were so far convinced of the truth of what they had heard that they began to teach it to their relatives and other friends. As a pardon was extended about this time to the hitherto proscribed members of the clan, Mr. Kageta was at liberty to go wherever he pleased. He had become an earnest believer, and he now openly collected people together that he might read and explain to them the manual of Christian doctrine.

The two men that remained in Hakodate were still troubled for means of living. They opened small shops and succeeded fairly well in business; much better than Mr. Sawabe, who commenced to brew and sell rice-beer, but whose manners were not such as to attract custom.

When Père Nicolai arrived in Russia, the Holy Synod was considering the establishment of a bishopric in Pekin, and the Metropolitan asked him to be its head. He replied that he had no desire to be a bishop, and that he was too much interested in Japan to leave it for another country. The Holy Synod now approved of his plans and many persons promised financial support. The largest single subscription was ten thousand rubles brought to him by a merchant of Moscow who, when asked his name, refused to give it and said, "God knows." Père Nicolai was raised to the rank of Archimandrite. It was at first hoped that four priests might be sent to reside in Yedo, Hakodate, Nagasaki, and some other city to be chosen later. One priest did indeed accompany Père Nicolai on his return; but he fell ill on the journey and was obliged to go back to Russia only two months after reaching Japan.

Père Nicolai reached Hakodate in February, 1871. He soon sent a letter to Sendai in which those who had become interested in Christianity were invited to come to him for further instruction. He also asked that they bring with them some scholar well versed in Chinese, who could help him in the translation of books. The recipients of the letter, who had been eagerly waiting to hear of his return, at once prepared to follow his words. They found a Confucian scholar to accompany them and soon all were on their way to Hakodate. On their arrival they were lodged in a building connected with the consulate and were formed into a sort of school. The Archimandrite not only instructed them in Christian doctrines, but also taught the Russian language to those desiring it. At the same time he worked upon an adaptation of the Chinese New Testament to the needs of the Japanese. The school was soon increased by the coming of more persons from Sendai, and by the reception of others in Hakodate who wished to study Russian.

While Père Nicolai had been absent Dr. Sakai had come again to Hakodate, where he soon gained an extensive medical practice. Although the company of enquirers in Mr. Sawabe's house received help from members of the Sendai clan who had no interest in Christianity, Dr. Sakai seemed indifferent to their needs. Mr. Sawabe and the others were indignant at what they considered his stinginess. Some of the younger men went so far as to force their way into his house and show by their rough behaviour how much they disapproved of his conduct. Whatever may have been the reason for his indifference, he afterwards showed that he was not miserly, for soon after the coming of the Archimandrite, Dr. Sakai brought to him a large package of silver coins, saying he had been saving this money in order that it might be used in the service of the Church. Père Nicolai, while commending the zeal thus displayed, told him that perhaps the money would have been more acceptable to the Lord if it had been used for helping the brethren in their time of need.

At about this time Dr. Sakai and another man disappeared. For several days no trace of them could be found by their anxious friends. At last they came to Père Nicolai, pale and emaciated, as though they had passed through a severe illness. They said that, being possessed by the desire to become preachers of the Gospel, they had hidden themselves in an attic where they had spent the time in fasting and prayer, beseeching God to accept them for His service. The Archimandrite was pleased with their earnestness, though he told them that any person desiring to practise religious austerities ought first to seek the advice of a priest so as to do all in accordance with ecclesiastical rules.

Soon after Père Nicolai's arrival, but before the Sendai students reached Hakodate, Mr. Sawabe left that city for a short visit to Tosa, his native province. While on the journey he tried to learn what he could concerning the trend of public thought, and he was convinced that conditions were becoming favourable for an active propagation of Christianity, This made him enthusiastic in urging the immediate and vigorous prosecution of the work. On coming back to Hakodate, he was displeased to find that most of the men from Sendai were learning the Russian language instead of giving their whole time to the study of religious truth. "Is this the time," he remonstrated, "to be learning a foreign tongue? You should be preparing to go out as evangelists at the earliest possible moment." In this view he was seconded by Mr. Kageta, who had not entered the classes in Russian.

Mr. Sawabe urged Père Nicolai to remove to Tokyo, saying that Hakodate was too far removed from the center of influence and activity to be a favourable place for inaugurating any movement that was to affect the whole nation. Père Nicolai agreed with this opinion, though he felt it necessary to remain a few months longer where he was. He had an abundance of work. Besides the students who lived at the consulate, he had several other pupils in the Russian language. The superintendence of the work of the translator took much time. With the aid of the students he used a lithographic press for printing copies of the Lord's Prayer and of doctrinal manuals. He prepared a Russo-Japanese dictionary, which his pupils copied by hand. The dictionary continued to be reproduced in this way until 1881, when it gave way to one published by the Educational Department.

Near the close of 1871 several of the men from Sendai were baptised. Soon after this Père Nicolai asked one of them, John Ono, if he would be willing to return to his native province as an evangelist. Mr. Ono replied that the proposition accorded with his earnest desires. Being further asked whom he would like for associates, he chose Peter Sasakawa and Jacob Takaya. The Archimandrite therefore began to give the three young men special instruction in Christian doctrine and evangelistic methods. In November they set forth on their mission. No definite arrangement was made for their support. They had no desire to receive financial assistance from others, but expected on reaching Sendai to provide their own sustenance.

Soon after this, Mr. Sawabe was sent to Tokyo to make arrangements for the removal of Père Nicolai to that city. On his arrival he found lodgings near Nihonbashi, the very centre of the metropolis, and set himself to studying the state of affairs. There were all sorts of rumours concerning the attitude the Government was about to assume towards Christianity. Some said that the old edicts were soon to be removed. Already two scholars of growing influence, Nakamura Masanao and Fukuzawa Yukichi, had expressed sentiments in favour of religious liberty, and others were approving their views. Mr. Sawabe met some high officials of his acquaintance who expressed their willingness to have Christianity taught. He believed that, whatever the real sentiment of the Government might be, the favourable time for evangelistic efforts had come and that, since American and French missionaries were already in Yokohama and Tokyo, the Greek Church ought at the earliest possible moment to enter a field that to the enthusiastic pioneer seemed full of promise. He was living at this time with some friends belonging to his own clan, who invited him to join them in a business enterprise that they were sure would make them rich. He refused, saying, "Money-making is all very well in its way; but I have some business of far greater importance. I have consecrated myself to God for the work of preaching the Gospel." In December, when Mr, Ono came on private business to Tokyo, Mr. Sawabe thought that his friend was the one best fitted to prepare the way for Père Nicolai, and he therefore insisted on an exchange of places by which he himself was transferred to Sendai.

On the coming of Père Anatolius, another Russian priest, to Hakodate, Père Nicolai gave the work there into his care, and in January, 1872, set out for Tokyo. When he arrived in Yokohama he sent a messenger to call Mr. Ono, who reached him the next day. After consultation about various matters, Père Nicolai said: "I shall go to-morrow to Tokyo, so you must return at once." Mr, Ono reached Tokyo in the middle of the night and the next morning waited upon Soejima, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, whom he told of Père Nicolai's intention to reside in the city.

In Tokyo Père Nicolai at first went to a hotel that had been opened on the Foreign Concession. As this was too expensive, he accepted the use of a room that an American offered to let him have until he should be able to find a house. He soon obtained a Japanese building that was only about twelve feet square. Thither, on Mr. Ono's invitation, came four or five persons to hear what the foreigner might have to tell them. An appointment was made for a second meeting, but on the day it was to have been held, one of the great conflagrations for which Tokyo is noted swept over that section of the city. With the exception of a few things that were thrown into the well, and two books, nothing was saved from the building. Père Nicolai now found temporary shelter with a South American until he could rent another house.

News from Sendai caused much anxiety. The three evangelists that had been sent to that city went about among relatives and friends, telling of their new faith and inviting those that wished further information to come to Mr. Ono's house. This continued to be used as the chief preaching-place even after the owner went to Tokyo. Meetings were often held also in the houses of enquirers, whose numbers rapidly increased. Soon there were each day more than a hundred hearers—men, women, and children—some of them coming from neighbouring villages.

Reports of what was going on spread through the city. It was commonly believed that the evangelists practised magic. In February one of the hearers, who was well acquainted with the prefectural officers, heard reports that the latter were beginning to think they ought to prohibit the teaching of Christianity and were preparing to make arrests. To his suggestion that the meetings be temporarily discontinued, Mr. Takaya replied:

"From the first we were well aware that the officials might interfere with our work. If at the first rumour of trouble we cease proclaiming the Gospel, when will the time ever come for making God's mercy known? It is not our business to consider whether the officials will make arrests. So long as we are left free, we shall continue our work."

On the evening of February 13, while Mr. Sawabe was preaching at the house of an enquirer, he was interrupted by a messenger who had come to tell him that several policemen were prowling about Mr. Ono's house and that one of them, disguised as a merchant, had gone to enquire for Mr, Sawabe. The evangelist went on with his meeting, and at its close returned to Mr, Ono's house. Soon three policemen entered, and after binding him took him to the prefectural office. About forty policemen had been lying in wait about the house. They probably feared that the Christians would resist them, and perhaps remembrance of stories told about the arrests of Christians two hundred and fifty years before made them fear that magic would be used for effecting an escape. As a further precaution, they had barricaded the streets by placing ladders across them. After Mr, Sawabe was taken away, they entered the house, took possession of the books, and trampled on the icons.

At the prefectural office Mr. Sawabe was asked why he was breaking the laws by teaching an evil doctrine. In reply, he tried to tell them about Christianity; but the officers cut him short, saying that he should not be so insolent as to dispute with his superiors. They took away the religious emblem hanging from his neck and committed him to jail.

Peter Sasakawa, on hearing of this arrest, said to the Christians: "When Mr. Sawabe came to Sendai, I reported him to the officials as being my guest; hence, it is a very irregular method of procedure for the police to seize him without giving me any notification. I must go to the office and make enquiries about the matter. As I cannot hope to escape arrest, it will be better for me to give myself up at once."

He did as he had said, and was put in jail. Jacob Takaya had set out to Tokyo on the day of Mr. Sawabe's arrest; but being overtaken by a messenger who told him what had happened, he returned to Sendai, spent the night in Mr. Ono's house, and the next morning was taken by the police, who were surprised that he should come back to face the danger that he knew to be threatening him.

The three evangelists were not allowed to see each other. Mr. Takaya was put in a room with several common criminals. It contained a Buddhist image, and the rules of the prison required that all should repeat prayers before it every evening; but the keepers excused him from doing this, and even allowed him to repeat aloud his Christian prayers.

Several persons who had attended the meetings were put into prison, while others were summoned to the office for examination. Their names were learned from a list in Mr. Sawabe's notebook. One hundred and fifty persons were put under the surveillance of relatives, who were made responsible for their conduct. Among those interrogated were several children, who astonished the examiners by asserting their willingness to suffer punishment for the sake of Christ.

The prison was conducted after the old methods, the supply of food being insufficient, except as it was supplemented by gifts from friends. The believers rallied to the help of their brethren. The chapel in Mr. Ono's house was appointed as the place whither contributions of food should be brought. One of the Christians had a friend among the police, who let him know beforehand, when any of the company were to be apprehended. These persons would then come to the chapel so that all the arrests might be made there. The police showed considerable clemency, and in order not to cause inconvenience to those who might be busy in collecting supplies for the prisoners, would postpone their arrest until a later day.

Intelligence of these events soon reached Père Nicolai, who was greatly troubled at thought of the danger to which the Christians were exposed. He would say to Mr. Ono:

"If we cannot devise some way of saving them, they will certainly be subjected to the severest punishment. Yon must save them. If you do not, it will be the same as though you killed them."

Mr. Ono could not bear to think of his brethren as groaning in captivity, while he remained at liberty. He said that he ought to go and share their imprisonment, or even their death, if it should come to that. Père Nicolai frowned upon such an idea, and told him that he ought to remain in. Tokyo, devising some plan for the rescue of his brethren. Mr. Ono had an interview with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and through the agency of friends got Mr. Fukuzawa Yukichi to plead with the high officials against a persecution that would bring disgrace upon the nation. Some *samurai* from Sendai, who were in Tokyo, consulted with Dr. Verbeck, then an adviser to the Council of State, who appealed to Mr. Okuma and others connected with the Government.

When the prefectural officials presented a report of their action, the matter could not longer be disregarded by the Central Government, and though there were differences of opinion among those in authority, orders were sent to Sendai for the release of the prisoners. They were brought before the local officers that they might receive their sentence as follows:

"Although you are blameworthy for having studied the foreign religion, you are mercifully pardoned because you have repented of your fault. Take heed that you do not offend again."

On hearing this, the Christians protested that they had repented of nothing, and therefore could not assent to this statement; but the officials would not listen, and ordered them to leave the place. Those that had been under surveillance were also called to the office and told that they were pardoned, but that they must henceforth be more careful to obey the laws.

It was a happy day for the released prisoners and their friends when they met in the chapel to return thanks for their deliverance. The persecution had its natural effect in dividing the chaff from the wheat. Some of the former attendants at the meetings had denied having any interest in Christianity; others had fled from home. The real enquirers had been bold, and considered it an honour to suffer persecution. The number of hearers was for a time diminished; but those that remained were more earnest than ever. After a while, there were additions to their ranks. In 1873, there were in Sendai twenty Christian families, besides about a hundred others in which were one or more believers. In all, there were about two hundred persons who had accepted Christianity, though few of them were baptised until 1875, when Mr. Sawabe, having been ordained as a priest, administered the rite to one hundred and twenty-nine persons.

As has been already mentioned, Père Anatolius was left in charge at Hakodate. It was his purpose to make the school in the consulate a place for the training of evangelists. Calling together the Christians, he asked them to select persons who should at once enter upon the work of spreading the Gospel, The choice fell upon Matthew Kageta, John Sakai, and Paul Tsuda. Houses were at once obtained in different parts of the city for the use of classes that met to study Christianity. The number of attendants increased so rapidly that other Christians were called to help the three evangelists.

In March, 1872, the Easter services in the consular chapel were attended by about thirty believers, besides a number of other persons. The reports that these gave of the services aroused general curiosity. As the bell of the chapel rang for the meetings that were held each day of that week, crowds collected about the door. The students acted as ushers to lead the people into the chapel. Since there was room for only about a hundred persons at a time, the people were admitted in companies, a short explanation of Christian doctrine being given to each band ere it gave place to the next. Throughout the city men and women were talking about Christianity; some saying that it seemed to be a good religion, while others denounced it as immoral or dealing in magic.

Yezo, unlike the more populous parts of Japan, had not been given a prefectural government. Its affairs were administered by a Colonisation Commission, and the officials were imbued with the old-fashioned ideas. In issuing orders for the registration of the people, they required that the names of men, women, and children should be reported to the Shinto shrines. Each person would then receive an amulet that he was to preserve with care, and that was to be returned to the shrine at his death. When the officials heard that Christianity was being openly taught, they decided that it must be immediately suppressed. Dr. Sakai was arrested and asked why he had become a follower of the evil religion. When he tried to explain the teachings of Christianity, his examiner refused to listen and sent him to prison.

Three days later, Messrs. Tsuda and Kageta were ordered to appear at the office. After some delay, they were brought into the room where criminals were examined, On every side were displayed instruments of torture, whose very sight was thought sufficient to make persons tremble. With several police to guard them, the prisoners were placed before a platform on which were seated the examining official and his clerk. After the names and ages of the evangelists had been recorded, they were asked:

"On what business did you come to this city?"

"I came," answered Mr. Tsuda, "for the purpose of studying the Russian language."

"Under that name you are also studying Christianity. Why are you doing so?"

"In these days, when Japan is having dealings with other nations, I am likely to be asked by foreigners why their religion has been prohibited. It seemed to me that inability to give a reason would bring disgrace upon me and upon my country. Hence, I thought it necessary to examine their doctrines. In doing so, I soon found out that there was nothing to justify opposition. The religion at which this prohibition was aimed must have been something other than that of Jesus, whose excellent teaching has brought the countries of Europe and America to their present state of civilisation. Convinced of its truth, I was led to study it more thoroughly."

"This religion of Jesus, as you call it, is just the same as Christianity, and is not Christianity strictly forbidden by the edicts that are posted throughout the land?"

"I, of course, know what is written in those edicts. Moreover, I have from childhood been acquainted with Shintoism and Confucianism, as also with Buddhism, which has been the religion of my family. Since, however, it was in the religion of Jesus that I first found the way of salvation and righteousness, I have desired to learn all that I could about it."

"Since you are a student, there may be some reason for making an investigation of Christianity; but why have you been teaching it to others?"

"Jesus said that we should bestow on others the same blessings that we desire for ourselves. Hence, it is my wish to teach this religion, not merely in Hakodate, but in all parts of Japan."

"The people of Hakodate are unintelligent. Hitherto they have been satisfied with Buddhism. To teach them something new, even though it may be good in itself, will only confuse them."

Mr. Tsuda seemed vexed at these words and said: "Intelligence and lack of intelligence depend largely on the degree of instruction that a person receives. Hence, I am specially desirous to teach those that are ignorant."

The officer, who seemed to be seeking some ground for pronouncing a sentence of condemnation, again asserted: "The religion of Jesus is certainly the same as that which has long been prohibited."

"Is it prohibited because it is evil, or because it is good?" asked Mr. Tsuda, thinking that if the answer was that it was evil, he would ask to be shown what points in it were evil; while if acknowledgement were made that its doctrines were good, he would ask why then it was to be suppressed.

The officer, however, waived the question, and simply said: "Law is law, and you as a law-breaker should tremble at thought of your wrong-doing."

"I am not conscious," said Mr, Tsuda, "of being a law-breaker, for I have done nothing but study a good religion."

After some further questioning, the two evangelists were sent to the military prison to await trial. They were closely guarded to see that they did not make use of magic arts to effect an escape. They relieved the dulness of their imprisonment by prayers, hymns, and conversation. Finally they gained permission to receive some books from their friends. When arrested, Mr, Tsuda had hidden a portion of the Scriptures in his bosom, but had not dared to read it until now, when he slipped it among the volumes received from outside. After a while the guard happened to notice it, and all the books were taken away.

As Dr. Sakai was not a *samurai,* he was put in the criminal prison, where, with fifteen other persons, he occupied a room fifteen feet long and nine wide. He made for himself a rosary by stringing pellets of boiled rice on a thread drawn from his clothes, while a chop-stick furnished the wood for a cross.

The arrests of the evangelists caused so much alarm that the people no longer flocked to the chapel. Even the street merchants, who had formerly furnished supplies for the school, did not dare to enter the premises. When believers appeared on the street they were avoided by their acquaintances. One young man was expelled from a government school, and some other students were not allowed to live in the dormitories.

The Colonisation Commission tried in vain to make the evangelists recant, and then, not knowing what to do with them, sent a report to the Department of Justice with a request for instructions. The report arrived at about the time the case of the Sendai Christians was decided, and orders were sent for the release of the evangelists. They were set free on May 1, after an imprisonment of about two months. At the same time the officials of the Colonisation Commission sent word to the prefectures to which these men belonged, asking that they be summoned to return to their homes.

An official messenger soon came from Sendai for Messrs. Kageta and Tsuda; but, knowing that they had committed no crime, he consented to postpone their return, he himself waiting for them until the last part of August. He then accompanied them to the prefectural office in Sendai, whence they were sent to their own villages after being told that, as their trouble had come from their connection with Christianity, they must be careful to avoid further offence in that respect. They paid so little heed to this warning that they were soon actively engaged in propagating their faith.

Dr. Sakai's home was north of Sendai, in what was then the Tome Prefecture. There was still more delay in his return, but he finally reached his native town, where he was put under the care of a relative, who had strict orders that Dr. Sakai was not to go elsewhere without permission, and was not to teach Christianity. In spite of these directions, he tried to tell his friends about his new belief; but they feared to have anything to do with a religion that had brought him into so much trouble. He therefore turned his attention to neighbouring villages. In one of these he was encouraged by the conversion of a young man named Semba, who soon afterwards visited Tokyo, where he received baptism.

In 1872, Père Nicolai procured, in the name of the Russian Legation, the lease of a piece of ground on Surugadai, a hill situated in a central and populous part of Tokyo. The location seemed a favourable one for his school, and also for the church that he had faith to believe would be erected before many years. The buildings already there were low and dingy; but the funds at his disposal were insufficient to provide anything better. He took one of them for his own residence, and in the others soon gathered a number of students. Most of them came for secular instruction. Père Nicolai taught them Russian by day, and in the evening he explained Christian doctrines to those that were willing to listen. A number of the pupils soon asked for baptism, and it was administered September 24, 1872, to ten persons. As the attitude of the Government towards Christianity was still doubtful, it was deemed advisable to use the greatest secrecy. A few days later, Père Nicolai, who had become well acquainted with one of the Buddhist priests in the Shiba Temples, was calling upon him, when the priest passed over a piece of paper saying: "See what I have here." Père Nicolai, little suspecting what it was, unrolled the paper and saw to his amazement that it contained a plan of the room where the baptismal service had been held. The places where he and each of the neophytes had stood were designated, as well as the position of the utensils used in connection with the ceremony. He was greatly disturbed at this, apprehending that some evil was about to fall on the young men, whose secret profession of Christianity had evidently been discovered. The priest, with a smile, told him not to be alarmed. A report of the matter, he said, had reached the Government, and on account of the connection of the temple with national affairs, a copy of the plan had been given to him, but there was no intention of making any trouble over what had been done.

It was afterwards found out that the sketch had been drawn by a friend of one of the persons baptised. He was a spy who, having in some way learned of what was to be done, gained permission to be present.

This occurrence, which at first caused anxiety, became a source of assurance, for the inaction of the Government seemed to show that it was not inclined to prevent its subjects from embracing Christianity. In December, ten more persons were baptised.

Père Nicolai's name was becoming well known among all classes of people, and various stories concerning him were in circulation. Some said that he belonged to the Imperial Family of Russia; many considered him a spy; and others believed that he had been sent to win men's hearts in order to facilitate the military conquest of Japan. Knowing that some of the officials suspected him of political designs, he sent to the Foreign Department a memorial, in which he denied that the doctrines of Christianity tended to shake the loyalty or patriotism of those that accepted them. The suspicion of the Government was not easily allayed. It had several spies enter the school to see whether anything taught there was likely to be a source of danger. One of these men became a Christian, and prepared a petition in favour of the public recognition of Christianity. Contrary to the advice of Mr. Ono, he tried to have this presented to the Emperor; but probably it did not get far beyond the first official into whose hands it came.\*

**Footnotes**

\* "La Rei. de Jésus Res.," vol. i., p. 103; "Nihon Seikyo Dendoshi." vol ii., p. 2. From the second of these books has been drawn most of the material for this chapter.

\* *The Mission Field,* October, 1860.

† "La Relig. de Jésus Res.," vol. i., p. 389.

\* It may seem somewhat inconsistent to use this word in connection with a Russian when it has not been used of the French priests; but, until raised to the bishopric, he was so universally known as Père Nicolai that no other designation has so familiar a sound to old residents of Japan.

\* Mr. Arai soon went to America in the suite of Mori Arinori, the Japanese Minister. While there, he joined a Methodist church.

\* In 1877 a student in the Theological School confessed to Père Nicolai that he had been sent by the police as a spy. He also became a believer.




