+++
title = "02 CHAPTER ONE BRINGING SCRIPTURE DOWN TO EARTH"

+++
**CHAPTER ONE**

**BRINGING SCRIPTURE DOWN TO EARTH**

**1.1. Vanishing of the supernatural**

Anyone who cares to look, can see that Christianity is in steep
decline.  This is especially the case in Europe, where church attendance
levels in many countries have fallen below 10% or even below 5%.  In
most Christian countries (i.e. with the exception of some frontier areas
of the missions), the trend is the same, even if less dramatic.

Even more ominous for the survival of Christianity is the decline in
priestly vocations.  Many parishes that used to have two or three parish
priests now have none, so that the Sunday Service has to be conducted by
a visiting priest, who has an ever fuller agenda as his colleagues keep
on dying, retiring or abandoning priesthood without being replaced.  The
average age of Catholic priests in the world is now 55.  In the
Netherlands it is even 62, and increasing.  This is only partly due to
the strenuous obligation of celibacy, for in Protestant Churches, where
priests do get married, and in those countries where Catholic priests
ignore the celibacy rules, the decline in priestly vocations is also in
evidence.  The fact is that modern people just aren’t very interested
anymore in practising Christianity.

Outside observers may join the Church leadership in asking why this
decline is taking place.  As a participant observer of the emptying of
the churches in Europe, I will argue that certain circumstances and
tactical mistakes may have accelerated the process, but that the
fundamental reason for the decline is intrinsic to the nature of the
Christian faith.  Modem consumerism is one factor - but to an extent
also a consequence - of the decline of the faith.  The *Aggiornamento*
(“adaptation to the new times”) policy of the Catholic Church since the
Second Vatican Council (1962-65) and similar developments in the
mainstream Protestant Churches have been a clumsy and unconvincing way
of proving that Christianity could keep pace with modem times.  Any
attempt to bridge the gap between modernity and the Christian faith has
only underlined their incompatibility.

Nothing can be done about it, except transforming Christianity till it
is no longer Christianity.  The central, defining element in
Christianity that cannot possibly be saved, is the composite doctrine of
prophetic monotheism.  The notion that there is a single God, Creator of
the universe, who is interfering with His Creation by sending messages
to privileged spokespersons called prophets, flies in the face of
rationality.  People will accept that reason isn’t everything, but not
that your central belief system is so militantly opposed to reason. 
When they also look at the actual contents of the utterances of the
Biblical prophets and of Jesus, they find much of it incomprehensible,
or undesirable, or irrelevant to our times, or at best good but not
requiring divine intervention.

The decline of Christianity started when Christian intellectuals
committed to religion tried to conceive religion in a rational way. 
Some of the founders of modern science, including Galileo Galilei, Isaac
Newton, Johann Kepler and René Descartes, explored nature in order to
discover therein the greatness and glory of God.  It is often said that
science has destroyed religiosity and nurtured atheism, but fact is that
the founders of science were passionately religious people.  However,
their conception of religiosity was radically different from the
teachings of the Church.

These founding fathers of modern science did not immediately discard the
Church teaching that God had revealed Himself through Scripture and
through His Only-begotten Son, but they juxtaposed this traditional
revelation with a second God-revealing “scripture”: nature.  This was
known as the *Liber Mundi*, the “Book of the World”, the laws of nature
conceived as God’s own handwriting on the paper of matter.  Galilei said
that this *Liber Mundi* was more reliable than revealed Scripture: it
could not be tampered with, and it was always available right here for
everyone to investigate.

The Church could claim no God-invested monopoly over this universalist
religiosity, which gained ground with the dawn of modem science.  And
since the *Liber Mundi* was there for everyone, the exclusivist claims
on Salvation for the baptized Christians became repulsive to the new
spirit.  Knowledge instead of rituals and beliefs became the new key to
salvation.  New religious movements like the Freemasons and the
Rosicrucians, while still using some Biblical parlance, in fact
undermined Christianity’s exclusive claims. For them, Christ became a
symbol, an ontological concept of the divine presence in the world,
rather than a historical character who saved humanity from eternal sin
by his crucifixion.  Religious philosophers like Spinoza developed a
universalist and rational conception of the divine.^([1](#1))

Church teaching had overruled reason, and declared its own dogmas,
inspired directly by the Holy Spirit, to be above anything the human
mind could think up or envision.  In the words of Tertullian, the
third-century Church Father: *Credo quia absurdum*, “I believe *because*
it is absurd”.  The idea that humanity’s intrinsic imperfection or
sinfulness had been remedied by Christ’s crucifixion, was so absurd, and
so contrary to experience (the level of sinfulness, whatever that may
be, has not changed much since before Christ), that it could only be
upheld as Christianity’s basic dogma by declaring reason incompetent.

On the issue of the relation between reason and religion, a popular
quote is Saint Thomas Aquinas’s dictum that “*philosophia ancilla
theologiae*”, “rational inquiry is the handmaid of theology” (the term
*philosophia* used to mean both philosophy and science).  From a certain
viewpoint, that statement still makes perfect sense.  That intellectual
knowledge (*philosophies*) is subservient to “knowledge of God”
(*theologia*), is something which the founding-fathers of modern science
would have readily accepted: their aim indeed was to grasp something of
God’s fullness through physics and geometry, to use science as a
stepping-stone to cosmic vision.  It is an age-old and pre-Christian
tradition: we all know the case of Pythagoras, who used mathematics as
the basis of his mystical teachings, and we know that Pythagoras himself
merely continued a tradition with roots in Egypt and Mesopotamia
(perhaps also in India: the similarities between his school and Mahavira
Jina’a are striking).  So, if we understand *theologia* in the broader,
literal sense of “God-knowledge”, keeping in mind that Thomas Aquinas
himself was also a mystic, then there is nothing wrong with the dictum
“*philosophia ancilla theologiae*”.

However, the Church has definitely used the term “theology” in the
ordinary sense of “knowledge of Church dogma”.  In that case, Thomas’s
aphorism does mean the subordination of intellectual insights to the
non-rational “revealed truths” of Church dogma.

The advent of Protestantism has not bettered Christianity’s intrinsic
opposition to reason, on the contrary.  Protestantism was a political
movement against the Pope’s power, and that had some merit, but
religiously it was a fundamentalist movement that reinforced the hold of
the Bible over the minds of the faithful.  The Catholic populace knew
little of the Bible’s contents, only some selected stories which the
priest would read out and authoritatively interpret in his weekly
sermon.  What they knew were Church-made teachings, starting with the
Creed (the statement of Catholic Belief formulated at the Council of
Nicea), and a lot of devotional practices to the Sacred Heart, the
Saints and the Virgin Mary, which had little to do with specifically
Christian teachings.  In fact, the Protestants correctly saw them as
heathen practices in disguise.  Protestantism made much of Europe
thoroughly read the Bible with all its contradictions and tales of
cruelty, and accept it as God’s own word, extolled above human
criticism.  But it was this very Bible that would be the great casualty
of the scientific revolution and the age of Enlightenment.

If one used reason, the same one with which to study the solar system’s
mechanics, to critically investigate the contents of the Bible, its
status as God’s own word could not hold out for long.  But more
fundamentally, if one accepted that reason was to guide man, then the
Bible, even regardless of its actual contents, would have to be rejected
in principle as the source containing the ultimate truth.

The eighteenth century saw the rise of a non-scriptural God-affirmation,
called *deism*.  Whereas *theism* postulates a personal god who can
intervene in the world by His own free will, e.g. in response to
someone’s prayer, deism postulates a divine creator who has set the
world in motion, who has laid down his own laws for his creation, and
now lets the machine roll on by itself.  There is no question of God
intervening in His own creation, by fulfilling someone’s prayer, by
revealing Himself through a unique Scripture, or by sending and
sacrificing His only begotten son.  This conception of God is known as
*le Dieu horlogier* (the clockworker-God), and Voltaire, sometimes
wrongly thought to be an atheist, was its best-known exponent.

This kind of God, who takes leave after having set creation in motion,
and who doesn’t give any sign of His existence except the world itself,
could be thought of as non-active and non-verifiable, and so, for all
practical purposes, non-existent.  One could postulate that the laws of
nature were God’s handwriting, or one could not: it didn’t make any
difference for the laws of nature themselves.  Therefore, dismissing
what could be dismissed, materialism and atheism soon made their
appearance.  When Napoleon asked the physicist Laplace where God fitted
into his model of the universe, the scientist’s answer was: “*II ne me
faut pas de cette hypothése-la*” (I have no use for that hypothesis
which you mention).  Man can understand nature without postulating an
extra-natural Being called God.

Recently, God has lost one of the last uses attributed to Him in
explaining nature: creating life out of dead matter.  So far,
materialist science was unable to explain how nature could generate such
complex structures.  Now, the study of “systems far from equilibrium”
and of the spontaneous genesis of order from chaos, have brought the
genesis of life within the reach of materialist science. We may
confidently look forward to a satisfactory explanation of life’s genesis
in the near future, one in which no supernatural intervention by any God
is needed.^([2](#2))

God wasn’t needed for explaining nature, and He also wasn’t needed as a
foundation for man’s ethics.  The Church had tried to instill morality
by threatening man with hellfire.  But according to Enlightenment
thinkers, reason and the study of man and society could form a
sufficient basis for ethics.  In this connection, Voltaire liked to
point to the Chinese moralist Confucius, who strictly refrained from
religious speculation but nonetheless taught a consistent and workable
(in fact, highly successful) system of morality.

If God was still to make any sense, He had to be found somewhere else. 
He was not dictating Scriptures, He was not operating heaven and hell,
but perhaps He is still there where man cannot see Him: inside man’s
consciousness.  The conception of religion as an exploration of the
divine inside man’s consciousness had been there all along in a number
of heathen religions, Now, European Christians began to rediscover it
for themselves.  In the late nineteenth century, the Dutch poet Willem
Kloos wrote: “*Ik ben een god in het diepst van mijn gedachten*” (I am a
god in the deepest of my thoughts).  Both Protestants and Catholics
expressed their indignation at this sacrilegious statement.

In the twentieth century, this approach to religion as an adventure of
consciousness has become a mighty trend.  It has been propelled by the
discovery, on an ever larger scale, of the teachings of Eastern
thinkers.  Some Christian apologists contend, as a last line of defence,
that Eastern spirituality may be valuable but is not fit for Western
man.  But more and more, they are forced to recognize that “Eastern
paths” are just universally human paths that merely happen to have been
developed in the East.  Worse, to some extent they once were just as
much part of the European or Mediterranean heritage, but they were
stamped out by Christianity’s concerted efforts.

So, in spite of the predictions of 19th century materialists, religion
has survived the untenable prophetic belief systems.  As Salman Rushdie
has said, there is a “God-shaped hole” in the world.  In an article with
the eloquent title: “Never mind God, let’s have religion”, the
British-Jewish columnist Chaim Bermant observes: “About 30 years ago, a
Church of England bishop hit the headlines because he didn’t believe in
God: today it is little exaggeration to say that a Church of England
bishop would hit the headlines if he did.” A substantial number of
people do not want to abandon the existing community structures shaped
by the Churches, but they are transforming religion from within.  Either
way, religious-minded people have outgrown the stranglehold of dogma.

Religion is no longer conceived as the result of a bizarre intervention
of a supernatural being in the natural world, either through miracles or
through privileged spokesmen, let alone only-begotten sons.  Even if
people believe in the supernatural, that still doesn’t bring them back
into the bosom of the Church.  Those people make a distinction between
“supernatural” phenomena (clairvoyance, magnetic healing), and blind
faith in Scriptural dogma.  They assume that even in their experience of
the supernatural, a certain rationality, a certain as yet unknown law of
nature must be at work, rather than a divine intervention.

Consider the belief in miracles, for long the mainstay of popular
religion.  Both Protestants and Catholics believe in miracles, though
with a different flavour.  Protestants always talk about Jesus: Jesus
gave me the strength to do this, everything changed when Jesus came into
my life, etc.  Many of them are very serious about faith healing, and
some of them even reject modem medicine and vaccination on the ground
that the Bible doesn’t allow it, or that only Jesus should heal them.
The Catholic Church leaves the miraculous cures preferably to the
saints, in their places of pilgrimage.  It also recognizes a number of
miraculous appearances of the Virgin Mary, around which more places of
pilgrimage have sprung up, where people go for miraculous cures.

Modem people don’t have patience with Christianity’s faith in these
miracles.  A critical scrutiny of the miracles shows that nothing
genuinely miraculous is going on.  In the case of miracle cures, it
turns out that no actually supernatural things ever happen, such as an
amputee getting back his lost limb.  What routinely happens, is that
psychosomatic diseases are cured, due to a psychological jump from
despondency to faith.  “Your faith has saved you”, is what the priest
will say (quoting Jesus) on such occasions, and correctly so: but not
the faith in Jesus, much less Jesus himself, but faith in the
possibility of cure.  Medicine has so far underestimated the psychic
factor in health, and “miracle workers” do address that inner strength
by creating confidence with the aid of powerful mental images, one of
which may be Jesus, or the Virgin Mary.  Other gods, other prayers,
other rituals could do the job just as well, provided they create a
sufficiently strong impression on the patient’s mind.

While consciousness is dawning that the miracle cures effected in
Lourdes and other places of pilgrimage, are merely applications of an as
yet insufficiently explored healing power within ourselves, there has
also been research into that other Christian miracle: the apparitions of
the Virgin Mary.  Some striking facts: over 90% of the apparitions
concerns children between nine and fifteen; what they see, is the
typical Virgin Mary of the statuettes in churches, dressed in blue and
white; the geographical spread of the apparitions is such that the
Virgin Mary hardly ever appears in Protestant countries, where she is
not worshipped nor depicted; she only appears to people who are
believers already.

So, the Virgin Mary appears only to people who already have emotionally
charged images of her in their heads, and perfectly fits the image they
have of her. That points to a purely psychological phenomenon. The
recipients are children at an age when they are very susceptible to what
the German psychologist Erich Rudolf Jansch (1883-1940) called “eidetic
images”: mental images of emotionally charged objects, that seem very
lively and real.  The contents of what Mary has to say fits this age
group.  On the one hand, she offers a bit of simple platitudinous
theology: calls to better their lives, to turn to her or to God, to pray
and to spread the Gospel.  She doesn’t come up with something that those
youngsters couldn’t have thought up themselves.  On the other hand, she
often pays a lot of attention to the recipients’ personal problems,
encourages them, gives them confidence: just what an understanding
educator does towards kids in that self-searching stage of life.

In the cases where several children saw her at the same time, it turns
out that the first time they see different images, but after they
exchange information on what they have seen, the image seen by the
“leader” among them, is also seen by the others.  In several cases, it
was noticed they declared seeing the same image.  For instance, in the
apparition in Beauraing (Belgium, on November 29, 1932) one child
declared it saw the Virgin Mary with a golden heart on her breast (just
like in many statuettes).  The next time, the two other children saw the
same thing. Their descriptions were, however, not identical to the
detail, and observers noticed they were focusing on a different spot. 
Essentially, the image was in their minds.^([3](#3))

So today, people see through these “miracles”, and they are convinced
that what miraculous elements there were in Jesus’ life, must have been
of a similar nature (if not fiction concocted by the Gospel-writers). 
The “second evangelization” campaign that pope John Paul II has called
for is not going to re-convince people of the divine hand working
through such miracles.

At the same time, it should be mentioned that today, the popularity of
places of pilgrimage is at an all-time high.  Of course, this
quantitative peak should be put into perspective: the population numbers
are higher, especially old people (still the most religion-prone age
group) are far more numerous than ever in history, and they can travel
far more easily.  Still, many people who don’t set foot in their parish
church anymore, do go “on pilgrimage” sometimes: they want to experience
the powerful atmosphere that they expect to find at those places. Just
like the heathens of old.

On the whole, modern rational education has not destroyed religiosity,
but it has fatally cracked the age-old tendency to be over-awed by
phenomena that are not readily understood, as well as the hope for such
phenomena to solve our life’s problems.  A skepsis has made religions
based on irrational beliefs outdated forever.  This skepsis extends
beyond petty miracles to the basic miracle supposed to underlie the
entire Abrahamic tradition: God’s verbal or actual intervention in human
affairs.

**1.2. Prophethood**

At the centre of the Judaeo-Christian tradition stands an institution
which we moderns tend to consider as irrational par excellence: the
belief that the Creator of the Universe is a person, with personal
traits and whims, who communicates messages to us through privileged
channels called prophets.  This irrational belief mixes up the eternal
and the temporal, the metaphysical and the phenomenal.  Moreover, it is
the foundation of exclusivist claims on divine revelation: it divides
mankind in those who are in touch with the privileged messengers and
those who aren’t.

Biblical prophetism has evolved as one specific line of development from
a world-wide culture of trying to understand the gods’ designs for the
world.  Prophetism in the broadest sense could mean any practice of
revealing truths unknown to man, esp. knowledge of the future, or at
least good advice tuned to the future course of events.  The world over,
people have devised techniques of obtaining such hidden knowledge.

The oracle bones of the Chinese Shang dynasty (mid-2nd millennium BC)
reveal an oracular procedure that was highly systematized and formed
part of a magical way of relating to the world.  First, the will of the
gods was sought to be revealed through an oracular technique, usually
causing a crack (by inserting a hot needle) in a tortoise’s “shield” or
in cattle’s shoulder blades: the shape or direction of the crack gave
the desired information.  This information could be a simple yes/no
reply to a question, e.g.: should the army attack or not?  Otherwise, it
concerned the specific sacrificial wishes of the gods: which sacrifice
should be brought, human or animal, at what time, etc.? To us, this
would seem doubly irrational: to believe that you can influence events
by sacrificing specific items to the supposed gods, and moreover to
determine the wishes of these gods by a procedure yielding nothing but
the random cracks cause an innocent flame or hot metal in an innocent
animal’s bone.

The Etruscans had perhaps the most elaborate divination system of
antiquity, mentioned and partly borrowed by the Romans.  While there was
a wealth of techniques, the essence was that first a field was created
in which the different parts gave the different possible outcomes: yes
or no; attacking or retreating; allying oneself with candidate A, B or
C; moving in direction east, west, north or south.  These sectors were
called the “temples”, whence our word *contemplation*, i.e. surveying
the different factors of a situation (compare, in the slightly younger
and more learned technique called astrology, the “houses” of a
horoscope, and the term *consideration*, i.e. surveying the
configuration of the *sidera*, the stars).  Subsequently, the diviner
made, as it were, a god or a divine sign appear in one of these temples,
i.e. he let coincidence make a choice between one of the sectors.  This
could be done by letting a bird fly up in a specific direction, or by
checking which part of the liver of a ritually slaughtered goose showed
any remarkable sign, or in many other ways.  At any rate: the gods were
supposed to speak through coincidence, through a provoked random
“choice” between a predetermined number of possibilities.

The location of the “gods” in the sphere of coincidence has something
rational to it: in the realm of coincidence, they can interfere without
interfering either in the laws of nature or in man’s free choice. 
Compare with the notion of Sankhya philosophy that there are three types
of *karma* (causal factors of destiny): “from oneself” (*adhyatmika*),
i.e. wrought by one’s own doings; “from the elements” (*adhibhautika*),
i.e. wrought by the intrinsic nature of beings and substances, or in
modem terms, by the laws of nature; and thirdly “from the gods”
(*adhidaivika*), i.e. resulting from coincidence. If you happen to be in
that one-in-a-million airplane which crashes, it is not your own doing,
nor a necessary result of the laws of nature, but what we call
“coincidence” or “(bad) luck”, and what the ancients called “the will of
the gods”.  Coincidence is that malleable medium which the gods can
knead according to their wishes, even while respecting the autonomy of
both man and nature.

The point with divination is that we don’t wait till the gods visit upon
us a piece of coincidence devastating to our lives and plans, but we
catch them in a prearranged laboratory situation, where they can
determine something inconsequential (though meaningful), such as the
shape and direction of a heat-induced crack in a tortoise bone.  Before
ridiculing the ancients way of handling destiny, let us appreciate the
primitive streak of rationality present in it.

Apart from different guilds of technical diviners, there were also
spontaneous fortune-tellers, what we would now call clairvoyants and
mediums.  A clairvoyant, when focusing his mind on a given object or
person, gets images relating to its or his past or future.  No divine
person is asked to intervene, but clairvoyants are usually religious
persons who nevertheless do ascribe their powers to some divine power or
person.  A medium is someone who makes contact with spirits, either
spirits of deceased human beings or spirits belonging to a different
category of divine or demonic beings, who have access to knowledge kept
hidden from ordinary mortals.  A well-known variety of the medium
category are the shamans, who allow a spirit to take control over their
bodies to speak through them.

This type of direct communication with the realm of the divine was not
necessarily confined to a class of specialists.  In some cultures, all
men were expected to undertake a ‘vision quest’ at least once in a
lifetime, usually with the aid of psychedelic drugs.  A typical
characteristic of these purposely induced hallucinations, whether
drug-aided or otherwise, was that they were allowed to happen within
certain limits of place, time and circumstance, leaving secular space to
the more sobre states of mind.  This is the radical difference with
pathological hallucinations, which are out of the affected person’s
control and refuse to be confined to special occasions.  On the other
hand, the apparent similarity between the sacred visionary experience
sought by normal men and the pathological hallucinations of mentally
deranged people has often led to the recognition of the latter (at least
the more interesting and articulate specimens) as divine persons.  But
to prevent misunderstandings, let us repeat that in principle, the
visions which constituted a communication with the heavenly world were a
controlled and purposive activity undertaken by sane people,
occasionally or on a professional basis.

It is in the category of people who receive messages from a supposed
superhuman source on a regular basis that the origins of Biblical
prophethood can be found.  In the oldest stage of the Israelite state,
both systems existed: diviners and clairvoyants.  The latter are
attested since the beginning and remain protagonists until ca. 100 AD,
the former are only present as an institution during the period of the
Judges and early kings (12th-10th century BC).

Divination was practised by the high-priest, who used a system mentioned
but not technically explained in the Bible.  Attached to the *Ephod*, a
strip of cloth forming part of the priestly robe, there was a square bag
containing the oracular pieces, the *Urim* and the *Thummim*.  We do not
know what exactly they were, though it is significant that the former
name starts with the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet (*Aleph*), and
the latter with the last letter (*Thau*).  It is assumed that these were
little pieces of wood or stone, which were handled like dice.^([4](#4))

A passage in the book 1 Samuel (14:41-42) reveals that they could be
used for yes/no answers, and consulted by the method of successive
elimination: “Therefore Saul said: ‘…If this guilt is in me or in
Jonathan my son, give Urim; but if this guilt is in thy people Israel,
give Thummim.’ And Jonathan and Saul were taken \[*meaning the result
was Urim*\], but the people escaped \[*it was not Thummim*\].  Then Saul
said: ‘Cast the lot between me and my son Jonathan.’ And Jonathan was
taken.”

After the reign of David, this priestly divination system is no longer
attested.  David himself consults three diviner-priests, but is also
described as directly addressing Yahweh with yes/no questions, following
the same procedure of successive elimination (1 Samuel 23:4, 2 Samuel
5:19); it is probable that he used a similar system, but that the
material details have simply not been mentioned.

A century later, we find king Ahab exclusively consulting “prophets”,
also called “men of God”, “seers” and “sons of prophets”; he had 400
attached to his court.  It was understood that a prophet (*navi*) had
direct knowledge of God’s plans.  There was an extatic element in their
prophesying: prophets had to get into the right mood to receive
inspiration.  Thus, the prophet Elisha once asked for musicians to help
him get the inspiration.

There were different types of prophet.  The “sons of prophets”
(*bene-neviim*) were hereditary extatic prophets who lived as a
community.  They were the pre-Israelite religious class of Canaan, and
they used music and ritual celebrations on hilltops to invoke the divine
vision.  When Elijah is facing the Baal prophets who are wildly dancing
and cutting themselves with knives, it is said that this was their
custom (1 Kings 18:28).  King Saul himself joined in these prophets’
extatic dances (1 Samuel 19:20-24).

Prophets were usually dedicated to a particular god.  The prophets of
Yahweh were one class among others. On the one hand, they were part of a
traditional institution of godmen, on the other, they were increasingly
part of an anti-traditional ideological movement, described by Bible
scholars as the “Yahweh Alone” movement.^([5](#5)) This movement was
obviously directed against polytheism and idol-worship, but its
ideological thrust was slightly richer than mere iconoclasm.  In the
utterances of these Yahwist prophets, we find one recurring theme that
makes them quite respectable for modem post-religious readers: the
denunciation of sacrifice as the meeting-place of man and god, its
replacement with a call to ethical living, and the concomitant attacks
on organized priesthood.  While the temple-cult, at least that in the
temple of Jerusalem which contained the Ark of the Covenant (at least
until the Exile 587-538), was a constituent part of the Israelite
national identity, there is a general anti-temple and anti-priest
tendency discernible among the major Yahwist prophets.

To be sure, the contrastive depiction of Yahwist and other early
prophets in the Bible, regarding both ideology and personal behaviour,
should be treated with extreme caution: the ultimate Bible editors were
strongly biased in favour of the Yahwist prophets.  Similarly, the
depiction of ritual priesthood as a den of corruption is obviously not
unmotivated, though sociologically it makes sense, esp. by comparison
with similar aberrations in other cultures.

Apart from the “peripheral” prophets, whose tirades against kings and
priests have come to represent the core of the prophetic ideology, there
were also “central” prophets, associated with the court or the temple,
such as Nahum and Habakkuk, who were linked with the cult in the Temple
of Jerusalem.  These were generally more in favour of the establishment
and the status-quo, and prophesied doom against the Israelites’ enemies
rather than against the Israelites themselves.  The fact that the
“peripheral” prophets have taken the ideological centre-stage in the
prophetic part of the Bible, can be understood from the post-exilic
opposition between what we may call the Temple party (the Sadducees of
Gospel fame) and the Scripture party (the Pharisees and Scribes).

The first two Yahweh prophets who formed the classical type of prophet,
were Amos of the southern kingdom Judah and Hosea of Ephraim, heartland
of the northern kingdom Israel, both working in ca. 750 BC.  Amos was
the first writer-prophet; that the Yahwist movement ultimately
triumphed, is at least partly due to its literate accumulation of a
corpus of doctrine.  It is through Amos that Yahweh declares: “I hate, I
despise your feasts, and I take no delight in your solemn assemblies. 
Eventhough you offer me your burnt offerings and cereal offerings, I
will not accept them... Take away from me the noise of your songs, to
the melody of your harps I will not listen.  But let justice roll down
like waters, and righteousness like an overflowing stream.” (Amos
5:21-24)

Though many people will readily get carried away by the ethical stand of
this utterance, it contains a fallacy: it falsely implies that a choice
has to be made between ethical conduct on the one hand, and rituals and
hymns on the other. In India today, missionaries still like to contrast
the Hindu wealth of ritual celebrations and devotional music with the
Christian call to charity and justice - as if the ritual-minded Hindu
religion does not at the same time foster a developed culture of charity
and righteousness (*dharma*).  Amos could have attacked possible
excesses of the priesthood without attacking the ritual aspect of
religion itself.  Further, Judeo-Christian apologists like to identify
this call to righteousness and social justice with Yahweh’s intervention
through the prophets; while in fact, other cultures and other
ideological milieus have equally expressed the same ethical and social
concerns (e.g. Chinese Taoists who had no notion of a personal god). 
This at once shows the fundamental flaw of the ideology identified as
“prophetic”: it excludes things that are normal and deserve to be
included.

When Amos attacks Amasiah, the priest of the temple of Bet-El, the
latter scolds him and calls him a “seer” (*hozeh*), one of those
professional hereditary extatic prophets.  But Amos replies that he is
not one of those “sons of prophets”, that he was a simple cowherd until
Yahweh spoke to him and entrusted him with a mission (Amos 7:12-15). 
Clearly there is a sociological dimension to the opposition between the
traditional religious personnel and the new breed of Yahwist prophets,
and Marxist-leaning Bible scholars have naturally tried to explain the
rise of Yahwism in terms of an economical transformation of Israelite
society.

What is of more concern to us here, is what Yahweh has to say in this
confrontation with Amasiah, as on other occasions.  For the flavour:
“Your wife shall be a harlot in the city, and your sons and your
daughters shall fall by the sword, and your land shall be parceled out
by line; you yourself shall die in an unclean land, and Israel shall
surely go into exile away from its land” (7:17).  And: “The end has come
upon my people Israel; I will never again pass by them.  The songs of
the temple shall become wailings in that day, the dead bodies shall be
many…” (8:2-3).  And: “Surely I will never forget any of their deeds. 
Shall not the land tremble on this account, and everyone mourn who
dwells in it…?” (8:7-8). This sets the tone for the entire lineage of
Yahweh prophets: through them, an angry and vengeful Yahweh scolds his
Chosen People for being disobedient and unfaithful, and promises,
terrible punishment through natural disasters and victorious enemies.

The prophet Hosea introduces the symbolism of the adulterous woman: the
Israelite people that becomes unfaithful to its national god by
worshipping other gods.  The introductory chapter relates Hosea’s
personal married life, and it is his own wife who is painted as
adulterous and marked for punishment.  Here already, we have a hint of
how prophecies of national importance can be linked with the personal
experiences of the prophet.  From then onwards, as prophetism in the
name of Yahweh takes on a classical form and repeats a classical
message, the role of Yahweh’s prophet will increasingly attract a
certain type of man, one whose inner life fosters the same grim and
bitter outlook that becomes the hallmark of Yahweh’s prophetic
communications.

Hosea is identified by many theologians as the one man who takes the
jump from *monolatry* or *henotheism*, i.e. the worship of a single god
disregarding all other gods, to full-blooded monotheism, the belief that
this single god is the only god in existence.  Until then, Yahweh may
have been in the picture, may even have been a jealous god, but he was
not yet conceived as the only possible divine person.  The conflict
between Yahweh and Baal in the 9th century (massacre of Baal priests by
Elijah, removal of Baal idol from Samaria temple by king Joram, massacre
of Baal priests and destruction of their temple by the usurper-king
Jehu), though reinterpreted by the Bible editors as a struggle for
monotheism, was in fact only a struggle for political supremacy between
the national god Yahweh and the supra-national god Baal.  Even the
adultery image in Hosea is still indicative of henotheism, with Yahweh
being jealous of other gods, rather than being confident of being the
only god.  Moreover, the metaphor of Yahweh (originally the warrior-god
of the desert nomads) as husband is borrowed from the epithets of the
fertility god Baal, whose cult was very popular.

But in Hosea 13:4, Yahweh declares: ‘I am the Lord your God from the
land of Egypt; you know no god but me, and beside me there is no
saviour.’ Whether this is really such a big innovation in itself, is an
interesting topic for debate; for many centuries after Hosea, mature
monotheism will continue to worship a jealous god, who is not confident
of being the only one but wages war against his supposedly non-existent
rivals.  At any rate, this is the first appearance of the ideology
embodied in the doctrine surrounding Moses’ Decalogue, which, according
to a consensus among Bible scholars, has only been given its distinctive
monotheistic edge by the Deuteronomist Bible editors in the 7th-6th
century BC.

The effect of monotheism on the status of prophecy was far-reaching. 
The belief in one God who is valid for every person in every time and
circumstance gave a totally new universality to the utterances of His
prophets.  In the heathen context, an oracle was always meant for a
specific occasion and a specific audience.  In monotheism, the prophets’
utterances were worth preserving and repeating in places and on
occasions unrelated to the original.  This stimulated their preservation
and the extraction of a somewhat systematic theology from them.

This claim to universal validity of Yahwist prophetism contained the
germ of prophetism’s undoing as a living religious institution. 
Gradually, the reports of Yahweh’s revelations acquired Canonical
status, which made it more difficult for new prophets to acquire
prophetic legitimacy.  When in the Hellenistic and Roman periods,
Scripture became the centre of religious life in Judaism, replacing the
Temple, the gate of prophecy got closed.  New claimants to prophetic
status were regarded with suspicion, as Mohammed was to find out.  This
dying out of the prophetic institution in mature Judaism was a logical
development: if the utterances of the earlier Yahwist prophets had
validity beyond the confines of their own space and time, they remained
valid and had little need for updating with new prophecies.  While
*mysticism*, conceived as a type of communication with God but without
prophetic pretence, has never been without popular appeal, prophetism as
such became a fringe phenomenon.  Scripture had replaced prophetism as
the communicator of God’s will to man.

It was not until after the return of the Israelite elite from exile in
Babylon (538 BC) that prophetic revelations were forged into a
substantial corpus of Scripture that could command theological
authority.  After that, prophetism becomes increasingly referential,
i.e. explicitly indebted to earlier prophets as well as to other
components of Scripture.  With the reforms of Ezra (late 5th century),
patronized by the Persian overlords, officially recognized prophecy was
restricted to a class of Levites associated with the cult in the Second
temple.  It is in the two centuries before the return from exile that
the great prophets could have their unfettered flights of prophetic
space-travel.  It is in this high tide of prophecy that the prophetic
institution attracted some of its weirdest representatives, as we shall
see in ch.2.5.

The institution of prophethood was already subject to criticism in
Antiquity.  Unlike the early court prophets and diviners, the great
prophets met with hostility or with derision and rejection, a fact of
which they and their ultimate editors have made much, as if it confirms
the prophets’ genuineness.  Jeremiah mentions a priestly letter in which
he himself is denounced as insane (Jer. 29:26).  Another well-known case
is Mohammed, who had to defend himself time and again (the Quran lists a
dozen instances) against the allegation that he was ghost-possessed. 
While the people could not yet put it in exact words, they felt that
there was something wrong with these messengers of doom and abuse.  If
prophetism could already be rejected as a source of religious doctrine
in those half-educated societies of yore, it can definitely not be
accepted without due scrutiny in the modern age.

While some prophets have affected that the skepsis and rejection by
profane critics they met was precisely a sign of genuine prophethood, we
may say that those critics were generally right in their appreciation.
What the prophets claimed to be God’s word, was very much their own
word. In the best cases, it could be a pertinent social critique or the
expression of a certain man-made theological conviction, but in other,
important cases it was also an expression of the prophet’s own mental
darkness.

**1.3. The importance of prediction**

Modem theologians find it a bit too simplistic for comfort, but it is an
obvious fact that the prime role of the prophet was to predict the
future.  Only one corrective is needed to this simplistic formulation:
predicting the future was only one aspect of the prophets’ real task,
which was to discern the will of the gods, or in monotheistic parlance,
the will of God.  In the world at large, the actual outcome of events
was by definition God’s will, because nothing can happen against God’s
will.  In the human world however, there was an extra factor: man had a
choice to co-operate with God.  In the human sphere, therefore, the
prophet’s task was to discern what God wanted from man (cfr. the Shang
oracles: which sacrifice did the gods want men to bring?).  However, the
insight into the wishes of the gods was in turn a part of the over-all
pattern of God’s will: either you live up to God’s wish, and then the
outcome will be X, or you don’t live up to it, and then the outcome will
be Y. Even in a more sophisticated conception of the prophet’s role,
predicting the future remains the overriding concern.

The Biblical prophets live up to that role.  Their reports on God’s
wishes and opinions is full of definite and verifiable predictions. 
Often they are in the conditional form: if the people is faithful, it
will be victorious; if not, then not.  In the complexities of history,
the conditions and promised punishments and rewards are sometimes a bit
more complex as well, but essentially this pattern is followed
throughout.  When doomsday prophets have given up all hope that man can
sufficiently free himself from his faithlessness, they make their
predictions unconditional: God has decided to wipe a people out, or to
have His own people subdued by the Babylonians, or to make an idolatrous
king lose the battle against the Assyrians.

The predictions made by prophets were as often as not untrue. It is only
the later editors who have back-projected some far-sighted predictions
into the mouth of their heroes; no doubt they have also censored out
many embarrassingly failed predictions.

The predictions of Daniel, situated by his editors in the 6th century BC
but in fact writing in about 165 BC, are simply fraudulent predictions
after the fact.  They are floated because they have to render credible
the genuine predictions made in the same text: the way Daniel’s
“predictions” of the downfall of the Babylonian, Medic, Persian and
Hellenistic empires have come true, so the prediction of the everlasting
independence under the Maccabeic dynasty will also come true.  This last
prediction was genuine but failed to come true: the Romans gained
influence and would formally occupy the country a century later.

Even the short-term predictions about polytheist kings meeting their
doom and monotheist kings being rewarded, often did not come true. 
Elijah predicts Ahab’s downfall; but because Ahab goes in sackcloth for
a while, Yahweh changes His mind and promises to bring the misfortune
over Ahab’s (so far innocent) son instead (1 Kings 21).  What had
happened was clearly that Elijah’s prediction failed to come true, and
that the later editor, who knew about Ahab’s son’s downfall, adapted the
story to turn it into a second-best way of making Elijah’s prophecy a
true one.  Like our modern fortune-tellers, the prophets and their
editors knew the tricks of wriggling out of such unambiguous tests
falsifying their prophetic reliability, e.g. by stating that Yahweh was
withholding the deserved punishment (predicted but failing to
materialize) from a trespassing king but that He would visit it upon the
king’s descendents.  And of course, as every dynasty is bound to fall
one day, such prediction cannot fail.

After valiantly keeping the formidable Assyrian threat at a distance and
thus refuting Amos’ and Hosea’s prophecies, the northern capital Samaria
did fall in 721 BC, three decades after the prophecies.  During the
exile, Jeremiah’s and Ezekiel’s later prophecies which
uncharacteristically promised a hopeful outcome, were not fulfilled for
decades, until finally, like most conquerors, the Babylonians were
defeated in their turn by the Persians.

Moreover, where outside information is lacking, we have to depend on the
biased version of history given by the Bible editors themselves, but
from cases where we do have the control of outside information, we know
that the Bible editors rewrote not only the predictions to make them
suit history better, but also history itself.

The Bible itself says that a false prophet can be recognized by his
predictions not coming true (Deut. 18:22). By that standard, most
prophets were false, and we wonder why God would allow such misuse of
His name, and even the sanctification of this false prophetism as Sacred
Scripture.

The failed predictions are one reason for definitely rejecting the claim
that an omniscient supernatural being, Yahweh, was speaking through the
prophets.  Like everyone, they were sometimes right on common-sense
predictions about politics or about the logical consequences of people’s
behaviour: e.g. Mohammed’s correct prediction of a Byzantine come-back
in the war with the seemingly unstoppable Persian army.  But there is
not a single case in the whole Abrahamic prophetic tradition of a
prophet making a genuine prediction (not one visibly back-projected by
the later editors) about something normally unforeseeable, and getting
it right.  It is like the common astrologer who can, along with many
non-astrologers, predict which of two candidates will win an election,
but proves incapable of foreseeing the place and date of the next big
earthquake.

It gets worse when we consider the eschatological predictions (referring
to ultimate doom, the coming of the Messiah, and judgment Day), a matter
that should be dose to God’s heart.  So far, all such predictions have
badly failed, from Jeremiah through Jesus, Saint Paul, the different
Apocalypse books, Mohammed, the Medieval millenarists, the Jehovah’s
Witnesses.  Nostradamus enthusiasts claim their hero has predicted the
end for 1999; let us see.  So far, the prophets did not demonstrably
have any access to a higher source of knowledge.

The Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that they are the select segment of
humanity that will inherit the earth after the imminent catastrophe of
which the scenario has been given in the Apocalypse. Jehovah Witnesses’
founder Charles Tase Russell said Jesus would return in 1874 and
complete his work in 1914, when God’s Kingdom would start.  His
successor Franklin Rutherford predicted in 1920 that “millions living
now will never die”, and had a royal mansion built for Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, due to return in 1925.  When the prediction failed to
materialize, the Witnesses claimed that it had been made by “the old
light”, and that “the new light” would surely do better.  Another
leader, Nathan Homer Knorr, predicted the Armageddon catastrophe for
1975, to be followed by God’s empire.  Then W.F. Franz predicted 1986,
etc.  So, if ever you are troubled by those obtrusive Jehovah preachers,
simply say to them: “Deuteronomy 18:22.” But remark how these failures
are always rationalized by the believers: the fact that a prophet has a
following and keeps it, does not prove that his prophecies come true.

Some believers may shrug off the cold test of prediction as a kill-joy,
but it is considered pertinent by scientists: genuine knowledge is
proven by accurate predictions.  The source of the prophets’ statements
was not any genuine knowledge, but uncertain opinions and beliefs,
ranging from common sense opinions and theological doctrines to
psychopathological delusions.  Certainly it was not an omniscient God
who communicated their failed predictions, unless He was also malicious.

**1.4. Modern Interpretation of prophethood**

Modern theologians who have problems with the exclusive claims of
prophets, but who are still too attached to the image of prophets as
upright and far-sighted men, might venture to interpret “prophethood” in
a more abstract sense: identification with God’s viewpoint on a certain
given matter, with “God” in turn being interpreted as “the Truth” or
“the Good” or “the Whole”.  Thus, when members of a group are
quarrelling, and someone transcends his own private interest and
identifies with the interest of the group as a whole, and guides the
quarrelling parties out of their detrimental disunity by impressing upon
them the dependence of their separate interests upon the well-being of
the Whole, then one might call his stand prophetic.  One who becomes the
spokesman of the Whole, is a prophet.  But there is nothing exclusive or
Chosen or supernatural about it, in fact everyone can aspire towards
this kind of “prophetic” consciousness.

Modern Scripture interpreters have sometimes tried to attribute this
kind of role to the historical prophets.  Thus, when the prophets rebuke
the kings and the rich for neglecting and oppressing the poor (or king
David for coveting commander Uriah’s only wife Bathsebah while he has
many wives himself), one might say that they are conscience-keepers who
remind the selfish rulers of their duty towards the whole of society. 
However, a closer analysis of some prominent prophets’ personalities and
careers shows that if they paid attention to social injustice, it was
more because unhappy and querulous people just happen to be perceptive
and tireless fault-finders, always seeking out the bad things in order
to confront others (especially those of whom they are jealous) about
them; or because they themselves were poor and deprived; or because they
saw a strategic advantage in allying with the poor.  Even those in whom
no such impure motives or distorting conditions can be found, were just
public-spirited men and good speakers, but that did not make them
messengers of the Creator in any literal sense.

An example of the new and more rational meaning which modern theologians
try to give to the term “prophet”, I saw in an article about divorce, in
a Catholic paper.  As divorce is a grave sin for Catholics, the title
was rather shocking: “Divorce is often a prophetic event”.  The essence
of the article was that, while many people step into marriage
mindlessly, nobody will divorce mindlessly.  A marriage can be concluded
in a self-deluded moment of infatuation, but divorce is the result of a
painful and highly conscious process.  It forces you to face questions
about your own weaknesses, values, expectations from life.  This hard,
even forced awareness of life goals and of one’s own shortcomings is
compared with the effect of the prophets’ warnings and tirades to their
complacent contemporaries.

So, awareness and consciousness-raising are the new contents of the
concept “prophetic”.  Of course, we are all for awareness and
consciousness-raising, in a rational sense; but it is unhistorical to
identify these lofty undertakings with what the Biblical prophets saw as
their “message”.  One may agree with some of the things the prophets
said, but their method of arriving at their “messages” is simply
unsustainable in an age that has chosen to cultivate the scientific
temper.  If a prophet spoke out against social injustice, fine.  Let us
do as he did, and as all those others did who spoke out against social
injustice without claiming a divine source.  If a prophet woke people up
from their self-satisfied and mindless slumber, good.  But if we follow
his example, let us not pretend it is some supernatural being that is
speaking through us.

Prophets are also praised as the ones who don’t accept reality as it
is.  To be prophetic means, for Liberation Theologians, to go against
the way of the world.  For instance, the recent upsurge of violent
nationalism has made theologians say: against the common belief that
people first belong to their nation and not so much to humanity as a
whole, the Church has a *prophetic* mission to question this seemingly
natural and instinctive nationalist loyalty.

When we look at the actual prophets, we see that they certainly do
militate against the existing reality.  But whether this is always so
elevating, is a different matter.  What we do find is frustrated people
who stand up against the successful in life, who are unwilling to accept
their own inferior position.  With that, nothing pejorative has been
said: a pupil who has enough of his mediocre school results and decides
to fight back and to work hard and become top of the class, deserves
praise; a member of an oppressed nation standing up against his
country’s occupiers, is hailed as brave and freedom-loving (though not
in all circumstances as wise).  It is something else when people do not
try to remedy their depressed position with a, real solution, but posit
an imaginary superiority instead.  That is what we see prophets of the
Abrahamic lineage do, time and again.

When the Israelites are suffering under the yoke of the Assyrians, the
Babylonians, or the Romans, we see prophets announce that God will take
these enemies away, that he will burn them down, that he will raise the
fallen warriors of Israel to life so that they can drive out the enemy. 
In some cases, this is coupled with a practical programme of armed
resistance (as with Bar Kochba, early 2nd century AD), but more often it
is just an invocation of imaginary threats from heaven against very real
worldly overlords.

Even without the humiliation of foreign occupation, the prophetic
Israelite religion has features of a collective overcompensation of an
inferiority complex.  In the beginning, the Israelites were a
cattle-rearing semi-nomadic tribe living at the mercy of the
increasingly well-organized sedentary populations: the story of the
farmer Cain and the shepherd Abel (Gen.4), where God accepts the
latter’s but not the former’s sacrifice, and where the latter is the
former’s innocent victim, testifies to this early experience of nomadic
vulnerability.  After establishing themselves as a kingdom, they were
still a peripheral nation living in the shadow of the great
civilizations of Egypt and Mesopotamia.  The status of “God’s Chosen
People”, which need not be supported by actual cultural achievements or
political grandeur, but can be claimed on the strength of an
unverifiable exclusive “divine revelation”, comes in handy to overcome
this gnawing sense of inferiority.

This self-elevation from a real-life insecure and peripheral tribe to a
mythical Chosen; People that is the centre of God’s concern, is the
unique contribution of the Old Testament.  As a matter of collective
psychology, it had fed on the insecurity of a wandering tribe.  After a
few centuries as a moderately powerful state, this need of imaginary
self-aggrandizement was re-stimulated by the defeats against the
Assyrians (722 BC) and the Babylonians (587 BC), and took the form of
the vengefulness of a defeated nation.  Their religion had given them an
imaginary superiority. It should be noted that the Hebrew self-promotion
from real-life smallness to the status of Chosen People, was in
essential respects re-enacted by the founders of Christianity and Islam.

Sociologically, both Jesus and Mohammed were unimportant people, as were
their first recruits.  Educationally, it is even more striking that the
founding groups of Christianity and Islam were all fairly backward
people.  In later apologetics, this is taken as a good point: what God
hath not revealed to the wise and mighty, he hath revealed to these
simple people.  This is a revolutionary and irrational assumption, that
uneducated people can just start a new religion, and know it all better
than educated people.  If education has the value which experienced
people ascribe to it, if it is really that indispensable for a mature
and fully developed faculty of judgment, we would expect people lacking
in education to come up with a second-rate product.  We would expect
them to improvise a clumsy and inconsistent doctrine full of exaggerated
claims and half-digested borrowed ideas, without proper method or sense
of proportion.  And indeed, these are typical traits of both
Christianity and Islam.

Recent history provides a number of similar cases where prophets
announce a God-ordained glorious future or superior status, as well as
miraculous help, to communities in distress.  The colonial period was
especially rich in Christian-influenced instances of prophethood among
natives of non-Christian cultures with some exposure to Christian
beliefs.  In India’s tribal communities, there has been a whole series
of prophets, the most famous of whom was perhaps the Munda leader Birsa,
who organized rebellions at the end of 19th century (a full survey of
these Indian prophetic movements has been given by Stephen Fuchs in his
book *Godmen on the Warpath*).^([6](#6)) In China, Hong Xiu-Chuan, a
schoolteacher who had failed thrice in the imperial exams, and who had
converted to Protestantism, answered God’s call to start a messianic
movement for establishing the *Tai-ping Tian-guo*, the “heavenly country
of supreme peace”.  This Tai-ping rebellion (1851-64) would wreck public
life in central China, and in the subsequent civil war millions were
killed.

Among the Xhosa people of South Africa, the prophetess Nongqawuse stood
up to announce that on a specified day (18 February 1857), the sun would
rise and sink back into the East, and during the ensuing 48 hours of
dark, the ancestors of the people would come back to life and the
British colonizers would be driven into the sea.  In order to show their
confidence, the people had to kill their cattle and destroy their
harvest, and prepare for the final battle.  But the day came and went,
and the people got hungry.  After this catastrophe, they had no choice
but to go to the Europeans begging for menial jobs.  Like that, numerous
prophets have brought disasters over their followers and other
fellow-men.

These pitiable prophets of heavenly intervention give a much better idea
of what Biblical prophethood was like, than the sophisticated notions
(say, “prophetic non-conformism”) preached by modem theologians.  It is
alright to preach modem attitudes and discard antiquated ones, but the
theologians will have to face the consequence, viz. that by discarding
the primitive Biblical belief in an exclusive literal revelation
announcing a drastic personal intervention of God Himself in worldly
affairs, they are also discarding the basis of Christianity’s claims to
exclusive truth.  The vague interpretation of prophethood as
“public-spiritedness” or “non-conformism” constitutes a climbdown from
claims of exclusive God-given truth to the submergence of Christian
identity in the multifarious religio-ethical efforts of humanity at
large.

**1.5. Borrowed themes in Scripture**

The Biblical text as a whole, comprising both the actual revelations
from God and the much lengthier narrative surrounding them, may or may
not be conceived as God’s word.  Nowadays, only some fundamentalist
Churches maintain that every word in the Bible was literally intended by
God Himself.  Most Christians would rather accept that the experiences
narrated contain a revelation of God’s plan for humanity, but that the
actual wording has been man’s work, and that it is up to us to interpret
the text and extract God’s intention from it.

Though directly it may make little difference to the question whether
the messages uttered by the prophets were really God’s revelations, it
is still interesting to see to what extent the surrounding Biblical
narrative is unmistakably a human creation.  Those who wrote and
re-wrote the Bible, were human beings conditioned by cultural motifs and
attitudes prevalent in their national and international environment.  It
follows that what they have transmitted to us as reports of prophetic
utterances, may in fact have been composed or at least rewritten to suit
certain ideological concerns, polemical exigencies or political
compulsions.

The Bible editors had undoubtedly borrowed important cultural motifs
from Egypt (where the Israelites lived during the first half of the
second millennium BC) and Mesopotamia (where they ultimately came from,
and where they lived in exile in the sixth century BC).  Though we are
told that the Chosen People’s “experience” of monotheism and the
Covenant is one of the biggest events in history, it can only be
understood if we realize that this people was a satellite of now the
Egyptian, then the Mesopotamian civilization.  Both in contents and in
literary techniques, the Bible has borrowed considerably from the
neighbouring cultures.

The Creation story, for a start, is thousands of years older than the
Bible.  God making man out of clay is a classical motif in the myths of
divergent cultures.  The fact that Eve, whose Hebrew name means “life”,
is taken from Adam’s rib, can be explained by a process of borrowing
from a Sumerian creation account, because in Sumerian the words for
“rib” and “life” are homophonous. in a story from the Talmud (the
rabbinical guide to life and to Bible reading, a very human and
sensitive text), the explanation is given that God took woman from man’s
rib “so that she will always be close to his heart”: this shows man’s
inventiveness in enlivening and humanizing an ancient story, but it
cannot undo the borrowed and non-revealed nature of this Bible passage.

A tradition that is much closer to historical events, and which was also
borrowed from the neighbouring cultures, is the story of the Flood.  Of
this story, several variations are known in West Asia, but the Bible is
true to the common narrative skeleton: the whole earth is flooded, only
a small group of people, who have taken precautions, survive in a ship
(the ark of Noah), together with some specimens of other species. 
However, the Bible re-interprets this old story as God’s design to undo
the evil that is part of His creation, and to help His handpicked
favourites among the human beings to survive this mass destruction - a
prefiguration of God’s later Covenant with His Chosen People.

More important borrowings are not so much the stories related in the
Bible, the pieces of contents, but the symbolic patterns and formal
characteristics of the Bible text.  One borrowed element is the
astrological symbolism of the Mesopotamians.  Its two chief sets of
symbols were the “seven planets” (which include sun and moon) and the
Zodiac.

Today, the Zodiac is known mostly as a tool in fortune-telling; for the
Mesopotamians, it was much more than that.  Astronomically, it was the
year cycle, the successive stages through which the sun accomplished its
yearly journey.  Philosophically, it became the archetypal cycle, the
cosmic pattern of every cyclical process in its completeness, the
structure of every complete set, every universe.

The planets were the active agents of destiny.  Long before the Zodiac
came into use for fortune-telling, the planets were already used for
that purpose.  They were the incarnated gods, heaven-dwellers who, in
contrast to the background of the “fixed stars”, were always in motion,
just like the earthlings (though in a more perfect, regular way).  The
planets were not the immutable absolute level of divinity, but the
creative, world-oriented, destiny-regulating department of the divine
sphere.

In the Bible, God creates the world in six days and then has a day off. 
But the seven-day week was not invented by God, as medieval Christians
used to believe, but by the ancient astronomers.  They put the planets
in order of apparent speed: Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter,
Saturn.  They divided the day in twenty-four hours, and named these
hours after the planets in descending order, starting with the sun for
the first hour of the first day. The days were named after the same
planet as their first hour, and the resulting arrangement is still in
use today: Sunday, Moonday, Marsday, Mercuryday, Jupiterday, Venusday,
Saturnday.^([7](#7)) This arrangement had existed for centuries by the
time the Hebrew creation story was written.  Sunday had been given the
honour of being the first day, so that Saturday was the last.  This was
symbolically right in the sense that Saturn is the slowest planet,
representing therefore minimal activity and introspection.  For the
Hebrews, this Saturn’s day became the Sabbath, with its extreme ban on
any kind of work, in imitation of God’s own rest on the seventh day.

As for the signs of the Zodiac: the twelve sons of Jacob (also called
Israel) are clearly an embodiment of the sacred twelvefold of the
Mesopotamians.  For all we know, the Zodiac imagery as we know it today
was developed in Mesopotamia in just the same period when the Hebrew
people was living there in exile.  In Genesis 49, some of Jacob’s sons
are even described with characteristics typical of the twelve signs:
Juda as a lion, who shall wield the sceptre (Leo), Joseph as a bull
(Taurus), Dan as a snake (which, along with the eagle, is an old
variation on Scorpio).  In Deuteronomy 33, a complete correspondence
between Zodiac symbols and the twelve sons/tribes is worked out.  In
Jesus’ time too, the Zodiac, or more abstractly the twelvefold, was an
all-important motif.  Later, the European painters would depict the
twelve apostles as people with the characteristic physique which
medieval astrology ascribed to the natives of the twelve signs.

The prophet Ezekiel uses the imagery of the four “fixed” (mid-season)
signs of the Zodiac: Bull (Taurus), Lion (Leo), Eagle (old image used
for Scorpio), Man (Aquarius).  These four were later coupled with the
four evangelists. The writer of the Apocalypse describes a woman
(ordinarily interpreted as the Virgin Mary) with the moon at her feet
and twelve stars around her head.  “The twelve stars” is simply the
Hebrew expression for “Zodiac”.^([8](#8))

But the Zodiac, or at least the twelvefold arrangement, is also present
in a more complex and abstract way.  The division of the circle into
twelve is a very simple but very interesting geometrical operation.  In
fact, it is the most “natural” division of the circle, i.e. it doesn’t
require anything that is not already present in the construction of the
circle, viz. the compasses with a given radius: by drawing six equal
circles on the circumference of a given circle, the 12
intersection-points form a six-pointed star, and the straight lines
connecting them with the central point yield a division in 12 times 30
degrees.  This must have been a momentous and awe-inspiring property for
the primitive geometers of those days. Just like the contemporary
attempts to read mystical profundities into the latest findings of modem
science (“Tao of Physics” c.s.), there was a tendency in ancient
cultures to link the first attempts at science with religion and
metaphysics.  We all know about the Pythagoreans’ linkage of numerical
properties with the mysteries of the cosmos, but Babylonians and
Egyptians had similar lines of speculation, which no doubt influenced
the Hebrew priests. They called the six-pointed star David’s Shield
(*Magen David*), and nowadays it is present in the national flag of
Israel.^([9](#9))

Another interesting thing about the construction is that it introduces
the symbolism of the number thirteen.  There are twelve intersection
points on the outside (six on the circumference of the basic circle,
each followed by one outside the circumference), and one in the centre. 
They are representative of the world with its twelve-stage cycles (like
the year with its twelve moon-cycles) and of God, motionless in the
centre.  One might speculate that this is the origin of the taboo on the
number thirteen: since the thirteenth point represented God, “thirteen”
was something like a God’s name, and many nations including the Hebrews
entertained a taboo on pronouncing God’s name. This speculation is
corroborated by the fact that to the Hebrews, the number thirteen was a
sacred number: e.g., the Thora (the five books of Moses), the most
sacred part of the Bible, is called “the thirteen-petalled
rose”.^([10](#10))

Moreover, in this geometrical construction as well as in the Bible, the
numbers twelve (the outside points marking the division of the circle)
and thirteen (the total number of intersection points) always appear
together.  Take the sons of Jacob: there were twelve of them, but they
had one sister, Dinah, so Jacob had thirteen children.  Take the twelve
tribes of Israel: each one of Jacob’s sons was the ancestor of one
tribe, except Joseph whose two sons both headed one tribe.  So the
twelve tribes were really thirteen.  But then the tribe of Levi had no
territory of its own, so that the land of Israel’s thirteen tribes was
divided into twelve.  Even in the New Testament, we see the same
pattern: there were twelve apostles around Jesus, making thirteen; and
even among the apostles, after Judas’ suicide, a thirteenth member,
Matthias, was accepted to replace Judas.  And in the description of the
days of Creation, the working days are listed as a day and a night, six
plus six being twelve, but of the Sabbath, only the day is mentioned,
making thirteen day-halves.

This list of Biblical motifs apparently borrowed from neighbouring
cultures is by no means exhaustive.  Without denying that the Bible
editors have added some inventive imagery and symbolism of their own, we
may safely conclude that the human source of this aspect of Bible
composition can be traced to the Israelites’ cultural environment; and
more generally to human reason and human imagination rather than to the
all-knowing Creator.

**1.6. Numerical perfection of Scripture**

The Kabbalah tradition of Jewish Scripture interpretation has always
held that there are elements of highly intricate structural and
numerical perfection in the architecture of the Bible.  These could
reveal meanings unnoticed in a superficial reading.

Thus, a technique called *Temurah* (permutation) was considered to
reveal hidden meanings by exchanging the letters within a word or
sentence.  So, the opening word of Genesis, *BeREShTh* (“in the
beginning”), was permuted to form the word-group *BeRITh-ESh*, “Covenant
of Fire”, a dramatic image of the Covenant as well as an allusion to the
column of fire which went before the Israelites on their exodus through
the desert.  It is also permuted to *BarA-ShITh*, “He created six”,
referring to the six days of creation and to a supposed sixfold
structure in creation (e.g. the six directions of space, represented by
projection onto two-dimensional space as, once more, the six-pointed
star).  To be sure, this kind of game can be played in any alphabetic
language, e.g. to say that GOD is merely DOG in reverse.

According to the Spanish kabbalist Joseph Gikatilla (13th century),
“like through a garment, God’s name is woven through the Thora”.  In the
Renaissance, some Christian authors too sought to unveil secret
structures containing coded messages, esp. secret annunciations of Jesus
the Redeemer.  In more recent times, many deplorable crank books have
been written about hidden structures and messages in the Bible.  The
main part of these Kabbalistic readings (or manipulations) of the Bible
text concerns numerical structures.  Recently, scholars have set out to
check the claim that the Bible is indeed such a numerically
sophisticated construction, without any superstitious expectations nor
skeptical prejudices.

The Austrian professor Claus Schedl has put forward the thesis that
sacred texts, just like sacred buildings, were subject to architectonic
rules.^([11](#11))Professor C.J. Labuschagne, Old Testament scholar of
Groningen University, has discovered a series of clearly
non-coincidental numerical patterns in the Hebrew text.^([12](#12)) One
coded message of the Bible editor is that numerical data embody heavenly
phenomena such as the planetary cycles.

For instance: one of the mysteries in the book of Genesis is the high
age of some of the earlier human beings.  In general, one may surmise
that as memories became more distant, stories were exaggerated, and all
kinds of facts were blown out of proportion, including the life-spa- of
the ancestors. We see this exaggeration in history-based legends the
world over.  However, there is a strange exactness about the ages of
these ancestors in Genesis: Lamech reached the age of 777, Henoch 365,
Mahalalel 895, Yared 962.  Of course, in Henoch’s age we recognize the
number of days in the year.  The other ages can be analyzed as the sum
of one planet’s “synodic cycle” (i.e. the number of days from one
conjunction of the planet with the sun till the next conjunction) with
another planet’s synodic cycle.  Thus, 777 = 399 + 378 (Jupiter +
Saturn), 962 = 584 + 378 (Venus + Saturn), 895 = 116 + 779 (Mercury +
Mars).

Numbers are present in the Bible not only in their explicit form, such
as the number of years in someone’s life, but also in a more intricate
way.  First of all, there is the number of letters in a sentence, the
number of words in a chapter, etc.  Psalm 119 has 22 stanzas, the same
number as the letters in the alphabet, apparently symbolizing cosmic
completeness.  For the same reason, the New Testament book of the
Apocalypse has 22 chapters, but the Psalm does even better: each of the
letters of the alphabet is the first letter of one stanza (acrostic).

Secondly, before Indian numerals came into use, the letters of the
West-Asian and Greek alphabets were used both as sound-representers and
as number-representers.  Thus, Aleph equaled one, Beth two, etc., Yod
ten, Kaph twenty, etc., Qoph one hundred, Resh two hundred, etc. 
Therefore, any written word could be read as a combination of numerals
(though usually not in the correct order of hundredfold-tenfold-unit). 
In Arabic script this can still be done, e.g. in the inscription on the
Babri Masjid in Ayodhya it is said: “The date of its erection will
become manifest by the words: it will remain an everlasting bounty”,
because the latter expression is written in Persian with letters that
add up to 935, being the year AH (equivalent to 1528-29 AD) when the
building was claimed to have been constructed.^([13](#13)) Similarly,
the number 786 is considered a lucky number by Muslims, because it is
equal to the sum numerical value of the *Kalima*, the Islamic creed.

This practice is almost as old as alphabetic writing, and was fairly
common in the cultural surroundings of the Bible editors.  A well-known
example: Sargon II of Assyria, in the 8th century BC, had a city wall
constructed around Dur-Sharrukin, the length of which (16283 el)
corresponded to the numerical value of his own name.  The Gnostics
discovered the basic oneness of their god-concept Abraxas and the then
very popular Persian god Meithras (Mitra) in the fact that the names of
both, written in Greek, had the same numerical value: 365.  In medieval
Judaism, this practice, called *Gematria*, became very prevalent, and
all kinds of variations were invented, e.g. a “filled” numerical value,
being the sum of the numerical values of the fully spelt names of the
letters that make up a word.

For example, the word *Shaddai*, one of God’s extra names, is ordinarily
analyzed into Shin/300 + Dalet/4 + Yod/ 10 = 314.  Its filled value is
counted as the sum of the letters that make up a the letters: SH-I-N +
D-L-T + Y-O-D = (300 + 10 + 50) + (4 +30 + 400) + (10 + 6 + 4) = 814. 
As an example of the use to which these calculations were put, the
followers of the Jewish “messiah” Shabbetai Tsevi (17th century AD)
“proved” his messianic pretence by showing that his name (Sh-B-T-I +
Ts-B-I = 300 + 2 + 400 + 10 + 90 + 2 + 10) had the same numeral value,
814, as the “filled” numerical value of Shaddai.  However, their
opponents pointed out that his name’s numerical value also equaled that
of the expression Ruakh Sheqer, “false spirit” (R-U-Kh + SH-Q-R = 200 +
6 + 8 + 300 + 100 + 200). Which did not so much prove they were right in
rejecting this false messiah (who was pressured into converting to
Islam), but rather that this number play should not be taken so
seriously.^([14](#14))

In the Bible this play with numbers also occurs.  Important numbers are
chiefly 26 and 17.  The godname *YaHWeH^([15](#15))* numerically
consists of Yod/10 + He/5 + Waw/6 + He/5 - 26.  However, in the
“reduced” variety of gematria, all numerical values of the letters were
reduced to unit level, dropping the zeros: that made the numerical value
of the letter Yod 1 instead of 10, and the total value for YaHWeH 17
instead of 26.  Both numbers appear in all kinds of ways.  Some
examples.  The total number of words spoken by Yahweh in the Book
Deuteronomy is 442, or 26 times 17.  The ages of the patriarchs are the
following: Abraham 175, or 7 times 5 times 5; Isaac 180, or 5 times 6
times 6; Jacob 147, or 3 times 7 times 7. Now if you replace
multiplication by addition, then (7 + 5 +5) = (5 + 6 + 6) = (3 + 7 + 7)
= 17.  This is clearly no coincidence.  Apparently, the hidden presence
of 17 indicates the intimate company of Yahweh who was with the
patriarchs all through their lives.

In the Hellenistic period, some Pythagorean lore was spread to many
countries, including new forms of number symbolism that often came to
reinforce older and simpler forms.  The Gospel of John (21:11) mentions
153 as the number of fish caught by the apostles.  Any Pythagorean can
see that 153 is the “triangular number” of 17, meaning the sum of all
the integer numbers from 1 to 17.  Moreover, 153 is also the only number
that equals the sum of the cubes of its components: 1 + 125 + 27.  If
the Gospel writer takes the trouble of giving an exact count of the fish
in Peter’s net, there must be a good reason for it.  In this case, it
may be a combination of Greek number symbolism and Hebrew *gematria*.

In the *gematria* system, the number 13 gains an extra significance: it
is the numerical value of EHhaD, meaning “one”.  That “God is one” is
the central affirmation in the Jewish religion.

The Babylonian exile in the sixth century BC seems to have steeped the
Hebrew scripturalists in this symbolic-mathematical lore of the heathen
Mesopotamians, and it is just after this exile, under Persian rule, that
the Thora was codified for good.  It seems now that the final editors of
the Hebrew Bible took the stories handed down to them (the contents of
the Bible), and shaped them according to these symbolic-mathematical
designs, adding a word here, repeating one there, spelling some words in
an unusual way, in order to create meaningful numerical properties in
the text.  Says prof. Labuschagne: “For me it is clear that the Bible
text constitutes a premeditated unity.  The invisible structure, insofar
as it hadn’t been handed down to them, must have been put in by the
final editors.  This throws a new light on the seemingly superfluous
repetitions: they were probably used in order to reach a predetermined
number of words.”

This doesn’t invalidate the theories which see the contents of the Bible
as the result of a slow growth process, with layers, additions,
interpolations, internal reinterpretations etc. it simply means that in
this process, especially in the final stages, the culture of
mathematical sacred symbolism was an important formal element in the
composition of the Bible.

It is now very clear that the Kabbalists of the Middle Ages and the
Renaissance who rediscovered these numerical properties while reading
the Bible, were wrong in inferring that they proved a superhuman design
in the Bible composition.  On the contrary, these number games
suggesting coded secret messages are a fairly typical cultural
phenomenon of that period of human development in which the Bible was
written.  They were a human way of making Scripture more sacred.

The effort to give meaning to every possible structure in the Bible,
even if obviously cranky, is only a logical consequence of the belief
that the Bible is God’s revelation.  Books in which one word means one
thing, are ten a penny; but a book composed by God Himself should be
truly perfect, and should be composed in such a way that it keeps on
revealing new aspects of the infinite divine with every new way of
reading it.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))The striking and profound similarity between Spinoza’s
philosophy and Eastern thought, particularly Mahayana Buddhism, has been
described and analyzed exhaustively by Jon Wetlesen: *The Sage and the
Way*, *Spinoza’s Ethics of Freedom*, Van Gorcum Publ., Assen
(Netherlands) 1979.

^([2](#2a))See the ground-breaking study by Ilya Prigogyne, the
Russian-born Belgian Nobel Prize winner, and mrs. Isabelle Stengers, his
colleague at Brussels Free University: *La Nouvelle Alliance*, 1979
(English translation: *Order out of Chaos*).

^([3](#3a))Full discussion in the yearbook of De Ronde Tafel 1989-90
(Gent 1990), in the report on *Mary’s Apparitions in Yugoslavia*.

^([4](#4a))The story of prophethood in Israel is told by Bernhard Lang:
*Wie wird man Prophet in Israel?*, Patmos Verlag, Dusseldorf 1980;
Jean-Marie Van Cangh: *Le Prophetisme Biblique et Chrétien*, El-Kalima,
Brussels ca. 1990; Mircea Eliade ed.: *Encyclopedia of Religion*, entry
Prophecy.

^([5](#5a))On the rise of monotheism in Israel, see Morton Smith:
*Palestinian Parties and Politics that shaped the Old Testament*,
Columbia press, New York 1971; and Johannes C. De Moor: The Rise of
Yahwism: *The Roots of Israelite Monotheism*, Leuven University Press,
Leuven 1990.

^([6](#6a))S. Fuchs: *Godmen on the Warpath. A Study of Messianic
Movements in India*, Munshiram Manoharlal, Delhi 1992. It also deals
with Islamic quasi-prophetic movements whose origin cannot be attributed
to Christian influence but to the Islamic tradition itself.

^([7](#7a))In the Germanic languages, the names of Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday and Friday are coined after the corresponding Germanic gods
Tiwas/ Mars, Wodan/Mercury, Thor/Jupiter and Freya/Venus.

^([8](#8a))These twelve stars now figure in the flag of the European
Community.  It was the winning design in a public contest in the 1950s. 
The designer, a devotee of the Virgin Mary, said that this image from
the Apocalypse was his inspiration (via the so-called Miraculous Medal,
the design of which included this same twelve-star-circle, and which had
been “revealed” to the French nun Catherine Labourié in 1830).

^([9](#9a))It must, however, be pointed out that the six-pointed star
was then not used as a distinctive “flag” of the Jewish People (just
like the swastika is seen used as a religious symbol everywhere in
India, as well as other countries, without being the private symbol of
one religion).  Only in the late 18th century AD, Jews adopted it as a
symbol of their community, to match the Christians’ cross.  See the
appendix on *Magen David* in Gerschom Scholem: *Kabbalah* (Keter Publ.,
Jerusalem 1974; Meridian, New York 1978).

^([10](#10a))For this reason, the famous Israeli Talmud scholar Adin
Steinsalz's book on the Jewish religion is titled: *The
Thirteen-Petalled Rose* (Basic Books, New York 1980).

^([11](#11a))Claus Schedi : *Baupläne des Wortes* (German : “Building
plans of the Word”), 1974.

^([12](#12a))Report in *Elsevier*, 4/8/90, P. 75 ff.

^([13](#13a))Radhey Shyam: *Babar* (Janaki Prakashan, Patna 1978),
app.6.

^([14](#14a))For a fuller treatment of *gematria*, see Gershom Scholem:
*Kabbalah*, ch. 2.10.

^([15](#15a))YaHWeH was sometimes written with the vowel-marks of word
ADoNaI, “my lord”, which was usually read instead of the unpronounceable
god-name, resulting in the mistaken pronunciation YeHoWaH.

   

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
