+++
title = "00 FOREWORD BY PHILIP SPRATT"

+++
FOREWORD BY PHILIP SPRATT

Why is there so much puzzlement about the politics of Jawaharlal Nehru?
As Goel reminds us, and every newspaper reader can recall, he himself
frequently says that he agrees in principle with the Communists. Why is
he not taken at his word?

We do not take him at his word, because he says and does many other
things, and so we do not realise how closely the relevant parts of his
policy accord with this particular avowal. When I read the articles in
this book, I was quite surprised. He is a very much more faithful
Communist than I had realised.

But the principal reason why we do not fully accept his own statements
that he is a Communist is that our image of the Communist is so
different. We think of the Communist as a man with no interests ourside
politics, a fanatic working furiously for the cause, an offensive,
truculent person, or if he has to indulge in camouflage, a wily
deceiver, and at all times a docile follower of the party line. That is
not a false picture, but there are many whom it does not fit. Many
Communists are also ambitious; many have a liking for the fleshpots;
some have serious interests outside politics, though their theory
assures them that there is nothing outside politics; no doubt there are
some who do not accept the more abstract parts of the Communist theory,
as there are certainly many who ignore it; and there are some, even
within the party, who are not slavish followers of the party line.

Nehru is a Communist in this broader sense. He accepts increasing
governmental power, socialisation and mechanisation, as both inevitable
and desirable. He is strongly attached to the existing Communist
governments, and when they clash with other governments he almost
invariably supports them. He is in a sense aware of the dark side of
Communism as it has existed up to now, but he neutralises this awareness
by the Communist procedure of considering history in block-stages. The
"bourgeois era" is thus made responsible for all the unpleasant things
that have happened in the past few centuries, and the facts that some
bourgeois systems have outgrown many of the old evils, and that it
appears possible to achieve a bourgeois world system which would be much
preferable to the Communist world system, are ignored. The Marxian
scheme of block-stages does not contemplate such facts.

Here, it is true, Nehru may deviate somewhat from the orthodox Communist
position. The bourgeois world system was sketched by Woodrow Wilson. It
provides for substantially independent nations, running their internal
affairs in their own way, under a very limited world authority, like the
League or the U.N. The Communists insist on substantial uniformity,
through a Communist Party monopoly of power, in the internal affairs of
all nationas, and until the rise of "polycentrism" they contemplated a
highly centralised world government. Wisdom may be dawning on them now,
but we do not yet know how far they will go.

In this controversy Nehru no doubt stands with the revisionists, but
that is a matter of little immediate importance. On the questions that
arise now, though he looks so different he is a Communist in practice.
The figure in world politics who most resembles him is Castro. Castro
got into power on false pretences. i.e. as a liberator, not as a
Communist, but within a year or so he had liquidated his opponents and
built up the Communists so far that he was able to drop the mask. Nehru
got into power on the same false pretences, i.e. as a liberator, not as
a Communist, and he has proceeded in the same direction, but far more
cautiously. Castro succeed Batista; Nehru succeeded Gandhi on the one
hand, and the legalistic British regime on the other. The two legacies
between them have cramped his Communist style. Nehru has sometimes
sighed for a cadre such as Mao Tse-tung built up during the Long March.
With such a cadre he might not have lagged so far behind Castro. But
such a cadre, while it might have enabled him to enforce Communism,
would not have made it any more congenial to India. Communism is the
policy of a small group of intellectuals, who are building a governing
machine with a vested interest in Communism, but it remains wholly alien
to this conservative, religious, individualistic, property-conscious,
peasant-minded country. Just as in Russia and China, Communism can be
forced upon India only by a usurper regime.

When I have argued in this way, people object that Nehru has made no
attempt to impose the Communist policy in regard to religion, education,
freedom of opinion, personal liberty, and so on. The Gandhian legacy has
been too strong; if he had tried he would have been overthrown. But
through a series of constitutional amendments, he has systematically cut
down the right to property, which most theorists regard as a necessary
bulwark, in the long run, of the other freedoms. As for civil, religious
and intellectual liberty, the Communists always profess to respect them.
They are fully provided for in the Soviet constitution. Stalin himself
claimed to recognise the necessity for discussion and the clash of
opinions. But in practice Communists concentrate all power in the hands
of the government, leaving no countervailing force to balance it.
Consequently, the libertarian provisions of their constitution cannot be
enforced. They are totally ignored in practice, and it is more than
anyone's life is worth to protest. Nehru's attitude in this matter is,
therefore, in accordance with the abstract theory of Communism. What he
would have done if he had enjoyed total power is anyone's guess.

An item of his policy which, I believe, testifies to Nehru's Marxist
feeling, though it is no longer Communist orthodoxy, is his tolerance of
corruption. Before the revolution the Bolsheviks obtained their funds by
organising a prolonged campaign of dacoities, by seducing heiresses, and
by taking big subsidies from the German Government. The last was kept
quiet, though it has been proved recently from German Foreign Office
documents, but the other two were well-known, and the party leaders had
not objection: why bother about bourgeois financial prejudices? Nehru
has the same bohemian attitude towards audit objections: they belong to
the fussy bourgeois era of Gokhale and Gandhi.

Nehru's Communism is revealed in the extraordinary favour he shows to
the Communist Party, as contrasted with his marked coolness towards the
socialists who put democracy first, like the PSP. He allows the Russian
Government, and apparently the Chinese too, to subsidise them. It has
been admitted in Parliament that the Home Department knows about some of
these foreign funds. No other ruler in the world tolerates this kind of
thing. Why does Nehru?

His Communism has been clearly revealed in his foreign policy. He cannot
go wholly over to the Communist bloc, but he will not take the
protection of the free countries, so India remains defenceless. China's
big attack came a year after Goel's articles, and fully bore out his
warning. It even moved Nehru for the moment, but he quickly went back to
the policy which made the attack possible.

His Communism is also shown in his economic policy. Its deficiencies in
Russia and China have become generally known in recent years, but he
still persists with it. He is not even disabused of collective farming,
despite its spectacular failure everywhere. This over-centralised,
one-sided, state-controlled economy is building up a great vested
interest, political and bureaucratic and indeed capitalistic, which he
doubtless relies upon to keep it going when he has stepped down.

Ten years ago the Congress Party was by no means socialistic. When the
resolution on the socialistic pattern was passed at Avadi, an important
Congressman compared it to the Emperor Akbar's Din Ilahi. Socialism, he
said, is Nehru's personal fad, which will quickly be forgotten when he
passes from the scene. It seemed a shrewd judgement at the time, but it
overlooked the attraction of socialism for a ruling party of hungry
careerists. The experience of socialism in the nine years since than has
won many Congressmen over. But there are still many who oppose it, and
its continuance in the future is not yet assured. That, I take it, is
the real inwardness of the Kamaraj Plan. The purpose of the current
goings-on is to arrange the succession to Nehru in such a way that the
pro-communists retain control.

The dispute over this question is of the greatest importance for India's
future. But the partisans on both sides are still afraid of speaking
plainly, and many of the public are still unaware of what it is all
about. Goel's book helps greatly in making clear what the groups in the
Congress are fighting over. It is really whether India shall continue to
be ruled by a Government of usurpers, who will go on pushing the country
against its will towards Communism, or the Government shall follow a
policy which genuinely commends itself to the majority of the public.

  
Bangalore  
October 25, 1963

PHILIP SPRATT  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
