+++
title = "03  ONE IN SEARCH OF A CULPRIT"

+++
ONE  
IN SEARCH OF A CULPRIT

The communist and fellow-travelling press and platforms in this country
are busy building up and defending India's Defence Minister, Mr. V.K.
Krishna Menon, in the face of what the leftists describe as "an upsurge
of rightist reaction". Krishna Menon himself struts about with an air of
injured innocence, and frequently dons the mask of a much misunderstood
martyr whose services to the nation have not been properly appreciated.

But the nation at large is not convinced. It is not only the politically
conscious intelligentsia, concentrated in our patriotic parties, that
suspects Krishna Menon as a sinister influence in our public life. Even
the man in the street feels that there is something spurious about his
masquerade as a servant of the nation. There is a widespread belief that
he is the real author of that disaster which has recently overtaken
India's *Panchashila* policy vis-a-vis communist China.[1](#1)

A belief is abroad that if Krishna Menon is not immediately removed from
his position of influence on the Government of India and the armed
services, many more disasters of greater magnitude will follow in each
other's trail.[2](#2) And there has been a persistent demand in the
popular press, by the patriotic parties of the opposition, and among an
overwhelming majority of Congressmen that he should be sacked.

At the back of this continued clamour against Krishna Menon, there is a
generally accepted assumption that, left to himself, Prime Minister
Nehru is a clean and honest patriot who will do the right thing at the
right time and in the right place. Krishna Menon has, therefore, become
the central target of attack. All sorts of stories are current as to how
he is trying to undermine the morale of the defence services, how he is
leaking top secrets to the Russian and Chinese communists, and what
decisive role he is playing in leaving our northern frontiers unguarded.

But no one has as yet bothered to contemplate the two important
implications which follow from this generally accepted assumption about
Pandit Nehru. The first implication is that he is a half-wit who readily
and repeatedly surrenders his own judgement to the evil counsels of a
scheming scoundrel. According to the second implication, although he
knows what his Defence Minister is doing, he is too powerless to get rid
of the man.

None of these implications squares with known facts. It is, therefore,
legitimate to doubt the basic assumption that Pandit Nehru is not the
guilty party. It is, therefore, wrong to reserve all our brickbats for
Krishna Menon and all our bouquets for Pandit Nehru. *If something is
seriously wrong somewhere, Pandit Nehru and not Krishna Menon is the
real author of it. V we are in search of a culprit, we should get at
Pandit Nehru and not at Krishna Menon*.

For, even the worst critic of Pandit Nehru cannot call him a half-wit.
He has proved himself to be easily the most astute politician among a
legion of leaders left to this country during thirty long years of
Mahatma Gandhi's stewardship. He has tamed, or beaten, or driven into
wilderness not only the so-called "mature and hardheaded men" of the
Congress Right but also the "fire-eating rabble-rousers" of the Congress
Left. He has reduced the mighty Congress Party to his private harem in a
matter of less than ten years. The other top Congress leaders may still
continue to intrigue against each other for the Grand Moghul's favours,
but all of them put together are too weak and demoralised to challenge
his authority.

Nor is Pandit Nehru, by any stretch of imagination, a powerless man
vis-a-vis Krishna Menon. It is only his personal favour that has
catapulted Krishna Menon into such and important position in so short a
time. Krishna Menon was nobody in the national struggle for freedom, and
as such has never wielded any entrenched influence or personal following
in the Congress Party. Nor is he distinguished for any extraordinary
talent such as can hold its own in the political or administrative
set-up of the country after independence. Left to himself, he would have
been a garrulous non-entity with whom no one would have willingly shared
a table in the coffee house. Even today, after all these years of power
and publicity, he can be dropped at will by Pandit Nehru without so much
as arousing even a stray dog to bark in protest. If anything, the whole
country will heave a sigh of relief and rejoice over the event.[3](#3)

The simple and stark truth is that Pandit Nehru is wilfully sticking to
Krishna Menon in the face of an overwhelming national demand for
latter's immediate dismissal. Not only that. Pandit Nehru has been going
out of his way to defend his Defence Minister, in season and out of
season, inside and outside the Parliament.

What is the explanation? Why has Pandit Nehru shown such extraordinary
fondness for Krishna Menon? Why did he ignore the advice of such devoted
friends as the late Rafi Ahmed Kidwai and Maulana Azad against what they
regarded as the evil influence of Krishna Menon? Why did he estrange his
relations with his devoted sister and life-long follower, Vijayalakshmi
Pandit, on account of Krishna Menon? Why did he come down on his beloved
daughter simply because Krishna Menon disapproved of her stand against
the communist Government in Kerala? These are some of the questions that
must be answered.

Some people take resort to depth psychology whenever they are faced with
such questions. They say that Pandit Nehru is a man of honour who
believes in standing by an old friend against the insinuations of the
latter's political rivals and personal enemies. But his life-story as a
whole leaves no doubt that he has never bothered about such "sentimental
nonsense" as a sense of honour. He has made friends and deserted them in
their hour of need with the casualness of a hardened street harlot.

Some others say that Pandit Nehru is under a debt of gratitude for the
various jobs of publicity which Krishna Menon did for him at a time when
he was not so important in terms of international stature. But, again,
Pandit Nehru's life-story reveals that whatever other virtues the man
may possess, at least gratitude has never been his strong point. He has
often kicked the ladder that lifted him up and bitten the hand that fed
him.

The history of various missionary movements as well as the known
examples of great personal friendships go to prove that the strongest
bond between human beings is forged by a meeting of minds, by common
convictions, by sharing together of a common ideology. Normal human
bonds are likely to disintegrate when subjected to controversy. But the
bonds created by common convictions grow stronger with every additional
strain.

We should, therefore, seek an explanation of Nehru-Menon comradeship at
the level of convictions. That is the one point where we are most likely
to strike at the truth. We should make a serious attempt at digging out
the basic beliefs of Pandit Nehru from under a mass of verbiage that has
been his stock-in-trade whenever he is acting on the public stage. If
the two persons are found to be holding certain common convictions, the
problem of Nehru-Menon relationship stands solved in a simple and
straightforward manner. But if there is a divergence between the two at
that level, the Nehru-Menon relationship must remain a mystery for all
time to come.

Now, what does Krishna Menon stand for? The task of pinpointing him is
somewhat difficult because the man has so far abstained from writing a
book that sets out his beliefs in an unmistakable manner. He has also
refused to give a straight answer when asked if he is a communist. He
has always shouted a counter-question: Are you a fascist? But those who
have known him during his long sojourn in London have absolutely no
doubt that the man is a convinced communist. The Labour Government in
Britain was considerably perturbed when it became known to it that
Pandit Nehru was adamant on appointing Krishna Menon as India's High
Commissioner in London.

Mr. Philip Spratt who came to India in 1926 as a top Comintern Agent,
who was the first architect of the Communist Party of India, who was
tried as the chief accused in the Meerut Conspiracy Case, and who later
on turned against Communism, says: "For nearly twenty of his years in
London, he was known as a close supporter of the communists. People
change their minds, but Mr. Menon's recent speeches do not suggest that
he has changed his. *I should guess that be is one of that considerable
band of people in important positions in the free world who, though not
technically party members, are in fact disciplined communists*. Even if
this is disputed, it will be agreed that there is something anomalous in
a convinced partisan of the aggressor masquerading as a neutral
mediator, and contriving so regularly to serve the aggressor's purposes.
I hope people will not think I am suffering from a conspiracy mania;
after all, Communism is a conspiracy."[4](#4)

The public image of Krishna Menon in India also squares with Mr.
Spratt's estimate of him. He has always received unmitigated support
from the Communist Party of India. The group that cherishes him inside
the Congress Party is the so-called Ginger Group which consists of
communists and crypto-communists. The papers with which, he is
associated in India, namely R.K. Karanjia's *Blitz* and the newly
brought out weekly *Link*, are without a doubt mouthpieces of
Communism.[5](#5) We can, therefore, take it as a settled fact that the
man is a communist. That is what the common man in India, his admirer as
well as his opponent, believes about him.

At this stage, a clarification about the definition of a communist may
be helpful. Ever since the days of Senator MacCarthy, most people feel a
distrust towards those who spot a communist without a party card.
According to a widely accepted but essentially American definition, a
communist is he who either publicly displays his party membership or
whom the secret police can locate in the party apparatus by means of a
standard system of check-up. No one else should be labelled a communist,
particularly if he or she is not an ill-fed, ill-clad, illiterate,
oppressed, and exploited poor person. Persons in power in a
non-communist country are not supposed to be communists.

The Soviet Union, however, happens to have a different definition.
According to this definition, the party members and the men of the
apparatus are, of course, communists. But there are many others, more
numerous than the party members and apparatus men, who believe in
Communism and who regard the Soviet Union as an ideal country where all
the miracles have already happened. For the Soviet Union, all these
people are communists, to be cherished, encouraged, assisted, and
anointed as "progressive people struggling for a better world". The
Soviet scriptures pose only one question before every person: Are you
*for* or *against* the Soviet Union?

Those who have doubts on this score may read one little pamphlet,
*Patriotism and Internationalism*, by the Russian writer S. Titasenko,
available for one anna from any communist bookstall. It says: "Love of
country, native land, we call patriotism. But not every one speaks of
the concept of patriotism in the same way. In our times only the
Communist and Workers' Parties, adhering to the platform of
Marxism-Leninism, cherish and give expression to patriotic ideas. A
patriot is one who exposes the aggressive plans of the Anglo-American
imperialists and their accomplices. Proletarian internationalism not
only does not deny patriotism but, on the contrary, is indissolubly
connected with it. An internationalist is one who always and under all
circumstances subordinates the national interests to the interests of
the struggle for victory of the working class over the bourgeoisie.
Internationalism places above everything else the interests of
international proletarian solidarity. *The Communist and Workers'
Parties regard the fostering of love for the USSR-the fatherland of the
working people - as one of their cardinal tasks. Devotion to the Soviet
Union, the true Place of socialism, a determined struggle against any
anti-Soviet machinations by the enemies of the working class is the
touchstone, the criterion of true proletarian internationalism*."

Or read the pamphlet, *Are You For or Against the Soviet Union*, by Otto
Kuusinen. He says: "The Soviet State not only differs radically from all
previous states. It represents the materialisation of a great historic
aim which the finest progressive minds of mankind had cherished for
centuries. Politically conscious workers in all countries are aware that
the Soviet State is the first Socialist State in the world, the vanguard
of the progressive forces of humanity. That is why their deep devotion
to the cause of Socialism and Communism is inseparable from an equally
profound devotion to the Soviet Union. *The need for solidarity with the
Soviet Union is not a debatable question. For the situation all over the
world is such that without solidarity with the Soviet Union there can be
no loyalty to Socialism."*

It need not be pointed out that, in standard Soviet parlance, the terms
"internationalist" and "socialist", like the terms "people",
"proletariat", and "progressive", mean the same as the term "communist".
So those who stand for the Soviet Union are communists for all practical
purposes. Whether one carries a party card or not is a matter of minor
detail.

We accept the Soviet definition of a communist as the only authentic
definition. After all, it is Soviet Union which defines as to who shall
be a "friend of the people" and who shall be denounced as a "lackey of
imperialism". The American definition misses the mark and leads to
mischief because it ignores what one carries in one's head and gloats
only on whatever outer trappings one may have. We think that it is one's
system of *belief* and *thought* and not one's situation in life that
ultimately determines what one shall do, and towards which end one shall
use one's position and opportunity.

Krishna Menon is undoubtedly a communist according to the Soviet
definition. He has all along been serving the Soviet cause - as an
editor of the Penguin Series, as a left-winger in the British Labour
Party, as India's High Commissioner in England, as India's leading
spokesman in the UNO, and as India's Defence Minister. But what about
his boss, Jawaharlal Nehru?

Here we are, fortunately, on a very much easier ground. Pandit Nehru has
done a lot of writing and speaking and although a complete record is not
available for purposes of this review, whatever we have before us
establishes beyond a shadow of doubt that the man is a communist in
terms of the Soviet definition. He has been and remains an admirer not
only of the Soviet socio-political and economic system but also of the
Marxist-Leninist-Stalinist ideology on which, according to communist
theoreticians, the Soviet system is based. The lines that follow will
mostly be devoted to sifting his ideology all through his nearly
thirty-five years in the public life of India and the world.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) The reference here is to Red China's first public proclamation
in January 1959 that she did not recognise the MacMahon Line and that
Indian territories occupied by her in all sectors of the Himalayas were
in fact Chinese territories. The Chinese started their aggression
against India almost simultaneously with the signing of the
*Panchashila* on April 29, 1954. But till the time they laid a legal
claim to the large territories they had occupied, Prime Minister Nehru
kept the facts of Chinese aggression a closely guarded secret. It was
the Chinese claim which forced him to confess the truth before the
Parliament in India.  

[2](#2a) The belief has since been vindicated by what happened in the
Himalayas during October-November 1962, only an year after the last of
these articles appeared in the Organiser on October 9, 1961.

[3](#3a) This conclusion has been confirmed by the nationwide rejoicing
that followed Krishna Menon's dismissal from the Union Cabinet on
November 20, 1962.

[4](#4a) Philip Spratt, *Blowing Up India: Reminiscences of a Comintern
Agent*, Prachi Prakashan, Calcutta, 1955, p. 111. Italics added.

[5](#5a) Now we can enlarge the list by adding papers like *Patriot,
Mainstream* and *Century* which have appeared after the Chinese invasion
and Krishna Menon's dismissal.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
