+++
title = "08  SIX AN APOLOGIST FOR SOVIET SINS"

+++
SIX  
AN APOLOGIST FOR SOVIET SINS

An ordinary apologist for Soviet sins always points out the "progressive
character of Soviet foreign policy" whenever he is faced with an
overwhelming evidence of Soviet crimes in the domestic sphere. And he
generally turns towards "Soviet achievements at home" whenever he finds
that a defence of Soviet foreign policy at some point is a somewhat more
difficult job. But Pandit Nehru is no ordinary apologist. He does take
the first turn and tries to draw people's attention towards Soviet
foreign policy whenever the ugliness of the domestic Soviet scene
becomes too obvious even to his indoctrinated "insight". But whenever it
comes to defending the defects in Soviet foreign policy, he comes out as
quite an extraordinary apologist. In fact, Soviet foreign policy has
been his one permanent fixation all through these nearly thirty-five
years during which he has worshipped at the altar of Communism. This
will become more than amply evident when we take up his foreign policy
in the later part of this series. Just now we are analysing his various
books for finding out his basic beliefs.

His fourth book, *The Unity of India*, is a collection of articles and
speeches from 1935 to 1940 in the context of various national and
international issues. Its compilation and publication in London in early
1941 was also arranged by Krishna Menon who says in the Foreword:
"Jawaharlal Nehru entrusted to me the task of making the necessary
selection of his writings and putting them together for the publishers.
I had no opportunity of consulting him about the form of this book, nor
has he seen any of its proofs...To Jawaharlal Nehru I am deeply grateful
for his generous confidence."[1](#1)

In the same Foreword, Krishna Menon gives a warning to those people who
had started holding that recent happenings inside the Soviet Union as
well as the doings of the Soviet Union abroad had cured Pandit Nehru of
his old addiction. As we shall see later on, there was also at this time
an acute difference of opinion inside the Congress High Command
regarding the so-called "radicalisation" of Congress policy under
pressure from Pandit Nehru and his leftist followers, for all of whom
Mahatma Gandhi harboured a more than blind fondness. Says Krishna Menon:
"It should help those who are prone to think that Jawaharlal Nehru can
be cajoled or coerced or that the movement of Indian awakening can be
diverted from its basic purposes to discover their tragic error. Such a
discovery would be the beginning of an understanding of renascent
India."[2](#2) What he meant by the terms "awakening" and "renascent
India" should be clear to everybody. He was pointing out that by the
year 1941 the Soviet Trojan horse inside India had travelled too far to
beat a retreat simply because some "reactionaries" objected to its
transgressions. And the "basic purposes" he had in mind meant a steady
colonisation of the Indian National Congress by the Communist Party of
India so that in due course this country could be converted into a
Soviet satellite.

This book was published by the same firm which had earlier brought out
Pandit Nehru's *Glimpses of World History*. A second impression was
printed in 1941 and a third one in 1948, by which time world events had
clearly shown the intrinsic character of the Soviet Union as a
totalitarian tyranny and an imperialist monster for which human history
held no example. But that did not deter Pandit Nehru from going on
parading the Soviet Union as a paradise at home and a force for peace
abroad.

This book is very important in so far as it is a close paraphrase of
Georgi Dimitroff's *United Front* published by this General Secretary of
the Communist International at the end of 1937. Dimitroff's exercise
depicted "development of the political line of the Communist
International" after August 1935 when tile Comintern did a volte-face
against its earlier pro-fascist performances and propounded, in its
Seventh World Congress, the policy of "anti-fascist people's united
front". We shall have occasion to review Pandit Nehru's advocacy of a
"united front" in India. In the present context we are reproducing only
his record as an apologist for Soviet sins.

On March 5, 1938 he had given an Address to the National Academy of
Sciences at their Annual Meeting held in Allahabad. He could not miss
this opportunity for doing a bit of clean communist propaganda. He said:
"We have seen how a consciously held objective, backed by coordinated
effort, can change a backward country into an advanced industrial State
with an ever rising standard of living. *Some such method we shall have
to pursue if we are to make rapid progress*."[3](#3) He was to redeem
this promise when he rose to supreme power and launched his Five Year
Plans after the Soviet style. Of course, we have witnessed inside India
during 1956-61 the "ever-rising standard of living" and the record of
"rapid progress". The Soviet Union up to 1938 had put up a better
performance because she had managed to kill millions of peasants, and
workers and to discover "plots and counterplots" of unprecedented
magnitudes.

During February-March 1939, Pandit Nehru had published a long article -
A Survey of Congress Politics, 1936-39. Coming to his survey of the
international scene, he wrote: "I had been considerably upset by the
course of events in the Soviet Union, the trials and the repeated purges
of vast numbers of Communists. *I think the trials were generally
bonafide and there bad been a definite conspiracy against the regime and
widespread attempts at sabotage*. Nevertheless, I could not reconcile
myself to what was happening there, and it indicated to me ill-health in
the body politic, which necessitated an ever-continuing use of violence
and suppression. Still the progress made in Russian economy, the
advancing standards of the people, the great advance in cultural matters
and many other things continued to impress me. I was eager to visit the
Soviet Union, but unfortunately my daughter's illness prevented me from
going there."[4](#4)

No one should imagine that he wanted to visit the Soviet Union in order
to discuss his doubts. For, doubts he had none. He himself said so in
the next paragraph of the article: *"Whatever doubts I had about
internal happenings in Russia, I was quite clear in my mind about her
foreign policy*. This had been consistently one of peace and, unlike
England and France, of fulfilling international obligations and
supporting the cause of democracy abroad. The Soviet Union stood as the
one real effective bulwark against Fascism in Europe and Asia. Without
the Soviet Union what could be the state of Europe today? Fascist
reaction would triumph everywhere and democracy and freedom would become
dreams of a past age."[5](#5)

But unfortunately for him, the Soviet Union, "the sole defender of
democracy" and "the one real effective bulwark against Fascism", signed
a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany and threw Europe into the throes
of the Second World War. By the normal laws of human psychology, he
should have felt ashamed of himself and admitted his mistake publicly
like his master, Mahatma Gandhi. But, as we have already pointed out, he
is no ordinary Soviet-addict. His psychology, therefore, has also been
extraordinary. He had up his sleeve an apology for the Soviet Union, and
he produced it as early as September 21, 1939 when he wrote: "Soviet
Russia is at present a mystifying factor in the world situation. It is
obvious that whatever Russia does will have important and far-reaching
results. But as we do not know what she is going to do, we have to leave
her out of our present calculations. *The Russo-German Pact came as a
shock and surprise to many. There was nothing surprising in it except
the manner of doing it and the moment chosen for it*. At any other time
it would have naturally fitted in with Soviet foreign policy. But there
can be little doubt that at that particular moment it brought dismay to
many friends of Russia. There seemed to be too much over-reaching,
cynicism and opportunism about it. That criticism applied to Hitler
also, who overnight had dropped his fierce anti-Communism and apparently
made friends with the Soviet. A cynic said that Russia had joined the
Anti-Comintern Pact; another that Hitler was turning Communist as well
as a patron of the Jews. All this seems to us fantastic nonsense, for
there can be, and there is going to be, no real alliance between Hitler
and Stalin. But both are willing enough to play at the game of power
politics. Russia has suffered enough at the hands of England to resent
it bitterly."[6](#6) So, Russia had committed no crime; she was simply
repaying England in the latter's own coin!

But the rape of poor Poland by the "socialist and anti-imperialist"
Soviet Union was somewhat more difficult to defend. The admirers of the
Soviet Union had constantly pointed out that she did not covet foreign
territory. They had, of course, forgotten that the Soviet Red Army had
tried to occupy Poland as early as 1920 an only the weakness of the Red
Army had prevented it from playing its essentially imperialist role. And
Soviet propaganda had turned this necessity into a virtue. Now all of a
sudden the Red Army had marched into Poland which had not offended the
Soviet Union in any way except refusing to ally with the Soviet Union
which was Poland's sovereign right. Moreover, Poland had seen the fate
of Czechoslovakia which was allied with the Soviet Union, and which the
latter had done nothing to save from Hitler. It was no fault of Poland
that she saw no protection in a Polish-Soviet Alliance. She had instead
depended on the protection promised by England and France which nations
at least showed a sense of honour by declaring war against Nazi Germany.

Pandit Nehru-was, of course, shocked. But like every inveterate
Soviet-addict, he was quite capable of absorbing this shock also. He
guessed and philosophised as follows: "The Soviet's march into Eastern
Poland was another shock. But it is yet difficult to say whether this
was to counter the German army or to weaken the Poles or merely to take
advantage of a particular situation from the nationalist point of view.
From the meagre information that we possess it seems, however, that
Russia's advance into Poland has certainly come in the way of German
designs. *It has prevented German occupation of Eastern Poland and cried
a halt to the German army. More important still is the occupation of the
entire Polish-Rumanian frontier by the Soviet army. This has made it
certain that Germany cannot take possession of the Rumanian oil-fields
which she coveted, and probably that she cannot draw upon the vast wheat
supplies of Rumania*. The Balkans are saved from German aggression, and
Turkey breathes with relief. All this may mean little today, but in the
future, as the war progresses, it will have a vital significance. It may
be thus that Soviet Russia has rendered a great service to the cause of
the Western Allies, and Bernard Shaw's dictum that Stalin has made a
cat's-paw of Hitler has some truth in it."[7](#7) He had nothing to say
when, after the fall of France, the German armies occupied Rumania and
the Balkans, and Soviet Russia kept on looking the other way.

Everyone except Pandit Nehru and his communist comrades could see that
the Nazi-Soviet Pact alone had given a free hand to Hitler for his
triumphant march into Western Europe and the Balkans. The Pact had also
strengthened Hider's resources so that he could turn back and devour the
Soviet Union. The nemesis came very soon. And it is recorded history how
the poor and down-trodden people of Russia rose against Nazi hordes in
defence of their Fatherland after the Red Army had collapsed all along
the front, and after Stalin, who was responsible for inviting the German
armies, ran away from Moscow like a rat.

Again, everyone knew in 1948 how Stalin had conspired with Hider for a
division of Europe and Asia between Germany and Russia. The records of
the Ribbentrop-Molotov talks had been published by that time. They did
not betray any socialist or democratic intentions on the part of the
Soviet Union. If anything, they showed that Soviet Russia was as
ruthless in pursuit of her imperialist designs as Hitler's Nazi Germany.
Her record in Eastern Europe and China during 1945-47 had further
confirmed that Soviet Russia intended to streamline her system of
imperialism. But for Pandit Nehru all these facts did not mean a fig. He
quietly permitted his minion to bring out another reprint of his
"philosophisations" in the middle of 1948. He had become the Prime
Minister of an independent India by that time due to the good graces of
a British Government. And Krishna Menon was by now a responsible
representative of the Indian Republic in his capacity as India's High
Commissioner in England.

We do not know if there have been any more reprints of this book in
India or abroad. Pandit Nehru has been a bestseller for years now. We
should not be surprised if this book runs into more reprints without a
comma being erased or a footnote being added, as if it were not a piece
of puerile journalism but a sacrosanct scripture. Even in 1948, it was
obvious that old copies of this book should have been hidden away from
the public. But that sort of discretion demands a sense of shame. And
Pandit Nehru has prospered without that sense over the past forty or
more years.

The fifth book by Pandit Nehru, *The Discovery of India*, was published
in early 1946. In this book, after taking his autobiographical thread
upto 1936, he suddenly switches over to India's past history and culture
till he reaches the point at which he had left. Then he resumes his
commentary on events in India and abroad and comes up to the year 1942.
This book, too, has seen many reprints and is supposed to bring into
high relief Pandit Nehru as, "the statesman-philosopher".

In the very first chapter he wrote: "A study of Marx and Lenin produced
a powerful effect on my mind and helped me to see history and current
affairs in a new light. The long chain of history and of social
development appeared to have some meaning, some sequence and the future
lost some of its obscurity. The practical achievements of the Soviet
Union were also tremendously impressive. Often I disliked or did not
understand some development there and it seemed to me to be too closely
concerned with the opportunism of the moment or the power politics of
the day. But despite all these developments and possible distortions of
the original passion for human betterment, *I had no doubt that the
Soviet Revolution bad advanced human society by a great leap and had lit
a bright flame which could not be smothered, and that it had laid the
foundation for the 'new civilisation' towards which the world would
advance*. I am too much of an individualist and believer in personal
freedom to like overmuch regimentation. Yet it seemed to me obvious that
in a complex social structure individual freedom had to be limited, and
perhaps the only way to real personal freedom was through some such
limitation in the social sphere. The lesser liberties may often need
limitation in the interest of the larger freedom."[8](#8)

And again, when he returned to modern India: "We realized in our hearts
that we could not do much till conditions were radically changed-hence
our overwhelming desire for independence-and yet the passion for
progress filled us and the wish to emulate other countries which had
gone so far ahead in many ways. We thought of the United States of
America and even of some eastern countries which were forging ahead. But
most of all we had the example of the Soviet Union which in two brief
decades, full of war and civil strife and in the face of what appeared
to be insurmountable difficulties, had made tremendous progress. Some
were attracted to communism, others were not, but all were fascinated by
the advance of the Soviet Union in education and culture and medical
care and physical fitness and in the solution of the problem of
nationalities-by the amazing and prodigious effort to create a new world
out of the dregs of the old."[9](#9)

Thus we see that Pandit Nehru was quite a Soviet-addict up to the eve of
his becoming the first Prime Minister of independent India in August
1947. Since then he has not written any major book from which we may
find out his basic beliefs, but his speeches on foreign policy and other
subjects leave little doubt that, by and large, his fascination for the
Soviet Union has remained undiminished.  

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Jawaharlal Nehru, *The Unity of India*, Lindsay Drummond,
London, 1948, p. 5.  

[2](#2a) Ibid.

[3](#3a) Ibid., pp. 181-82. Italics added.

[4](#4a) Ibid., p. 116. Italics added.

[5](#5a) Ibid., Italics added.

[6](#6a) Ibid, pp. 308-09. Italics added.

[7](#7a) Ibid., pp. 309-10. Italics added.  

[8](#8a) Jawaharlal Nehru, *Discovery of India*, Signet Press, Calcutta,
December 1947, pp. 12-13. Italics added.  

[9](#9a) Ibid., p. 311.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
