+++
title = "09  SEVEN A PERSISTENT PRO-SOVIET SPEAKER"

+++
SEVEN  
A PERSISTENT PRO-SOVIET SPEAKER

Pandit Nehru's admirers are prepared to admit that he was influenced by
communist thought to quite an extent before he became the first Prime
Minister of independent India in August 1947. But they maintain (of
course, in a purely *a priory* fashion) that since that event his sense
of responsibility as leader of a major democracy has considerably
diluted his devotion to purely theoretical questions, and developed in
him a sense of proportion regarding the Soviet Union.

These people tell us that Pandit Nehru's unceasing tirades against the
various Western alliances have been inspired not by his addiction to the
Soviet Union but by his strong anti-imperialist inclinations coupled
with his faith in non-violence. They add that he has been considerably
annoyed with the West due to the latter's pro-Pakistan stand on the
Kashmir question. He, they say, had come to put considerable trust in
Western good faith after the British withdrawal from India. But the West
has, over the past few years, frittered away that fund of goodwill by
committing one folly after another. If, therefore, he has spoken against
the West it must be due to his bitterness against the West rather than
to any pro-Soviet proclivities on his part.

The Western nations, particularly the U.S.A., have gradually come to
accept this explanation of what they describe as Pandit Nehru's
neutralism. They are, therefore, vying with each other to "heal the
wounds" which they think they have unwittingly inflicted on Pandit
Nehru's "sensitive mind". And in that process Pandit Nehru's India has
become the "bastion of democracy" in Asia and he himself the only firm
guiding star for the destiny of what they describe as the underdeveloped
nations. More recently, his "dynamic neutrality" is gaining prestige in
the West as a model for all newly independent nations in Asia and
Africa.

Independent India would have very much liked her Prime Minister to be
inspired neither by the West nor by the East. India may be a newly
independent country, but she is no new nation. In fact, in terms of her
culture and civilisation, she is the only nation on earth which has
still maintained an unbroken continuity with her ancient traditions.
Those traditions have their own solutions to offer for most of the ills
from which the world has been suffering ever since Christianity, Islam,
and the materialist civilization of the modem West managed to unhinge
nation after nation from their deeper moorings.

But that, perhaps, is too idealistic an aspiration. India does cherish
her ancient traditions but is no longer alive to them. She may,
therefore, not be able immediately to bring those traditions to bear on
current controversies. But she can at least strive to preserve her
independent identity and "judge each issue on its own merits", as Pandit
Nehru is so fond of saying so often. To that end, it is necessary that
India should understand the true nature of Communism as a streamlined
system of neo-imperialism, and show some appreciation for the struggles
of those nations which have to fight the communist menace for their very
self-preservation. That is the minimum we should expect from an
independent India.

But under Pandit Nehru's leadership, India has shown neither a will for
self-preservation against the increasing communist threat to her own
integrity, nor a minimum of sympathy for those who have had to stand up
against Communism. And that is no accident. It is not due to any lack of
information about the communist menace that India has kept her eyes shut
towards it. Nor is it due to any lack of moral sense in the nation as a
whole. If an explanation is to be found for this phenomenon of an
independent India siding with the communist camp, we have to look into
the mind of that man who has been the sole architect of India's policies
since Sardar Patel died in December 1950. Let us see how that man's mind
has functioned vis-a-vis the Soviet Union and Communism after he became
our Prime Minister.

If we could present all of his speeches and statements after he assumed
office, we would have more than adequate evidence to prove conclusively
that he has continued to be a Soviet-addict all through these
post-independence years. But that is a big job. We have before us only
his selected speeches from 1946 to 1957 compiled and published by the
Government of India in three volumes. To these volumes, then, we must
turn.

Pandit Nehru announced his Interim Government on September 7, 1946. His
statement on this occasion contained greetings to both the U.S.A. and
the Soviet Union. He said: "We send our greetings to the people of the
United States of America to whom destiny has given a major role in
international affairs. We trust that this tremendous responsibility will
be utilized for the furtherance of peace and human freedom everywhere.
To that other great nation of the modern world, the Soviet Union, which
also carries a vast responsibility for shaping world events, we send
greetings. *They are our neighbours in Asia and inevitably we shall have
to undertake many common tasks and have much to do with each
other*."[1](#1)

Thus the U.S.A. was a country whom "destiny" had chosen to play a "major
role", while the Soviet Union was willingly shouldering "a vast
responsibility". Further, Pandit Nehru had doubts in his mind whether
the U.S.A. would use her power and opportunity for the good of mankind.
He had no such misgivings about the Soviet Union. But, above all, while
the U.S.A. was a far-away nation, which had no common tasks to undertake
with us, the Soviet Union was a "neighbour in Asia" and India had "much
to do with her". The slant was quite meaningful for all those who had
the intelligence to pick it up.

A few months later, on December 13, he moved the Objectives Resolution
in the Constituent Assembly which was meeting in order to frame
independent India's constitution. Talking of American, French, and
Russian revolutions, he employed the same slant. He said: "I think also
of the various constituent assemblies that have gone before and of what
took place at the making of the great American nation when the fathers
of that nation met and fashioned a Constitution which has stood the test
of so many years, more than a century and a half, and of the great
nation which has resulted, which has been built up on the basis of that
Constitution. My mind goes back to that mighty revolution which took
place also over 150 years ago and the Constituent Assembly that met in
that gracious and lovely city of Paris which has fought so many battles
for freedom... Then my mind goes back to a more recent revolution which
gave rise to a new type of State, the revolution that took place in
Russia and out of which has arisen the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, another mighty country which is playing a tremendous part in
the world, not only a mighty country, but for us in India, a
neighbouring country."[2](#2)

So, the Soviet Union was still "a new type of State" and "a neighbouring
country". Any average student of politics knows that neighbourliness of
States leads to mutual hostility more often than to mutual trust. If
neighbourliness were a test, there were so many other countries which
were nearer to India at that time. In a few more months Pakistan was to
be India's neighbour on both sides of her borders. It has never occurred
to Pandit Nehru to emphasize the neighbourliness of Pakistan. And for
obvious reasons. Geographical nearness is never meaningful unless it is
accompanied by ideological nearness. What he was referring to in his
speech was the ideological nearness of the Soviet Union.

Next year, on March 5, 1947, he gave an inaugural address to the Asian
Relations Conference at New Delhi. Delegates from the Soviet Union had
been admitted to that Conference on his plea that Russia was an Asian
country as well and not a European Power which had colonised and
subjugated vast areas of the Asian continent. Welcoming the various
delegations, he said: "We welcome you, delegates and representatives
from China, that great country to which Asia owes so much and from which
so much is expected; from Egypt and the Arab countries of Western Asia,
inheritors of a proud culture which spread far and wide and influenced
India greatly; from Iran whose contacts with India go back to the dawn
of history; from Indonesia and Indo-China whose history is intertwined
with India's culture, and where recently the battle of freedom has
continued, a reminder to us that freedom must be won and cannot come as
a gift; from Turkey that has been rejuvenated by the genius of a great
leader; from Korea and Mongolia, Siam, Malaya and the Philippines; *from
the Soviet Republics of Asia which have advanced so rapidly in our
generation and which have so many lessons to teach us*."[3](#3)

Thus, while every other country had only past achievements to, its
credit, the Soviet Union alone had "so many lessons to teach us". The
significant slant was once more very obvious to the intelligent ear.

Very soon India became independent as a result of Britain's voluntary
and peaceful withdrawal. Pandit Nehru's sister, Vijayalakshmi Pandit,
was appointed India's Ambassador in Moscow. But by that time the Kremlin
had become intensely hostile to India. India had given no offence to the
Soviet Union, except that the Indian National Congress rather than the
Communist Party of India had come to power. One had to read the weekly
*New Times*, a journal published from Moscow, to realise the depth of
Kremlin's displeasure with Indian leaders. The Congress was being
accused of selling India to "Anglo-American imperialism" in order to
forestall a "people's revolution". In a few months, the Communist Party
of India was to launch its famous 1948 insurrection on direct orders
from Moscow. Naturally, Moscow could not be expected to be courteous to
India's Ambassador.

Like her brother, Mrs. Vijayalakshmi Pandit had so far hobnobbed with
various communist fronts in India. Even so, she was given a very cold
reception in Moscow. She was not able to meet Stalin despite her
repeated requests. And by the time she came back from her post in her
brother's Fatherland, she was completely cured of her communist
inclinations. She resented the fact that Moscow was refusing to accept
India as an independent country. Moscow made its hostility patent even
in petty matters. One such matter was the supply of furniture to the new
Indian Embassy. She had to buy all the furniture she needed from
Stockholm, and incur heavy expenditure on that account. Pandit Nehru was
aware of the inside story.

But when some members in India's Assembly raised a question as to why
the Indian Ambassador in Moscow had to spend so much for importing
furniture from abroad, he did not tell the truth. Instead, he apologised
for the Soviet Union. He rebuked the House for failing to understand
Soviet Russia. He said: "A great deal of criticism has been made about
our Ambassador in Moscow getting furniture from Stockholm. Well, how a
house has to be furnished in Moscow, of course, Hon. Members do not
realize. It just is not possible to furnish it easily in Moscow. You get
an empty house. We thought of sending things from India, but it was
almost a physical impossibility unless you spent vast sums on aeroplanes
to carry chairs and tables from here. Of course, it could have been
furnished alternatively with Russian furniture. *The Russian people, and
all credit to them for this, ever since the war, are so intent on doing
what they consider to be the fundamental things that they refuse to
waste their time on the accessories of life*. They have to rebuild their
country after the most horrible suffering and damage suffered in the war
and they are concentrating on major undertakings. They go about in
patched-up clothes and worn-out shoes. It does not matter, but they are
building dams, reservoirs and factories and the rest which they consider
more important. So it is not easy to get any of these small accessories
of life for the moment. The only things you can get in Russia are
antique pieces of Czarist days which are frightfully expensive. The
result is that our Embassy in Moscow had to go to Stockholm for its
chairs and tables, and as these were urgently required - office
equipment, etc. - our Ambassador had to go there."[4](#4)

It would have been difficult for anyone except an incurable
Soviet-addict to believe that the Soviet Government could not supply
ordinary furniture for a small embassy such as we had initially
established in Moscow. There is ample evidence that other embassies in
Moscow were buying a lot of furniture at that very time. Even if
furniture was not readily available from stock a dictatorial government
like that of the Soviet Union could have got it fabricated overnight,
had it so wished. There are many instances of the Soviet Government
performing such "miracles" at short notice.

The simple truth was that Moscow at that time was not favourably
inclined to having an embassy from a country which in its estimation was
no more than a "semi-colony of Wall Street imperialism". Moscow knew
that Pandit Nehru had all along been its own minion. But Moscow also
knew that Pandit Nehru was powerless so long as Sardar Patel wielded the
Congress Party machine and exercised his "reactionary" influence against
the "progressive people". And Moscow was angry with Pandit Nehru for his
failure to put up a fight against Sardar Patel by making a common cause
with the Communist Party of India. So Moscow behaved as it did. But all
these studied insults heaped on his country and on his own sister
presented no occasion to Pandit Nehru for having second thoughts about
the Soviet Union. He only felt called upon to invent yet another apology
for Moscow. in fact, he went further and praised Soviet Russia's
preoccupation with "fundamental things" after the fashion of a
straightforward sycophant. Moscow's manners towards a newly independent
country were not at all "fundamental" in his scheme of things.

As regards the Russian people, they had gone about in "patched-up
clothes and worn-out shoes" ever since the Bolsheviks seized power in
Russia. They had no say in the matter and they could not come in the way
of the Kremlin selling furniture to the Indian Embassy. On the other
hand, the communist bosses in Soviet Russia were, even during those days
of post-war shortages, living in great comfort and enjoying all the
amenities of civilised life. Things of luxury were being produced for
them in plenty. If the bosses had wanted to sell furniture to the Indian
Embassy, they had only to issue an order and all that was needed could
have been manufactured in a day.

Then came the communist insurrection inside India and an avalanche of
malicious Soviet propaganda against the Congress Party, its leaders, and
its Government. Pandit Nehru was now portrayed as a "co-partner in
Sardar Patel's crimes". Next year, that is in 1949, China went
communist. Mao Tse-tung at once sent a message to B.T. Ranadive, General
Secretary of the CPI, that India, too, was going to be "liberated before
long". A few months later, Peking was describing Pandit Nehru as a
"running dog of American imperialism". It was, therefore, natural that
opinion inside the Congress Party became pretty hostile against
Communism and the communist countries. Sardar Patel was still alive. So
Pandit Nehru had to stop singing his hymns in praise of the Soviet
Union. But he also refused to utter a word against Communism or the
communist "paradise".

Had he been in possession of normal mental faculties, here was an
opportunity for him to see the truth about the Soviet Union. He had
admired that country for more than 20 years. He had refused to protest
publicly even when, in his private opinion, the Soviet Union had acted
in a way which he did not consider right. Yet, without any provocation
whatsoever from him, the Soviet press had launched a malicious campaign
against him personally, and the Kremlin had directed its hired hounds to
overthrow his Government - a Government for which he had fought and
suffered for many years.

It is the tragedy of Soviet-addicts that they can seldom overcome their
infatuation. They always have an explanation for Soviet misdeeds. Now
the explanation for which Pandit Nehru plumped was that the Soviet Union
had been committed to a wrong line by an obstinate and die-hard faction
in the Kremlin, and that Stalin was personally opposed to it. So he had
only to wait and watch.

His next opportunity came in 1952. Sardar Patel was dead, and the
Congress Party was fast heading towards becoming his pocket
organisation. Meanwhile, the fiasco of the new communist line in Korea
had moved the world communist camp towards wooing the newly independent
nations in Asia. Early in 1952, it was more than clear that the Party
line in India was changing towards "parliamentarianism". He immediately
broke his silence and resumed his rhetoric in the service of the Soviet
Union.

India had her first Parliament in session now. More than two dozen
communist M.Ps were occupying the Opposition benches in New Delhi. They
were bitterly critical of Government policies. Addressing these traitors
on May 22, 1952, Pandit Nehru said on the floor of the Parliament: "I am
sure that the honourable Members of the Opposition remember that Lenin
is believed to have described Communism as soviets plus electricity. I
am anxious to impress on the House that whatever has been done in India
in these five years cannot be dismissed as insignificant. *Foreigners,
even those from the great lands of Russia and China, have often been
surprised at the measure of our achievements*. Not that they necessarily
agreed with our policy. Unfortunately their access to news about India
is limited and those who do supply them with information about this
country are full of their own ideas and only too readily condemn
everything we have done."[5](#5) It sounds strange that the Soviet
Government should, at that time, be misinformed about India. India had
become a fully democratic country in which information was readily
available to anyone who cared for it. And Moscow was now maintaining an
Embassy in New Delhi and Consulates in several other cities. Unlike
Russia, India was maintaining no Iron Curtain.

Slightly later, but during the same speech, he proclaimed: "I can say
with some confidence that there is hardly any other country in the
world, *perhaps including Russia also*, which can claim to have laid the
foundations of scientific progress as we have in so short a period of
time. It is true that Russia is far more advanced than we are but I am
referring to the initial stages of development."[6](#6) So the model to
be admired and seek comparison with was still the Soviet Union. The sins
of the Soviet Union towards the new Republic of India were explained
away as due to lack of proper information. Only he could believe that
Moscow was guided by the misinformation provided by its hirelings in
India! The plain truth was that these hirelings were prepared to see the
white as black and vice versa at Moscow's bidding.  

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Jawaharlal Nehru's Speeches, 1946-49, The Publications
Division, Government of India, New Delhi, Second Edition, November 1958,
p. 3. Italics added.  

[2](#2a) Ibid., pp. 9-10.

[3](#3a) Ibid., p. 300. Italics added.

[4](#4a) Ibid., p. 211. Italics added.

[5](#5a) Jawaharlal Nehru's Speeches, 1949-53, The Publications
Division, Government of India, New Delhi, Second Impression, June 1957,
p. 34. Italics added.

[6](#6a) Ibid., p. 35. Italics added.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
