+++
title = "12  TEN A FELLOW-TRAVELLER OF SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY-2"

+++
TEN  
A FELLOW-TRAVELLER OF SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY-2

Ever since Pandit Nehru visited the United States of America for the
first time in 1949 and the U.S. Administration discovered that it was
impossible to have a free and frank discussion with him regarding
concrete policies, a horde of U.S. specialists and psychologists have
been in and out of India for a "fuller understanding of Jawaharlal
Nehru, India's man of destiny". They have studied his life story
exhaustively and brooded for years over his least little idiosyncrasy.
And, by now, they are unanimous in their "analysis" that he is an
extremely touchy person who will never brook any affront to his sense of
self-respect. The U.S. State Department has, therefore, been deputing
its topmost experts in public relations to his court at New Delhi, and
there has been no end of their kowtowing before this king of independent
India. But in spite of all their endeavours, the U.S.A. has been
singularly unsuccessful with him. Every now and then he gets irritated
with the U.S.A. and starts shouting against U.S. policies so that even
his loyal lobbymen in the U.S.A., such as Chester Bowles, Cooper, Walter
Reuther etc., are shocked and have to hang their heads in a confession
of defeat.

But Moscow's reading of Pandit Nehru's character has been entirely
different. Moscow has never hesitated in launching vile and vicious
attacks on him whenever the exigencies of India's domestic politics have
forced him to stray away from the line laid down by Moscow, or whenever
there has been a dramatic turn in Moscow's policies and poor Pandit
Nehru has been caught napping. He on his part has not only pocketed the
most puerile personal attacks on him and kept quiet, but also taken to
introspection and self-criticism. His recurring reaction in the face of
Moscow's fury against him has always been an effort to catch up with
Moscow's new line in as short a time as his power and opportunity have
allowed him.

Such an occasion came for the first time in 1930. Pandit Nehru had been
faithfully following the Moscow line and injecting it into the Indian
National Congress ever since he returned from Europe in 1928. But,
meanwhile, Moscow's line was moving more and more left due to the
struggle that was raging at that time in Germany and China between the
communist conspiracy and the forces of nationalism. One fine morning
towards the end of 1930, Pravda published an article and denounced
Pandit Nehru as a "dangerous obstacle to the victory of the Indian
Revolution". This article was reproduced in the Comintern weekly,
*Imprecor*, under the title 'Platform of Action of the Communist Party
of India'. It said: "The most harmful and dangerous obstacle to victory
of the Indian Revolution is the agitation carried on by the 'left'
elements of the National Congress led by Jawaharlal Nehru, Bose, Ginwala
and others. Ruthless war on the 'left' national reformists is an
essential condition if we are to isolate the former from the workers and
the mass of peasantry and mobilise the latter under the banner of the
Communist Party."

This was a signal for a spate of swearology against Pandit Nehru in the
communist press inside India and abroad. All his fulminations against
the Social Democrats had failed to save him from what looked like the
fortuitous fury of Moscow. He was now classed with those very Social
Democrats whom he hated from the core of his heart. And, soon after, he
was summarily expelled from the League against Imperialism for which
organisation he had worked so hard in India. But all this meant nothing
to him. He was only sorry that he was not given a chance to defend
himself.

Recalling his disgrace during this period he wrote later on: "The League
against Imperialism veered more towards Communism in later years, though
at no time, so far as I know, did it lose its individual character. I
could only remain in distant touch with it by means of correspondence.
In 1930, because of my part in the Delhi truce between the Congress and
the Government of India, it grew exceedingly angry with me, and
excommunicated me with bell, book, and candle, or to be more accurate,
it expelled me by some kind of a resolution. **I must confess that it
had great provocation, but it might have given me some chance of
explaining my position."[1](#1) Thus in spite of this direct evidence he
was not prepared to believe that the League against Imperialism was an
out-and-out communist front financed by Moscow in the interests of
Soviet foreign policy. And all this provocation meant nothing to him
except a sense of regret that he was not given a chance of explaining
his position!

Had Moscow cared to give him that chance, he would have protested that
he was opposed to the Gandhi-Irwin Pact and that as such he did not
deserve that denunciation. Referring to this Pact, he had written:
"There was nothing more to be said. The thing had been done, our leader
had committed himself; and even if we disagreed with him, what could we
do? Throw him over? Break from him? Announce our disagreement? That
might bring some personal satisfaction to an individual, but it made no
difference to the final decision. The Civil Disobedience movement was
ended for the time being at least, and not even the Working Committee
could push it on now, when the Government could declare that Mr. Gandhi
had already agreed to a settlement."[2](#2) But unfortunately for him,
it has always been Moscow's method to decide matters ex parte and
victimise people without any verification or warning given to them.

Pandit Nehru on his part has been hewed out of "bourgeois" stuff as he
himself confesses in his autobiography. Moscow might have denounced him
as a degenerate in so many words. But that did not mean that he would
turn a traitor to Moscow. His "sense of honour" demanded that he should
continue to defend and disseminate the Moscow line. So he drafted yet
another resolution for the Karachi Congress of 1931. It read: "This
Congress declares that the people of India have no quarrel with the
countries and peoples bordering on India and desires to establish and
maintain friendly relations with them. It disapproves of the so-called
'forward' policy of the British Government in India in the North-West
Frontier and of all imperialist attempts to destroy the freedom of the
people of the frontier. The Congress is strongly of opinion that the
military and financial resources of India should not be employed in
furtherance of this policy and the military occupation of the
tribesmen's territory should be terminated."[3](#3) The North-West
Frontier at that time was a hotbed of communist conspiracy as the
channels of contact with the communists in India ran from Kabul to
Tashkent to Moscow. So that area had to be kept free from every kind of
"imperialist" vigilance.

Pandit Nehru's heart had always bled for the "brave Pathans" against
whom the "British imperialists were committing unprecedented crimes".
Had he studied India's history in right earnest, he would have known
that the problem of these frontier tribals was not new, and that every
government in India had had to keep them in check lest they descended on
peaceful citizens for plunder and abduction. He himself had to learn
this history the hard way. As soon as he became the first Prime Minister
of undivided India in September 1946, he rushed to the North-West
Frontier. He had been assured by the Khan brothers that he would get a
hero's welcome everywhere. Welcomed he was, but with bullets from which
he escaped with an hair's breadth. Next year, the same "brave Pathans"
descended on Kashmir and their brave deeds there became everybody's
knowledge. He has never mentioned the "brave Pathans" again.

He did not have a chance to draft any more foreign policy resolutions
because between 1931 and 1935 he was in and out of jail in connection
with the Civil Disobedience Movement. But even when he was in jail, his
primary preoccupation continued to be service to the communist cause.
This becomes obvious when he comes to the contemporary period in his
*Glimpses of World History*. On every single international issue, he
takes the same stand as the communists. He denounces all those people
whom the communists were denouncing and gaves his full support to all
those people who happened to be Moscow's stooges at that time.

To start with, he accepts the Leninist definition of imperialism which
says that any country which exports her surplus industrial production,
surplus capital, and surplus population to other countries is an
imperialist country. In terms of this definition, Soviet Russia which
was deficient in industrial goods as well as capital, could never be
called an imperialist country, although she had occupied a number of
foreign lands in both Europe and Asia and was importing people from all
these lands to do forced labour in her slave-labour camps. But this
definition made the 'invisible empire of America' visible to Pandit
Nehru. Commenting on this empire, he wrote: "The United States prevented
interference in Latin America from Europe by means of the Monroe
Doctrine. But as they grew wealthy they began to look outside for fresh
fields for expansion. Naturally their eyes first fell on Latin America.
They did not attempt to take possession of any of these countries by
force in the old way of building up empires. They sent their goods there
and captured their markets. They also invested their capital in
railways, mines, and other undertakings in the south; they lent money to
governments and sometimes arms to warring factions at times of
revolution. By 'they' I mean American capitalists and bankers, but
behind them and supporting them was the American Government. Gradually
these bankers controlled, through the money they had lent or invested,
many of the smaller South and Central American Governments."[4](#4) This
communist image of the USA has continued to haunt him.

This "new kind of empire, the modern kind of empire" was, in his
opinion, more profitable and more convenient as compared to the old type
of empire which the die-hard British imperialists were still practising.
Drawing his daughter's attention to the subtleties of this "new
imperialism", he theorised: "Most of us still think of empires of this
kind, like the British in India, and we imagine that if the British were
not in actual political control of India, India would be free. But this
type of empire is already passing away, and giving place to a more
advanced and perfected type. This latest kind of empire does not annex
even the land; it only annexes the wealth or the wealth-producing
elements in the country. By doing so it can exploit the country fully to
its own advantage and can largely control it, and at the same time has
to shoulder no responsibility for governing and repressing that country.
In effect, both the land and the people living there are dominated and
largely controlled with the least amount of trouble."[5](#5)

When the cold war started between the United States and the Soviet Union
immediately after the Second World War, many people wondered why Pandit
Nehru was so suspicious of the United States and so consistently siding
with the Soviet Union on all international issues. They had not cared to
know his definition of imperialism - a definition which he had derived
from communist doctrine and to which he still adheres. That is why he is
still obsessed with Western colonialism, even though the Western nations
have freed every enslaved nation in Asia and have, with the exception of
Portugal, almost cleared out of Africa. So long as any nation imports
goods and capital from a Western country, it remains for him a colony of
Western imperialism unless, like India, it starts serving the Soviet
Union by supporting the latter's foreign policy!

Next, he turned his attention towards the rise of Fascism. Stripped of
all its superfluous slogans, Fascism was a last-bid endeavour of
Italian, German and Spanish nationalism to root out the communist cancer
from their countries and stop Soviet imperialism from a subversive
takeover. The Fascists had to suppress and sometimes slaughter the
communists and their fellow-travellers. The only alternative was to be
slaughtered by the communists. That is an indispensable job which all
patriots, who want to save their country's sovereignty from Moscow's
strangle-hold, have to perform sooner or later whenever the communist
conspiracy assumes a certain magnitude. The communists, however, have
reserved the right to suppress and slaughter all opposition as their own
exclusive privilege, and their term for anyone who suppresses and
slaughters them is 'Fascist'.

Communists have also developed an elaborate thesis about the genesis of
Fascism. They propose that Fascism is the "last desperate bid of
capitalism to save itself from proletarian revolution". Pandit Nehru
swallowed this thesis and wrote: "For the first ten years after the War
it appeared that perhaps capitalism might recover and steady itself for
another considerable period. But the next three years or so have made
this very doubtful. Not only is the rivalry between capitalist States
growing to dangerous dimensions, but, at the same time, within each
State the conflict between classes, between the workers and the
capitalist owning class which controls the government, is becoming
acute. As these conditions worsen, a last desperate attempt is made by
the owning class to crush the rising workers. This takes the form of
fascism. Fascism appears where the conflict between the classes has
become acute and the owning class is in danger of losing its privileged
position."[6](#6)

And he noted that Fascism was becoming a universal phenomenon everywhere
in Europe outside the Soviet Union. He observed: "Fascism exists in
varying degrees in all countries of Europe except, I suppose, Russia.
Its latest triumph has been won in Germany. Even in England, fascist
ideas are spreading among the ruling classes, and we see their
application often enough in India. On the world-stage today fascism, the
last resort of capitalism, faces communism."[7](#7)

He spotted this "last resort of capitalism" manifesting itself in China
also, although China at that time was hardly a capitalist country. In
later years many people came to believe that Pandit Nehru was a friend
of Chiang Kai-shek and the Chinese Nationalists. But that was an
altogether false impression. He had befriended Chiang Kai-shek from 1937
onwards when the Comintern had also befriended him. He dropped Chiang
Kai-shek immediately after the communists turned against him in 1947, in
which year the final struggle for power flared up in China. Thus, all
along, he had toed the communist line regarding China.

In 1934, his comment on the 1926 break-up between the Nationalists and
the Communists in China was as follows: "The nationalist Government, now
established at Hankow or Wuhan, were faced with a difficult problem-to
advance or not to advance, to take Shanghai or not to do so... Borodin
\[Comintern Agent sent from Moscow\] advised caution and consolidation.
He was of opinion that the nationalists should keep away from Shanghai
and strengthen their position in the southern half of China which was
already under their control, and prepare the ground in the north with
propaganda. Very soon, within a year or so, he expected the whole of
China to be ready to welcome a nationalist advance. That would be the
time to take Shanghai, march to Peking, and face the foreign imperialist
Powers. Borodin, the revolutionary, gave this cautious advice, because
he was experienced in judging the various factors in a situation. The
right-wing leaders of the Kuomintang, however, and especially the
commander-in-chief, Chiang Kaishek, insisted on marching to Shanghai.
The real reason for this desire to take Shanghai appeared later when the
Kuomintang split up into two. The growing power of the peasants' and
workers' unions was not liked by these right-wing leaders. Many of the
generals were themselves landlords. They had therefore decided to crush
these unions, even at the cost of breaking up the party into two and
weakening the nationalist cause. Shanghai was an important centre of the
big Chinese 'bourgeoisie', and the right-wing generals counted upon it
to help them, with money and otherwise, in their fight against the more
advanced elements in their party, and especially against the communists.
In such a fight they knew they could also rely on the support of the
foreign bankers and industrialists in Shanghai."[8](#8) The simple truth
was that the Chinese communists were getting ready to hijack the
nationalist revolution, and convert China into a Soviet colony when
Chiang Kai-shek, who knew their game, anticipated their move and turned
the tables on them.

Again: "Having rebelled against his own Government at Hankow, Chiang now
made war on communists, left-wingers, and trade-unionist workers. The
very workers who had made it easy for him to take Shanghai and had
welcomed him joyously there were now hunted out and crushed. Large
numbers of people were shot down or beheaded, thousands were arrested
and imprisoned. The freedom that the nationalists were supposed to have
brought to Shanghai was soon converted into a bloody terror."[9](#9) The
Government in Hankow was a self-appointed communist clique, and Chiang
Kai-shek was not honour-bound to obey it. Unlike Pandit Nehru, Chiang
Kai-shek was a patriot who was not prepared to see his country becoming
a battleground between the Soviet fifth-column on the one hand and the
Western powers on the other.

And again: "In Peking, as in Shanghai, a 'clean-up' of communists and
advanced workers was carried out. The imperialist Powers of course
welcomed this development, because it broke up and weakened the ranks of
the Chinese nationalists. *Chiang Kai-shek sought to co-operate with the
representatives of the Powers in Shanghai*."[10](#10) It was not for the
first time that Pandit Nehru saw communist traitors as "workers" and
peasants' unions". He used the same labels for them when they waged war
against the government headed by him, from 1948 onwards. He himself was,
of course, the "more advanced" element as compared to Sardar Patel who
took care of the traitors. Sardar Patel represented the "landlord and
capitalist interests" in his eyes.

Japan, too, was viewed by him through the same communist glasses. The
fact that Japan at that time had very good relations with Soviet Russia
did not mean anything to the Comintern. Communists have never been able
to understand goodwill; they invariably interpret it as a symptom of
weakness. Pandit Nehru followed the communist line and wrote: "Japan had
come to terms with Russia because of her difficulties, but this did not
mean approval of communism. Communism meant the end of emperor-worship,
and feudalism and the exploitation of the masses by the ruling class,
and indeed almost everything that the existing order stood for... *But
communism is the outcome of widespread misery due to social conditions,
and unless these conditions are improved, mere repression can be no
remedy*. There is a terrible misery in Japan at present. The peasantry,
as in China and India, are crushed under a tremendous burden of debt.
Taxation, especially because of heavy military expenditure and war
needs, is very heavy. *Reports come of starving peasants trying to live
on grass and roots, and of selling even their children*. The middle
classes are also in a bad way owing to unemployment and suicides have
increased."[11](#11) He was prepared to see whatever the Comintern
wanted him to see, wherever. He shared the communist hatred for Japan's
indigenous culture, as much as he has shared with them their hatred of
everything Indian.

Nor could the Social Democrats escape his onslaught. The Comintern had
dubbed them as aids and allies of capitalism in its last desperate bid
to save itself. He followed suit and sobbed: "Gradually, as year
followed year after the end of the World War, things appeared to settle
down to some extent. The revolutionary elements were suppressed by a
curious alliance of the reactionary conservatives, monarchists and
feudal landlords on the one side, and the moderate socialists or social
democrats on the other. This was indeed a strange alliance, for the
social democrats proclaimed their faith in Marxism and a workers'
government. Their ideal thus appeared to be, on the surface, the same as
that of the Soviets and communists. *And yet these social democrats
feared the communists more than the capitalists, and combined with the
latter to crush the former*. Or it may be that they feared the
capitalists so much that they did not dare to go against them; they
hoped to consolidate their position by peaceful and parliamentary means,
and thus bring in socialism almost imperceptibly. Whatever their motives
may have been, they helped the reactionary elements to crush the
revolutionary spirit, and thus actually brought about a
counterrevolution in many of the European countries. **This
counter-revolution in its turn crushed these very social democratic
parties, and new and aggressively anti-socialist forces came into
Power."[12](#12) Unfortunately for him, and unlike him, the Social
Democrats were patriots who saw through the "revolutionary spirit"
emanating from Moscow.

All these "counter-revolutionary" forces-the capitalists, the
neo-imperialists, the fascists, and the social democrats-had, according
to Pandit Nehru, forged a united front against the Soviet Union and were
conspiring for a new world war for the destruction of the 'proletarian
revolution'. And this "capitalist conspiracy" was really responsible for
all the crimes being committed in the Soviet Union! He apologised:

"Because there can be no real peace between communism and capitalism,
and the imperialist nations are very keen on suppressing communism, and
manoeuvre and intrigue to that end, the nerves of the Bolsheviks are
always on edge and their eyes grow big at the least provocation. Often
enough they have reason for anxiety and they had to meet, even
internally, widespread attempts at sabotage or destruction of their
factories or other big concerns.

"Nineteen-thirty-two was a very critical year for the Soviet Union. The
Government took the most drastic steps against sabotage and against the
stealing of communal property, which had occurred in many of the
communal farms. Ordinarily there is no death penalty in Russia, but it
was introduced in cases of counter-revolution. The Soviet Government
decreed that the stealing of communal property is equivalent to
counter-revolution, and is therefore punishable by death. **For, says
Stalin: 'If the capitalists have pronounced 'private' property sacred
and inviolable, thus achieving in their time a strengthening of the
capitalist order, then we communists must so much the more pronounce
'public' property sacred and inviolable in order thus to strengthen the
new socialist forms of economy.'"[13](#13)

Thus having denounced the whole world in terms of communist swearology,
Pandit Nehru returned to the defence of the Soviet Union which was at
that time using the same swearology for nailing him down as an obstacle
to the "Indian Revolution". No lackey has ever provided a more glaring
instance of licking the boot that kicks.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) *An Autobiography*, p. 164.  

[2](#2a) Ibid., p. 257.

[3](#3a) *The Background of India's Foreign Policy*, p. 111.

[4](#4a) *Glimpses of World History*, p. 569.

[5](#5a) Ibid., p. 570.

[6](#6a) Ibid., p. 687.

[7](#7a) Ibid., p. 826.  

[8](#8a) Ibid., pp. 831-32.  

[9](#9a) Ibid., p. 832.  

[10](#10a) Ibid. Italics added..

[11](#11a) Ibid., p. 836. Italics added.  

[12](#12a) Ibid., p. 787. Italics added.

[13](#13a) Ibid., pp. 859-60. As we shall see in Volume II, he provides
a similar apology for Aurangzeb's crimes. Aurangzeb, he writes, was
irritated by the opposition he faced from the Rajputs, Marathas, and
Sikhs. (Footnote added in 1993).

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
