+++
title = "21  NINETEEN CHOOSING BETWEEN USA AND USSR1"

+++
NINETEEN  
CHOOSING BETWEEN USA AND USSR[1](#1)

Communist China's aggression along our Himalayan frontier has once again
posed before the nation the problem of finding friends against foes in a
dangerous and divided world. The nation had faced this problem at first
when Pakistan signed a military pact with the United States of America,
and started talking tough in the context of her self-chosen controversy
over Kashmir. During those days, at least, it was seriously apprehended
by the Indian people at large that Pakistan might mount an aggression
against India from a position of superior military strength. The same
people now fear that a militarily mightier China may choose any day to
convert isolated border incidents into an all-out war.

The Government of India had proclaimed in the midst of our first
predicament that, in spite of everything that had happened in the
meanwhile, India should and would continue to pursue her earlier policy
of non-alignment with any power bloc, support of world peace, and
friendship for all nations including Pakistan. But a vigilant and
well-entrenched communist movement inside the country had used the
opportunity to push our foreign policy in a definite direction till in
every essential except verbiage it came quite close to Soviet foreign
policy. Whatever might have been the intention of the Government of
India, at least the man in the street had been led to believe that
Russia was India's unfailing friend against an America conspiring for an
armed conflict between India and Pakistan. The man in the street was
supported in this belief by repeated statements from Government
spokesmen that an armed conflict between India and Pakistan would very
soon spread into a world-wide conflagration. The one clear impression
that was thus conveyed was that both Russia and America were bound to
collide in an effort to help their respective friends, India and
Pakistan.

In the present predicament also, the Government of India continues to
proclaim the same policy of non-alignment, world peace, and friendship
for all including China. Again, whatever may be the intention of the
Government of India, at least the man in the street has already started
looking towards America as India's inevitable friend in the event of a
showdown with China. And once again, the Government is supporting the
man in the street in this belief by repeated statements that a war
between India and China will very soon engulf the whole world. The one
clear impression that is thus being conveyed is that, in the event of
China attacking India, America will surely rush to India's rescue and
force Russia to side with her ally in the communist camp.

But with these similarities between the earlier and the present
situation, there are certain clearly discernible differences as well.

First of all, there is no organised movement inside the country which
may attempt to influence our foreign policy in favour of a pro-American
orientation. Some isolated individuals may have occasionally advocated
some sort of an alliance with America. But the political climate in the
country as a whole has not evinced any marked enthusiasm for making such
a commitment. India's foreign policy has, by and large, continued to
grind in its old grooves, although shorn of much of its earlier aura of
infallibility so far as the mass mind in the country is concerned. There
has been no mass fervour in favour of a friendship with America such as
was noticed earlier in favour of Russia, though the feeling of extreme
hostility towards America has tended to decline except in pockets of
communist dominated public opinion.

Secondly, there is a feeling among our intelligentsia at least that, in
the final round, Russia and China may not turn out to be the friends we
have assumed them to be. In fact, it is believed by an important section
of the intelligentsia that China has held her hand and hesitated in
pressing her initial advantage to the hilt due to some direct or
indirect pressure from Russia. This section also entertains the hope
that, sooner or later, there is going to be a big burst-up between the
two communist countries, and that Russia will certainly contain China
and force her to renounce her aggressive designs against India. If it is
pointed out to these people that there is also an equal possibility of
an eventual patch-up inside the communist camp, they maintain that, in
that event, Russia will surely secure a peaceful settlement between
India and Chin-a, provided India continues to cultivate her friendship
with Russia in the meanwhile.

Whatever be the line of reasoning or absence of it, this much at least
is obvious that, unlike in the earlier situation when practically every
political party tried to outdo the others in denouncing Pakistan's ally
in the arms pact, no section of Indian political opinion has so far
stepped forward to foment a feeling of mass hostility towards China's
ally in the international alignment of forces. The feelings of our
people at large as well as the relations of our Government have till now
continued to be more or less normal so far as Russia is concerned. No
doubt, the extreme forms of enthusiasm expressed earlier have tended to
decline over a period of time. But people who entertain any serious
apprehensions about Russia are few and far between.

Small wonder, therefore, that the politically informed opinion inside
the country should still be debating the question whether India should
continue to cultivate friendship for Russia as a solution of her
difficulties with China, one way or the other, or move decisively
towards America as an insurance against an eventual showdown. The
Government of India is, on the whole, still sticking to its previous
policy of friendship for Russia, though its earlier enthusiasm for
everything Russian has declined in a marked degree, while its impeccable
hostility towards America has become increasingly diluted even in the
face of American insolence. But there are persistent misgivings in the
minds of many patriotic people that, having failed to enter into an
alliance with America in the meanwhile, India may find herself
friendless in the event of a war with China. It is felt by these people
that Russia is surely not going to quarrel with China over the latter's
quarrel with India, and that the timing of a burst-up between the two
communist countries may not suit the strategy of India's defence.

The result of all this shilly-shallying has been a sense of confusion
amounting to callousness which ill-behoves a nation standing face to
face with a calamitous situation. In the absence of a clear vision and
all that follows from it, India has not been able to give any positive
shape either to her military preparations and dispositions or to her
foreign policy pursuits, so that if a showdown is forced upon her in the
near future she is sure to be caught napping. The Government of India
has not been able to make progress beyond a series of protest notes and
an intermittent show of strong language against the aggressor. And the
public is not at all sure which way to shape and project its agitation
for a suitable change in Government policy. The total scene is one of
paralysis in which hopes and fears are inextricably mixed up in one
prevailing national mood of doing nothing and waiting like weaklings
till some decisions are dictated by the onrush of world events.

  
II

Now, the first thing that strikes a serious observer of the political
scene in India at present is her hopeful though helpless dependence on
international developments, none of which she is in a position to force
or frustrate by throwing into the scales her own strength. There is a
blind belief in India's political mind that India is too valuable for
the forces of world democracy to be allowed to go down under the heels
of a communist aggressor. There is also a cowardly calculation on the
part of what passes for expert political opinion, particularly in
circles close to the Government of India, that Russia is too jealous of
China's growing strength to remain a silent spectator and permit her
rival in the international communist camp to gobble up India all by
herself. It hardly occurs to anyone in places of power and prestige and
public responsibility that nothing can be more pathetic than a modern
nation of four hundred million people staking her whole future on
whatever little or great interest the Big Powers may be inclined to have
at any time in the preservation of her independent identity.

That is not to say that India should shut her eyes towards international
developments outside her borders, or that she should refuse to turn such
developments to her own advantage. India should, on the contrary, be
watchful of every turn and twist in the international situation, and
profit from all available opportunities to improve her position
vis-a-vis China. Self-preservation is the first law of life, and so long
as India is not strong enough to protect herself against aggression, she
has no moral right to transgress that law out of any consideration,
idealistic or otherwise. But, at the same time, India has to realise
that no amount of good fortune that may flow to her as a result of
fortuitous developments abroad can ever be a substitute for her own
positive strength to ward off or, if need be, deliver decisive blows in
the domain of international diplomacy or mobilisation of military might.
India will, go down in history as an imbecile nation if she stakes her
future only on clever calculations about international developments, and
fails to build up and maintain that minimum of military power without
which no nation, big or small, has ever counted for anything on the
chess-board of world politics.

In the absence of such a perspective, the entire controversy regarding a
correct policy in the face of continued Chinese aggression has reached
the limits of the ludicrous. On the one hand, we have a Government which
denounces as warmongers all those who advise that this battle of protest
notes should stop at some stage, and that India should seriously think
of doing something which can register her strength of will in the mind
of a determined adversary. On the other hand, we have some small groups,
particularly in the opposition parties, who are currently agitating that
our army should be permitted to drive out the Chinese intruders, and
that India should straightaway reverse her present policy of taking no
risk of a wider conflict. Both sides are equally blind to the realities
and requirements of the situation.

The plea that our Government puts forth in defence of its policy of
pouring out protest notes, is that we are still not strong enough to
risk a trial of strength with a massively militarised enemy. And taken
by itself, this plea cannot be easily brushed aside by anyone who has
some acquaintance with the facts of our military position. China has not
only a larger armed force as well as an initial advantage over us in so
far as she started the build-up at a time when we were fast asleep under
the soporiphic of *panchashil*; she also has in her possession a
superior air force which can operate from a number of first class bases
in Tibet and pulverise in no time the entire industrial heartland of
India in the northern provinces. It would indeed be sheer folly on our
part to risk a showdown with China so long as we have not matched her
build-up with our own and, what is more important, before we are in a
position not only to intercept Chinese bombers at our very borders but
also to deliver blows that tell on China's own industrial network.

But that does not seem to be the reason why our Government has been
holding up action all these days. Our present state of weakness seems to
be, for our Government, only a cover for doing nothing beyond marking
time till some chance turn in international events tips the scales
against China and in our own favour. The Government has so far betrayed
practically no intention of changing our state of weakness into a state
of strength. It frittered away five years in a conspiracy of silence
over what China had been doing since the middle of 1954. It admitted the
truth only when it was forced to do so by the fast moving events after
the sack of Tibet in 1959. And even after that, it has failed to take
the nation into confidence about dimensions of the likely disaster and
give a call to the people to get prepared for all eventualities. A
tremendous lot could have been done during these three or four years to
redress the military imbalance and discipline the nation to face and
fight a fierce enemy if the worst came to the worst.

The small group which agitates for "action now" is sure that a show of
strength will not lead to a general war between India and China. They
suspect that, in all probability, China is playing a bluff and probing
how weak-willed or determined India is at present. They advocate,
therefore, that China's bluff should be called. In their estimation,
that is the best way of avoiding a war now as well as in the long run.
India should, they say, better take a chance of avoiding a war at
present by a positive show of strength than make it inevitable in the
long run as a result of unilateral appeasement. They add that if it does
not turn out to be a bluff and becomes an all-out war, India should go
ahead and fight it out before China gets further entrenched and is in a
position to move armoured divisions into the arena. There is, they say,
as much chance of India winning this war as of China winning it. Due to
the peculiar nature of the Himalayan terrain, they argue, the over-all
military imbalance between India and China is not of practical
importance and if the issues are joined immediately China is not in a
position to move into the arena more infantry divisions than India can
do from her own side.

There may be some substance in this chain of arguments, but it is
certainly mixed up with a lot of ill-informed enthusiasm. To start with,
the entire argument hinges on an altogether unproved hunch that China
may be bluffing and may quietly take a beating at isolated points where
she has penetrated or is trying to probe into Indian territory. It is
assumed without any fuller finding of facts that India today is quite
capable of carrying out such an operation immediately and simultaneously
at all points of her encounter with the adversary. All in all, we are
asked to shut our eyes to the wider implications of a war with China. It
is assumed arbitrarily that such a war will not involve the use of air
force and remain confined to infantry action in the mountain fastnesses.
India today is supposed to be capable of fighting and winning such a war
though no grounds are given in support of such a supposition.

Apart from the inner inconsistencies and unwarranted assumptions
contained in this reasoning as a whole, its perspective of India's
long-term policy is more or less out of focus. The long-term intention
of India's policy should not be to risk and wage a war successfully. On
the contrary, India should do everything in her power to avoid a war and
wait and work for peace in collaboration with whatever international
effort in this direction may be afoot at any time. No doubt, India must
be fully prepared to wage a war and win it in case it is thrust upon her
in spite of her best efforts to preserve peace. But India should never
take chances and provoke a war by miscalculation about the intentions of
the enemy. It may sound very brave to talk of taking a war in our
stride. But it is the limit of irresponsibility to miss the point that a
war in our times is always likely to become a catastrophe beyond all
human calculation.

  
III

This, then, is the proper perspective in which India's future policy has
to be planned-preservation of peace with China so far as possible and
preparedness to fight and finish successfully any war that may be forced
on us. This is the perspective which must first emerge in the political
mind of India before she takes into account any international
developments. And the emergence of this perspective does not depend upon
any outward circumstance, either in the international arena or in the
political scene at home. Primarily, it has to be an effort of national
will - an intellectual effort to walk out of the welter of sloganised
sentimentalism and into the sunshine of a world vision which relates the
highest type of idealism to the hardest of all realities; an emotional
effort to look at ourselves not through the eyes of a national press
preoccupied with panegyrics but through the eyes of other nations, big
and small, around and away from ourselves; and, above all, a moral
effort to be able to stand for truth, justice, equity, friendship,
loyalty, honour, and international rule of law instead of confusing all
these values with the wishes or whims of Big Powers, as we have been
doing hitherto.

Let us remember that India is not a small nation like Nepal or
Afghanistan or Switzerland to plead that no amount of strength she
builds up out of her own resources will ever have much of a meaning in
the world balance of military power. Let us remember that India is the
second biggest country in terms of manpower and one of the four or five
foremost nations in terms of industrial and military potential. If India
looks into herself, her innermost soul, and senses the sources of her
own intrinsic strength, she can become a formidable power capable of
preserving not only her own independence and integrity but also of
contributing to the cause of world peace. But if she fails to awaken to
her own innate potentialities and persists in harbouring the illusion
that her own frontiers as well as world peace will be preserved
automatically by the competing interests of the Big Powers, she will
surely fail and betray the trust which her hoary history has laid on her
shoulders.

Meanwhile, we can analyse the international alignment of forces and find
out for ourselves as to who between the USA and the USSR is likely to be
our ally in the context of our quarrel with China. It is high time that
we stopped this stock-taking of world politics in terms of professions
made by the two Big Powers about their own policies and programmes, as
we have been used to doing till today. It is high time that we took a
close look at contemporary history and formed our own objective estimate
of the goals which these Big Powers seem to have set for themselves, as
also of the means and methods they employ for achieving those goals. The
foreign policy of India, whatever be its own inspirations and aims, has
to be projected on the canvass of world realities as they exist at
present and are likely to be in future, rather than on wishful thinking
about what those realities should be.

Ever since Comrade Zhdanov of Soviet Russia divided the world into two
irreconcilably opposed camps-the camp of "socialism and peace" led by
the Soviet Union, and the camp of "imperialism and war" led by the
United States of America-in his Warsaw Speech in the Autumn of 1947,
most of us have been inclined to take such a division for granted. Some
of us may have changed the labels and described the USA as leader of the
camp of "democracy and freedom", and the Soviet Union as leader of the
camp of "totalitarianism and slavery". But the basic belief that the
world has become divided into two camps between which an ideological
strife is the primary inspiration for manoeuvres of international power
politics, has sunk very deep into the minds of most of us. And it is
this basic belief which has been, consciously or unconsciously,
colouring the greater part of our thinking about political issues
including the foreign policy of India.

Now, it can be admitted that till very recently the Soviet claim that
she is leader of the camp of international Communism has been quite
true. There *has* existed, till recently, such a monolithic entity as
the camp of international Communism and its head as well as heart has
been located in the Kremlin at Moscow. The Soviet Union has been, in
effect, in more or less complete control of nations that have been taken
over by communist parties, no matter whether she exercised that control
through ideological indoctrination, or through use of brute force, or
through a combination of both devices. There has also been an
international communist party line projecting a single world-view and a
single world strategy, proclaimed and practised by every communist party
of the world irrespective of the national situation in which the
communist party concerned has had to exist and function.

But the same cannot be said about the other camp-the camp of
"imperialism" or "democracy" or whatever else one may like, to call it.
The monolithic communist camp has all along been faced by a veritable
mob of independent, semi-independent, and slave countries-some of them
big or powerful and others small or powerless-amongst which there has
not been anything in common except a cynical seeking of narrow national
interests. Whenever a nation has been threatened by communist
intervention from outside or a communist subversion from within, it has
cried for help from non-communist nations, particularly America, and
started seeing and advocating the need for an international
anticommunist alliance which should strive to contain or conquer the
communist camp. But whatever nations have remained free from such a
threat, they have seen no harm in collaborating with Communism within
its own borders as well as abroad, feeling all the time that it is too
clever or too strong to be undermined in the process.

As regards the leadership of this so-called anti-communist camp, though
the United States of America has all along laid claim to it, she has
seldom lived upto her profession in practice. If we collect all relevant
facts from the history of nations that have gone down in the face of
communist onslaught, we can construct a pattern of American policy which
has been fairly constant.

To start with, America encourages and sides with the communist movement
inside a country and invariably uses her material resources as well as
her propaganda power to strengthen and extend that movement. If there is
any one thing which America hates from the bottom of her modern heart,
it is the native nationalism of a country which alone is, in the last
analysis, the armoury on which that nation can count in the face of the
communist menace. America denounces that native nationalism by every
method at her disposal and tries her utmost to see it defeated at the
earliest, not only by propping up its communist enemy but also by
pouring into the country concerned her own avalanche of an animal
culture. America's hatred for whatever anti-communist movement may come
up spontaneously from within a country, has to be known in order to be
believed. The army of American scribes and spies let loose over the
world lampoons and lambasts the native anti-communist of every sort,
while enormous amounts of American money are spent in order to raise and
maintain a motley crowd of mercenary "anti-communists" controlled and
manoeuvred by the most unintelligent of all intelligence services - the
Counter-Intelligence Agency (CIA) in Washington.

In the next stage, as soon as a country is caught in the communist flood
and starts sliding towards the Iron Curtain, America uses its
helplessness as an opportunity to reduce it to the status of a slave to
be ordered about and abused and maligned according to every passing mood
of her own massive but mad press at home. Finally, that country, mauled
as it has been by the communist man-eater in the meanwhile, is sold over
to the communist camp in the name of saving world peace or some other
such excuse. The entire operation is given a Finishing touch by a White
Paper or a Senate Hearing in which chest-beating over her own mistakes
is mixed up with self-congratulation for accepting the inevitable and
extricating America out of a hopeless situation which no one could have
helped.

That is the record of America from Eastern Europe to China to Korea to
Viet Nam to Laos. It is the record of a nation sick with an incurable
malady - treachery and foul play towards her friends, and a fawning and
cringing fondness for her foes. If some nations in Europe and Asia have
survived the plague of American friendship, it is simply because they
had within them greater resources of inner strength than could be sapped
by America. If America has failed to sell some of her friends in the
international stock market of cowardice and cupidity, it is not because
she had some scruples about it but simply because the nations concerned
asserted themselves in time and saved themselves. It is, therefore,
arrant nonsense to say that America is leader of any anti-communist camp
in the arena of world politics.

It will be the most disastrous day in India's long history if she ever
came to depend on America either due to a mistaken belief that America
can be her friend in time of need, or due to an overt situation in which
she is driven to the wall on account of her own lack of will and has no
course left open except that of walking into the American trap. Let no
one in India befool oneself with the hope that America will be willing
or able to save her from calamity if she gets caught in one. American
policy will be true to its pattern again, not because there is a
conscious calculation behind it, but because there is the whole complex
of American culture and thought and way of life as its ultimate source
and support. Conscious calculation can be changed, but a culture cannot
be cured except over a period of time which is irrelevant in the present
context.

  
IV

But that is not to say that India should not seek and obtain America's
assistance - moral, material, military, and diplomatic - whenever and in
whatever degree such assistance is available. America is an arsenal of
material strength from which India can pick up practically everything
she needs for her short as well as long-term build-up. But that arsenal
is accessible only to those who are capable of showing some strength of
will and, above all, a sense of self-respect in their dealings with
America. India will be able to avail herself of American might and
material resources exactly in proportion to the strength she builds up
from within, particularly the strength of a national character which
knows no compromise on basic principles. That is the line which India
should adopt in all her relations with America, present or future. While
India should give up repeating, parrot-like, those slogans about America
which she has borrowed from the communist camp-including the slogan that
America is an inevitable ally of nations trying to counter Communism
-she should learn from the experience of other nations, particularly
Nationalist China, in their relations with America.

The one lesson which the experience of every nation that has gone down
with the help of America is that India should never burn her boats with
the Soviet Union. China would not have been what she is today if the
Chinese Nationalists had not shown such consistent loyalty towards
America which, consequently, felt free to sell them down the drain. Viet
Nam and Laos would not have been in the plight in which they find
themselves today if they had not shown such helpless dependence upon
American aid and if they had bargained for an honourable settlement with
the Soviet Union as well. India should take note and refuse to follow in
the footsteps of these nations, whatever the shape and size of the
emergency she encounters at present.

No doubt, it is very difficult to deal with the Soviet Union which has
based its strategy so far on Lenin's famous dictum - "we support Mr.
Henderson as the rope supports the hanged man". No doubt, the Soviet
Union too has her own deadly designs and dirty methods to force nation
after nation behind the Iron Curtain through the instrumentality of her
communist parties. No doubt, a country should be extremely cautious in
bargaining with the Soviet Union and in no case an extension of the
communist network within its borders should be a part of that bargain.
But, after all is said and done, the Soviet Union is still easier to
deal with in terms of a consciously conceived policy because she herself
has a consciously conceived strategy behind all her world operations.
The Soviet Union at any time is managed by one mind with which a
purposeful dialogue is possible, unlike in the case of America which
thinks and moves like a mob all the time.

Fortunately for India, the Soviet world strategy at present is showing
some cracks through which we can peep in and explore the possibility of
a purposeful dialogue. It can be assumed in all certainty that the
international communist camp is no more the monolith it had been till
recently, and that Russia and China are seriously at loggerheads over a
number of issues including the issue of leadership inside the communist
camp. Russia is, therefore, and for reasons of her own, not likely to
look favourably on whatever steps the Chinese communists take to
increase their power or prestige in the arena of world politics. On the
contrary, Russia is more likely to try to frustrate such Chinese efforts
till the Chinese surrender and fall in with the Russian Line. There can
be no peace within the communist camp till the supremacy of the Kremlin
over that camp is restored back to its earlier position.

But as it is inconceivable that China can be dealt with by Russia in the
same way as Poland or Czechoslovakia or Hungary were dealt with, the
chances are that the breach between the two will widen with the passing
of each day. India should not hesitate to turn every such breach in the
communist camp to her own advantage, including the offer of arms and
ammunitions from Russia. In exchange, India can very well collaborate
with Russia over those foreign policy issues where Russia happens to be
following a line which is objectively consistent with India's own
foreign policy purposes. But all the time, India should go on building
up and augmenting her own strength so that she may not be outmanoeuvred
by any sudden turn in Sino-Soviet relations.

One such likely turn can be an open breach between Russia and China and
a consequent cold war which both of them may try to heat up on the
peripheries by using such pawns as they can find. Russia will, in that
event, like to push India into a war with China so that China may be
weakened and India softened sufficiently for an eventual takeover by the
Communist Party of India. The Party will, in that event, leap up with
patriotic cries of an immediate showdown with China. We know that the
giant communist machine in this country is quite capable of mobilising
our public opinion for such a mad adventure. We should be consciously
prepared for such an eventuality and refuse to pull any Soviet chestnuts
out of the fire. While we should be prepared to fight a war if one is
forced on us, we should refuse to be pawns in the political game of any
Big Power. The best course will be to keep a careful watch on the
communist movement within the country while we get ready for all
emergencies. That will also enhance our own manoeuvring power and leave
us free to shape and pursue a policy design of our own choosing.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This article was a comment on a bunch of "intellectuals" who
held a seminar in October 1962, in New Delhi, and called upon the
Government of India to plunge into immediate military action China. A
pamphlet, *Action Now*, issued at the end of the seminar pretended that
the "intellectuals" were mature military strategists as well. Two of
their who were the tallest of these "intellectuals" left India the very
next day for taking jobs in U.S. universities, leaving it to me to
translate their *Action Now* into Hindi. They had not thought it fit to
invite me to the seminar. I was not supposed to be an "intellectual". It
was out of regard for personal friendship that I did the translation.
But it left a bad taste in the mouth.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
