---
title: 01 IR part1

---
<div class="Section1">

I

1893-1910

(After thirteen years in England where he received a thoroughly Western
education, Sri Aurobindo returned to India on February 6, 1893, at the
age of twenty.

Bankim Chatterji's Anandamath, which contained “Bande Mataram,” the hymn
to the Motherland, had been published eleven years earlier. Swami
Vivekananda had just come to the end of his first pilgrimage round
India, and was preparing to sail for America. But it was going to take
another dozen years for their call to their countrymen to find
expression in the political field. For the present, the eight-year-old
Indian National Congress, whose members were mostly drawn from the
Anglicized upper classes of society, had full faith in British
fair-mindedness and the “providential character” of British rule in
India, and year after year swore its “unswerving allegiance to the
British crown”; it was content with submitting petitions which were
simply ignored by the Colonial rulers. There was another twelve years to
go before the start of the open struggle for freedom in 1905, and
twenty-five years before Mahatma Gandhi's entry on the political scene
in 1918.

Sri Aurobindo was twenty-one when he wrote a series of nine articles,
“New Lamps for Old”, in the Indu Prakash, a Marathi-English Bombay
daily; in these articles, which had to be stopped following pressures on
the newspaper's editor, Sri Aurobindo took stock of the prevailing
situation and launched into a detailed and forceful criticism of the
“mendicant policy” of the Congress. A few extracts:)

August 7, 1893

        We cannot afford to raise any institution to the rank of a
fetish. To do so would be simply to become the slaves of our own
machinery.

\*\*\*

August 21, 1893

        Our actual enemy is not any force exterior to ourselves, but our
own crying weaknesses, our cowardice, our selfishness, our hypocrisy,
our purblind sentimentalism.

\*\*\*

August 28, 1893

        I say, of the Congress, then, this—that its aims are mistaken,
that the spirit in which it proceeds towards their accomplishment is not
a spirit of sincerity and whole-heartedness, and that the methods it has
chosen are not the right methods, and the leaders in whom it trusts, not
the right sort of men to be leaders;—in brief, that we are at present
the blind led, if not by the blind, at any rate by the one-eyed.

\*\*\*

December 4, 1893

        To play with baubles is our ambition, not to deal with grave
questions in a spirit of serious energy. But while we are playing with
baubles, with our Legislative Councils, our Simultaneous
Examinations,[\[1\]](#_ftn1) our ingenious schemes for separating the
judicial from the executive functions,—while we, I say, are finessing
about trifles, the waters of the great deep are being stirred and that
surging chaos of the primitive man over which our civilised societies
are superimposed on a thin crust of convention, is being strangely and
ominously agitated.

\*\*\*

(On his return to India, Sri Aurobindo joined the Baroda State Service;
from 1897 to early 1906 he taught French and English at the Baroda
College, eventually becoming its principal. These years gave him a
first-hand experience of the dismal condition of education in India and
made him feel an acute need for a true national education.)

Early 1900s (?)

        If the physical training it \[the Indian University system\]
provides is contemptible and the moral training nil, the mental training
is also meagre in quantity and worthless in quality.... In order for a
student to get a degree let us make it absolutely necessary that he
shall have a good education. If a worthless education is sufficient in
order to secure this object and a good education quite unessential, it
is obvious that the student will not incur great trouble and diversion
of energy in order to acquire what he feels to be unnecessary. But
change this state of things, make culture and true science essential and
the same interested motive which now makes him content with a bad
education will then compel him to strive after culture and true
science.... We in India have become so barbarous that we send our
children to school with the grossest utilitarian motive unmixed with any
disinterested desire for knowledge; but the education we receive is
itself responsible for this....

        It is a fundamental and deplorable error by which we in this
country have confused education with the acquisition of knowledge....
Amount of knowledge is in itself not of first importance, but to make
the best use of what we know. The easy assumption of our educationists
that we have only to supply the mind with a smattering of facts in each
department of knowledge and the mind can be trusted to develop itself
and take its own suitable road is contrary to science, contrary to human
experience.... Much as we have lost as a nation, we have always
preserved our intellectual alertness, quickness and originality; but
even this last gift is threatened by our University system, and if it
goes, it will be the beginning of irretrievable degradation and final
extinction.

        The very first step in reform must therefore be to revolutionise
the whole aim and method of our education.^(1 [\[2\]](#_ftn2))

\*

        Indian scholarship ... must clearly have one advantage \[over
the European\], an intimate feeling of the language, a sensitiveness ...
which the European cannot hope to possess unless he sacrifices his sense
of racial superiority.... For to the European Sanskrit words are no more
than dead counters which he can play with and throw as he likes into
places the most unnatural or combinations the most monstrous; to the
Hindu they are living things the very soul of whose temperament he
understands and whose possibilities he can judge to a hair. That with
these advantages Indian scholars have not been able to form themselves
into a great and independent school of learning is due to two causes,
the miserable scantiness of the mastery in Sanskrit provided by our
universities, crippling to all but born scholars, and their lack of a
sturdy independence which makes us over-ready to defer to European
authority.²

\*\*\*

(From 1900 onward, Sri Aurobindo began contacting revolutionary groups
in Maharashtra and Bengal, and tried to coordinate their action with the
help of his brother, Barindra Kumar Ghose, and Jatindranath Banerjee; at
Sri Aurobindo's initiative, P. Mitter, Surendranath Tagore, Chittaranjan
Das and Sister Nivedita soon formed the first secret council for
revolutionary activities in Bengal. Although an effective coordination
between the various groups remained elusive, some of them, such as P.
Mitter's Anusilan Samiti, played a considerable part in spreading the
Nationalist ideal. Their chief weapon was the establishment of centres
in numerous towns and villages, where young men were given intellectual,
moral and physical training, and were inspired to work for India's
liberation.

Around this time, Sri Aurobindo wrote Bhawani Mandir, a pamphlet “for
the revolutionary preparation of the country.” Thousands of copies of it
were distributed clandestinely. A few excerpts:)

1905

        India, the ancient Mother, is indeed striving to be reborn,
striving with agony and tears, but she strives in vain. What ails her,
she who is after all so vast and might be so strong? There is surely
some enormous defect, something vital is wanting in us, nor is it
difficult to lay our finger on the spot. We have all things else, but we
are empty of strength, void of energy. We have abandoned Shakti and are
therefore abandoned by Shakti. The Mother is not in our hearts, in our
brains, in our arms.

        The wish to be reborn we have in abundance, there is no
deficiency there. How many attempts have been made, how many movements
have been begun, in religion, in society, in politics! But the same fate
has overtaken or is preparing to overtake them all. They flourish for a
moment, then the impulse wanes, the fire dies out, and if they endure,
it is only as empty shells, forms from which the Brahma has gone or in
which it lies overpowered with Tamas and inert. Our beginnings are
mighty, but they have neither sequel nor fruit.

        Now we are beginning in another direction; we have started a
great industrial movement which is to enrich and regenerate an
impoverished land. Untaught by experience, we do not perceive that this
movement must go the way of all the others, unless we first seek the one
essential thing, unless we acquire strength.

        Is it knowledge that is wanting? We Indians, born and bred in a
country where Jnana has been stored and accumulated since the race
began, bear about in us the inherited gains of many thousands of
years.... But it is a dead knowledge, a burden under which we are bowed,
a poison which is corroding us, rather than as it should be a staff to
support our feet and a weapon in our hands; for this is the nature of
all great things that when they are not used or are ill used, they turn
upon the bearer and destroy him....

        Is it love, enthusiasm, Bhakti that is wanting? These are
ingrained in the Indian nature, but in the absence of Shakti we cannot
concentrate, we cannot direct, we cannot even preserve it. Bhakti is the
leaping flame, Shakti is the fuel. If the fuel is scanty how long can
the fire endure?...

        The deeper we look, the more we shall be convinced that the one
thing wanting, which we must strive to acquire before all others, is
strength—strength physical, strength mental, strength moral, but above
all strength spiritual which is the one inexhaustible and imperishable
source of all the others. If we have strength everything else will be
added to us easily and naturally. In the absence of strength we are like
men in a dream who have hands but cannot seize or strike, who have feet
but cannot run....

        If India is to survive, she must be made young again. Rushing
and billowing streams of energy must be poured into her; her soul must
become, as it was in the old times, like the surges, vast, puissant,
calm or turbulent at will, an ocean of action or of force.

        Many of us, utterly overcome by Tamas, the dark and heavy demon
of inertia, are saying nowadays that it is impossible, that India is
decayed, bloodless and lifeless, too weak ever to recover; that our race
is doomed to extinction. It is a foolish and idle saying. No man or
nation need be weak unless he chooses, no man or nation need perish
unless he deliberately chooses extinction.

        For what is a nation? What is our mother-country? It is not a
piece of earth, nor a figure of speech, nor a fiction of the mind. It is
a mighty Shakti, composed of the Shaktis of all the millions of units
that make up the nation, just as Bhawani Mahisha Mardini sprang into
being from the Shakti of all the millions of gods assembled in one mass
of force and welded into unity. The Shakti we call India, Bhawani
Bharati, is the living unity of the Shaktis of three hundred million
people,[\[3\]](#_ftn3) but she is inactive, imprisoned in the magic
circle of Tamas, the self-indulgent inertia and ignorance of her
sons....

        We have to create strength where it did not exist before; we
have to change our natures, and become new men with new hearts, to be
born again.... We need a nucleus of men in whom the Shakti is developed
to its uttermost extent, in whom it fills every corner of the
personality and overflows to fertilise the earth. These, having the fire
of Bhawani in their hearts and brains, will go forth and carry the flame
to every nook and cranny of our land.

\*\*\*

(From a letter Sri Aurobindo wrote in Bengali to his wife, Mrinalini
Devi, in which he tried to explain to her the call he felt to work for
his country's freedom; this letter was seized by the police a few years
later and produced as evidence in the Alipore Bomb Case.)

August 30, 1905

        While others look upon their country as an inert piece of
matter—a few meadows and fields, forests and hills and rivers—I look
upon my country as the Mother. I adore Her, I worship Her as the Mother.
What would a son do if a demon sat on his mother's breast and started
sucking her blood?... I know I have the strength to deliver this fallen
race. It is not physical strength—I am not going to fight with sword or
gun—but the strength of knowledge....³

\*\*\*

(Alarmed by the rising force of Bengali feeling against British rule,
Lord Curzon, the Viceroy, partitioned Bengal in 1905. This faithful
application of the “divide-and-rule” policy aimed both at breaking the
growing political agitation in Bengal and at using the Muslim-dominated
East Bengal as the thin end of a wedge between Hindus and Muslims—a
policy that was to culminate in the partition of India forty years
later.

Bengal responded to its partition by massive and unanimous protests, in
which many personalities took part, such as Rabindranath Tagore,
Surendranath Banerji, Bepin Chandra Pal, Ashwini Kumar Dutt.... The
ideal of Swadeshi, which called for the boycott of British goods, spread
widely.

In March, 1906, Barin Ghose with a few others started the fiery Bengali
weekly, the Yugantar, to which Sri Aurobindo contributed several
articles. In August, B. C. Pal launched the famous English daily, the
Bande Mataram; Sri Aurobindo joined it and soon took up its editorship,
side by side with his behind-the-scenes activities with, among others,
B. G. Tilak and Lala Lajpat Rai.

Day after day till May, 1908, Sri Aurobindo used the pages of the Bande
Mataram to breathe inspiration, force and clarity of purpose into the
nascent Nationalist movement; his first preoccupation, in the face of
fierce opposition from the British authorities, the self-righteous
Anglo-Indian press and most of the Congress Moderates, was in his own
words “to declare openly for complete and absolute independence as the
aim of political action in India and to insist on this persistently in
the pages of the journal; \[Sri Aurobindo\] was the first politician in
India who had the courage to do this in public and he was immediately
successful. The \[Nationalist\] party took up the word Swaraj to express
its own ideal of independence and it soon spread everywhere.... The
greatest thing done in those years was the creation of a new spirit in
the country.”⁴ The following passages are from the Bande Mataram.)

September 1, 1906

        The true policy of the Congress movement should have been from
the beginning to gather together under its flag all the elements of
strength that exist in this huge country. The Brahman Pandit and the
Mahomedan Maulavi, the caste organisation and the trade-union, the
labourer and the artisan, the coolie at his work and the peasant in his
field, none of these should have been left out of the sphere of our
activities. For each is a strength, a unit of force; and in politics the
victory is to the side which can marshal the largest and most closely
serried number of such units and handle them most skilfully, not to
those who can bring forward the best arguments or talk the most
eloquently.

        But the Congress started from the beginning with a misconception
of the most elementary facts of politics and with its eyes turned
towards the British Government and away from the people.

\*\*\*

September 4, 1906

        We objected so strongly to this measure \[Bengal's Partition\]
because it was calculated to strike a serious blow at the political
power of the Bengalee-speaking race. Our second objection was that it
was professedly wanted by the Government to create a Mahomedan province
with Dacca as its capital, and the evident object of it was to sow
discord between the Hindus and the Mahomedans in a Province that had
never known it in the whole history of the present British
connection.... There is in \[the present\] agitation a consciousness of
a new strength, the quickening of a new life, the inspiration of a new
ideal. This agitation is not an agitation merely against Partition or
against any other particular measure of the Government.... The
attainment of absolute national autonomy,—it is this alone that will
settle down this movement....[\[4\]](#_ftn4)

        The idea that by encouraging Mahomedan rowdyism, the present
agitation may be put down, is preposterous; and those who cherish this
notion forget that the bully is neither the strongest nor the bravest of
men; and that because the self-restraint of the Hindu, miscalled
cowardice, has been a prominent feature of his national character, he is
absolutely incapable of striking straight and striking hard when any
sacred situation demands this. Nor has it been proved even in recent
British-concocted disputes between Hindus and Mahomedans in different
parts of India, that the mild Hindu is so absolutely helpless and
incapable of defending his rights and liberties as he is painted to be
by his foreign enemies.

\*\*\*

September 13, 1906

        The idea that the election of a Mahomedan President will
conciliate the anti-Congress Mahomedans is a futility which has been
repeatedly exposed by experience.

\*

        Ever since the birth of the Congress, those who have been in the
leadership of this great National Movement have persistently denied the
general public in the country the right of determining what shall and
what shall not be said or done on their behalf and in their name. The
delegates have been gathered from all parts of the country, not to
deliberate upon public matters, but simply to lend their support to the
decisions that had already been arrived at by secret conclaves of half a
dozen men.

\*\*\*

December 31, 1906

        The leaders can only deserve reverence by acting in the spirit
of the chief servants of their country and not in the spirit of masters
and dictators.

\*\*\*

April 5, 1907

        Politics is the work of the Kshatriya and it is the virtues of
the Kshatriya we must develop if we are to be morally fit for freedom.

\*\*\*

April 8, 1907

        We reiterate with all the emphasis we can command that the
Kshatriya of old must again take his rightful position in our social
polity to discharge the first and foremost duty of defending its
interests. The brain is impotent without the right arm of strength.

\*\*\*

April 13, 1907

        We should be absolutely unsparing in our attack on whatever
obstructs the growth of the nation, and never be afraid to call a spade
a spade. Excessive good nature, *chakshu lajja* \[the desire to be
always pleasant and polite\], will never do in serious politics. Respect
of persons must always give place to truth and conscience; and the
demand that we should be silent because of the age or past services of
our opponents, is politically immoral and unsound. Open attack,
unsparing criticism, the severest satire, the most wounding irony, are
all methods perfectly justifiable and indispensable in politics. We have
strong things to say; let us say them strongly; we have stern things to
do; let us do them sternly. But there is always a danger of strength
degenerating into violence and sternness into ferocity, and that should
be avoided so far as it is humanly possible.

\*\*\*

April 16, 1907

        There are periods in the history of the world when the unseen
Power that guides its destinies seems to be filled with a consuming
passion for change and a strong impatience of the old. The Great Mother,
the Adya Shakti, has resolved to take the nations into Her hand and
shape them anew. These are periods of rapid destruction and energetic
creation, filled with the sound of cannon and the trampling of armies,
the crash of great downfalls, and the turmoil of swift and violent
revolutions; the world is thrown into the smelting pot and comes out in
a new shape and with new features. They are periods when the wisdom of
the wise is confounded and the prudence of the prudent turned into a
laughing-stock....

\*

        The supreme service of Bankim \[Chandra Chatterji\] to his
nation was that he gave us the vision of our Mother.... It is not till
the Motherland reveals herself to the eye of the mind as something more
than a stretch of earth or a mass of individuals, it is not till she
takes shape as a great Divine and Maternal Power in a form of beauty
that can dominate the mind and seize the heart that ... the patriotism
that works miracles and saves a doomed nation is born....

        It was thirty-two years ago that Bankim wrote his great song and
few listened; but in a sudden moment of awakening from long delusions
the people of Bengal looked round for the truth and in a fated moment
somebody sang Bande Mataram. The Mantra had been given and in a single
day a whole people had been converted to the religion of patriotism. The
Mother had revealed herself.

\*\*\*

April 23, 1907

        Each nation must practise the political creed which is the most
suited to its temperament and circumstances; for that is the best for it
which leads most surely and completely to national liberty and national
self-realisation.

\*\*\*

May 11, 1907

        In this grave crisis of our destinies let not our people lose
their fortitude or suffer stupefaction and depression to seize upon and
unnerve their souls. The fight in which we are engaged is not like the
wars of old in which when the king or leader fell, the army fled. The
King whom we follow to the wars today, is our own Motherland, the sacred
and imperishable; the leader of our onward march is the Almighty
Himself, that element within and without us whom sword cannot slay, nor
water drown, nor fire burn, nor exile divide from us, nor a prison
confine.

        ...

        Let there be no fainting of heart and no depression, and also
let there be no unforeseeing fury, no blindly-striking madness. We are
at the beginning of a time of terrible trial. The passage is not to be
easy, the crown is not to be cheaply earned. India is going down into
the valley of the shadow of death, into a great horror of darkness and
suffering. Let us realise that what we are now suffering, is a small
part of what we shall have to suffer, and work in that knowledge, with
resolution, without hysteria.... The first need at the present moment is
courage, a courage which knows not how to flinch or shrink.

\*\*\*

May 23, 1907

        Where the will of a higher Power is active in a great upheaval,
no individual is indispensable.

\*\*\*

May 28, 1907

        We have to fill the minds of our boys from childhood with the
idea of the country, and present them with that idea at every turn and
make their whole young life a lesson in the practice of the virtues
which afterwards go to make the patriot and the citizen. If we do not
attempt this, we may as well give up our desire to create an Indian
nation altogether; for without such a discipline nationalism,
patriotism, regeneration are mere words and ideas which can never become
a part of the very soul of the nation and never therefore a great
realised fact. Mere academical teaching of patriotism is of no avail.

\*\*\*

June 7, 1907

        What India needs especially at this moment is the aggressive
virtues, the spirit of soaring idealism, bold creation, fearless
resistance, courageous attack; of the passive tamasic spirit of inertia
we have already too much. We need to cultivate another training and
temperament, another habit of mind. We would apply to the present
situation the vigorous motto of Danton, that what we need, what we
should learn above all things is to dare and again to dare and still to
dare.

\*\*\*

June 19, 1907

        Apart from the natural attachment which every man has to his
country, its literature, its traditions, its customs and usages,
patriotism has an additional stimulus in the acknowledged excellence of
a national civilisation. If Britons love England with all her faults,
why should we fail to love India whose faults were whittled down to an
irreducible minimum till foreign conquests threw the whole society out
of gear? But instead of being dominated by the natural ambition of
carrying the banner of such a civilisation all over the world, we are
unable to maintain its integrity in its own native home. This is
betraying a trust. This is unworthiness of the worst type. We have not
been able to add anything to this precious bequest; on the contrary we
have been keeping ourselves and generations yet unborn from a full
enjoyment of their lawful heritage....

        According to Sidgwick,[\[5\]](#_ftn5) physical expansion
proceeds from a desire for spiritual expansion and history also supports
the assertion. But why should not India then be the first power in the
world? Who else has the undisputed right to extend spiritual sway over
the world? This was Swami Vivekananda's plan of campaign. India can once
more be made conscious of her greatness by an overmastering sense of the
greatness of her spirituality. This sense of greatness is the main
feeder of all patriotism. This only can put an end to all
self-depreciation and generate a burning desire to recover the lost
ground.

\*\*\*

June 22, 1907

        He \[a leader in Bengal\] has not the qualities of a
politician—robustness, backbone, the ability to will a certain course of
action and the courage to carry it out.... No man who shrinks from
struggle or is appalled by the thought of aggression can hope to seize
and lead the wild forces that are rising to the surface in
twentieth-century India.

\*\*\*

July 3, 1907

        The East is more ancient by many thousands of years than the
West, but a greater length of years does not necessarily imply a more
advanced age.... Asia is long-lived, Europe brief, ephemeral. Asia is in
everything hugely mapped, immense and grandiose in its motions, and its
life-periods are measured accordingly. Europe lives by centuries, Asia
by millenniums. Europe is parcelled out in nations, Asia in
civilisations. The whole of Europe forms only one civilisation with a
common, derived and largely second-hand culture; Asia supports three
civilisations, each of them original and of the soil. Everything in
Europe is small, rapid and short-lived; she has not the secret of
immortality.

\*\*\*

July 25, 1907

        Spiritual power in the present creates material power in the
future and for this reason we always find that if it is material force
which dominates the present, it is spiritual which moulds and takes
possession of the future....

        Since the spiritual life of India is the first necessity of the
world's future, we fight not only for our own political and spiritual
freedom but for the spiritual emancipation of the human race.... For it
is not among an enslaved, degraded and perishing people that the Rishis
and great spirits can long continue to be born.

\*\*\*

*  
*

(On August 15, 1906, a few days after the start of the Bande Mataram,
the Bengal National College had opened in Calcutta with Sri Aurobindo as
its Principal; it was one of the first experiments in the search for a
true national education. Its foundation had been made possible by the
generous financial assistance of Subodh Mullick, one of Sri Aurobindo's
collaborators in his secret action. In spite of his charge of the Bande
Mataram, Sri Aurobindo found time to teach Indian history and geography,
English history, political science, as well as French, German and
English....

A year later, on August 16, 1907, the British government, alarmed by the
spread and impact of the Bande Mataram, arrested Sri Aurobindo under a
sedition law; he had turned thirty-five the day before. He owed his
acquittal a month later to the government's failure to prove that he was
the editor of the dreaded journal. It was then that Rabindranath Tagore
wrote his famous poem to Sri Aurobindo, whom he saluted as “the voice
incarnate, free, of India's soul.”

A few days after his arrest, Sri Aurobindo, released on bail, resigned
his post of Principal of the Bengal National College. A few excerpts
from a speech he delivered before the students and teachers, who had
assembled to express their “heart-felt sympathy.”)

August 23, 1907

        When we established this college and left other occupations,
other chances of life, to devote our lives to this institution, we did
so because we hoped to see in it the foundation, the nucleus of a
nation, of the new India which is to begin its career after this night
of sorrow and trouble, on that day of glory and greatness when India
will work for the world. What we want here is not merely to give you a
little information, not merely to open to you careers for earning a
livelihood, but to build up sons for the Motherland to work and to
suffer for her. That is why we started this college and that is the work
to which I want you to devote yourselves in future. What has been
insufficiently and imperfectly begun by us, it is for you to complete
and lead to perfection. When I come back I wish to see some of you
becoming rich, rich not for yourselves but that you may enrich the
Mother with your riches. I wish to see some of you becoming great, great
not for your own sakes, not that you may satisfy your own vanity, but
great for her, to make India great, to enable her to stand up with head
erect among the nations of the earth, as she did in days of yore when
the world looked up to her for light. Even those who will remain poor
and obscure, I want to see their very poverty and obscurity devoted to
the Motherland. There are times in a nation's history when Providence
places before it one work, one aim, to which everything else, however
high and noble in itself, has to be sacrificed. Such a time has now
arrived for our Motherland when nothing is dearer than her service, when
everything else is to be directed to that end.... Work that she may
prosper. Suffer that she may rejoice. All is contained in that one
single advice.

\*\*\*

September 22, 1907

        Caste was originally an arrangement for the distribution of
functions in society, just as much as class in Europe, but the principle
on which the distribution was based in India was peculiar to this
country.... A Brahmin was a Brahmin not by mere birth, but because he
discharged the duty of preserving the spiritual and intellectual
elevation of the race, and he had to cultivate the spiritual temperament
and acquire the spiritual training which could alone qualify him for the
task. The Kshatriya was a Kshatriya not merely because he was the son of
warriors and princes, but because he discharged the duty of protecting
the country and preserving the high courage and manhood of the nation,
and he had to cultivate the princely temperament and acquire the strong
and lofty Samurai training which alone fitted him for his duties. So it
was with the Vaishya whose function was to amass wealth for the race and
the Sudra who discharged the humbler duties of service without which the
other castes could not perform their share of labour for the common
good.... Essentially there was, between the devout Brahmin and the
devout Sudra, no inequality in the single *virat purusa* \[Cosmic
Spirit\] of which each was a necessary part. Chokha Mela, the Maratha
Pariah, became the Guru of Brahmins proud of their caste purity; the
Chandala taught Shankaracharya: for the Brahman was revealed in the body
of the Pariah and in the Chandala there was the utter presence of Shiva
the Almighty....

        Caste therefore was not only an institution which ought to be
immune from the cheap second-hand denunciations so long in fashion, but
a supreme necessity without which Hindu civilisation could not have
developed its distinctive character or worked out its unique mission.

        But to recognise this is not to debar ourselves from pointing
out its later perversions and desiring its transformation. It is the
nature of human institutions to degenerate, to lose their vitality, and
decay, and the first sign of decay is the loss of flexibility and
oblivion of the essential spirit in which they were conceived. The
spirit is permanent, the body changes; and a body which refuses to
change must die. The spirit expresses itself in many ways while itself
remaining essentially the same but the body must change to suit its
changing environments if it wishes to live. There is no doubt that the
institution of caste degenerated. It ceased to be determined by
spiritual qualifications which, once essential, have now come to be
subordinate and even immaterial and is determined by the purely material
tests of occupation and birth. By this change it has set itself against
the fundamental tendency of Hinduism which is to insist on the spiritual
and subordinate the material and thus lost most of its meaning. The
spirit of caste arrogance, exclusiveness and superiority came to
dominate it instead of the spirit of duty, and the change weakened the
nation and helped to reduce us to our present conditions.

\*\*\*

October 7, 1907

        This great and ancient nation was once the fountain of human
light, the apex of human civilisation, the exemplar of courage and
humanity, the perfection of good Government and settled society, the
mother of all religions, the teacher of all wisdom and philosophy. It
has suffered much at the hands of inferior civilisations and more savage
peoples; it has gone down into the shadow of night and tasted often of
the bitterness of death. Its pride has been trampled into the dust and
its glory has departed. Hunger and misery and despair have become the
masters of this fair soil, these noble hills, these ancient rivers,
these cities whose life story goes back into prehistoric night. But do
you think that therefore God has utterly abandoned us and given us up
for ever to be a mere convenience for the West, the helots of its
commerce, and the feeders of its luxury and pride? We are still God's
chosen people and all our calamities have been but a discipline of
suffering, because for the great mission before us prosperity was not
sufficient, adversity had also its training; to taste the glory of power
and beneficence and joy was not sufficient, the knowledge of weakness
and torture and humiliation was also needed; it was not enough that we
should be able to fill the role of the merciful sage and the beneficent
king, we had also to experience in our own persons the feelings of the
outcaste and the slave.

\*\*\*

October 23, 1907

        There is a cant phrase which is always on our lips in season and
out of season, and it is the cry for unity. We call it a cant phrase
because those who use it, have not the slightest conception of what they
mean when they use it, but simply employ it as an effective formula to
discourage independence in thought and progressiveness in action. It is
not the reality of united thought and action which they desire, it is
merely the appearance of unity.... It is a habit of mind born of the
spirit of dependence and weakness. It is a fosterer of falsehood and
encourages cowardice and insincerity. “Be your views what they may,
suppress them, for they will spoil our unity; swallow your principles,
they will spoil our unity; do not battle for what you think to be the
right, it will spoil our unity; leave necessary things undone, for the
attempt to do them will spoil our unity;” this is the cry. The
prevalence of a dead and lifeless unity is the true index of national
degradation, quite as much as the prevalence of a living unity is the
index of national greatness.

\*\*\*

December 6, 1907

        \[The British\] began of course long ago, the attempt to make
capital of the religious diversities of Indian society and recently the
policy of setting the Mahomedans as a counterpoise to the Hindus has
been openly adopted.[\[6\]](#_ftn6) In the new Legislative Councils the
Mahomedans are to have representation not as children of the soil, an
integral portion of one Indian people, but as a politically distinct and
hostile interest which will, it is hoped, outweigh or at least nullify
the Hindus.... The Hindus have become self-conscious, they have heard a
voice that cries to them, “Arise from the dead, live and follow me,” and
they are irresistibly growing into a living and powerful political
force.

        ...

        The latest brilliant device \[of the British bureaucracy\] is an
attempt to reshuffle the constituent elements of Indian politics and
sort them out afresh on the basis not only of creed, but of caste....
\[Caste\] has not and should not be allowed to have any political
meaning.

\*\*\*

December 17, 1907

        When the word of the Eternal has gone abroad, when the spirit
moves over the waters and the waters stir and life begins to form, then
it is a law that all energies are forced to direct themselves,
consciously or unconsciously, willingly or against their will, to the
one supreme work of the time, the formation of the new manifest and
organised life which is in process of creation....

        Nationalism[\[7\]](#_ftn7) depends for its success on the
awakening and organising of the whole strength of the nation; it is
therefore vitally important for Nationalism that the politically
backward classes should be awakened and brought into the current of
political life; the great mass of orthodox Hinduism which was hardly
even touched by the old Congress movement, the great slumbering mass of
Islam which has remained politically inert throughout the last century,
the shopkeepers, the artisan class, the immense body of illiterate and
ignorant peasantry, the submerged classes, even the wild tribes and
races still outside the pale of Hindu civilisation, Nationalism can
afford to neglect and omit none....

        What Nationalism asks is for life first and above all things;
life, and still more life, is its cry. Let us by every means get rid of
the pall of death which stifled us, let us dispel first the passivity,
quiescence, the unspeakable oppression of inertia which has so long been
our curse; that is the first and imperative need.

\*\*\*

*  
*

(On December 27, 1907, the Nationalist party, with Sri Aurobindo
presiding over its conference, broke away from the Congress Moderates at
the tumultuous Surat session over the latter's refusal to reaffirm the
demands of Swaraj, Swadeshi, Boycott and National Education, which had
been adopted at the previous Calcutta session under the presidentship of
Dadabhai Naoroji. It was going to take the Congress another twenty-two
years to declare complete independence for its goal.)

January 19, 1908

(A few days after the Surat events, Sri Aurobindo had in Baroda a first
decisive experience, that of Nirvana or the Brahman consciousness.
Henceforth all his activities, including his speeches and writings,
flowed from an “absolute silence of the mind.”

On his way back to Calcutta, Sri Aurobindo was asked to speak at many
places. A few excerpts from a speech he gave before a large gathering at
the Mahajan Wadi in Bombay:)

        Belief is not a merely intellectual process, belief is not a
mere persuasion of the mind, belief is something that is in our heart,
and what you believe, you must do, because belief is from God. It is to
the heart that God speaks, it is in the heart that God resides.... Here
is a work that you have undertaken, a work so gigantic, so stupendous,
the means for which are so poor, the resistance to which will be so
strong, so organised ... and what means have you with which to carry out
this tremendous work of yours? If you look at it intellectually, it is
hopeless.... This intellectual process, if it is used honestly, if it is
followed to the very end, leads you to despair. It leads you to death.

        ...

        What is the one thing needful? What is it that has helped the
older men \[of the Nationalist movement\] who have gone to prison?...
They have had one and all of them consciously or unconsciously one
over-mastering idea, one idea which nothing can shake, and this was the
idea that there is a great Power at work to help India, and that we are
doing what it bids us.... They have this conviction within, not in the
intellect but in the heart, that the Power that is guiding them is
invincible, that it is Almighty, that it is immortal and irresistible
and that it will do its work. They have nothing to do. They have simply
to obey that Power. They have simply to go where it leads them. They
have only to speak the words that it tells them to speak, and to do the
thing that it tells them to do.... He himself is behind us. He himself
is the worker and the work. He is immortal in the hearts of his
people....

        When you believe in God, when you believe that God is guiding
you, believe that God is doing all and that you are doing nothing,—what
is there to fear?... There is nothing to fear.... What can all these
tribunals, what can all the powers of the world do to that which is
within you, that Immortal, that Unborn and Undying One, whom the sword
cannot pierce, whom the fire cannot burn, and whom the water cannot
drown? Him the jail cannot confine and the gallows cannot end. What is
there that you can fear when you are conscious of him who is within you?
Courage is then a necessity, courage is natural and courage is
inevitable.... You are protected through life and death by One who
survives in the very hour of death, you feel your immortality in the
hour of your worst sufferings, you feel you are invincible....

        Try to realise the strength within you, try to bring it forward,
so that everything you do may be not your own doing, but the doing of
that Truth within you. Try so that every hour that you live shall be
enlightened by that presence, that every thought of yours shall be
inspired from that one fountain of inspiration, that every faculty and
quality in you may be placed at the service of that immortal Power
within you.... The leader is within yourselves.

\*\*\*

February 19, 1908

        When a great people rises from the dust, what *mantra* is the
*sanjivani mantra*[\[8\]](#_ftn8) or what power is the resurrecting
force of its resurgence? In India there are two great *mantras*, the
*mantra* of “Bande Mataram” which is the public and universal cry of
awakened love of Motherland, and there is another more secret and mystic
which is not yet revealed.

\*\*\*

February 20, 1908

        Truth is the rock on which the world is built. *Satyena tisthate
jagat*. Falsehood can never be the true source of strength. When
falsehood is at the root of a movement, that movement is doomed to
failure. Diplomacy can only help a movement if the movement proceeds
upon truth. To make diplomacy the root-principle is to contravene the
laws of existence.

\*\*\*

February 22, 1908

        Whatever plans we may make, we shall find quite useless when the
time for action comes. Revolutions are always full of surprises, and
whoever thinks he can play chess with a revolution will soon find how
terrible is the grasp of God and how insignificant the human reason
before the whirlwind of His breath. That man only is likely to dominate
the chances of a Revolution, who makes no plans but preserves his heart
pure for the will of God to declare itself. The great rule of life is to
have no schemes but one unalterable purpose. If the will is fixed on the
purpose it sets itself to accomplish, then circumstances will suggest
the right course; but the schemer finds himself always tripped up by the
unexpected.

\*\*\*

February 24, 1908

        National education cannot be defined briefly in one or two
sentences, but we may describe it tentatively as the education which
starting with the past and making full use of the present builds up a
great nation. Whoever wishes to cut off the nation from its past is no
friend of our national growth. Whoever fails to take advantage of the
present is losing us the battle of life. We must therefore save for
India all that she has stored up of knowledge, character and noble
thought in her immemorial past. We must acquire for her the best
knowledge that Europe can give her and assimilate it to her own peculiar
type of national temperament. We must introduce the best methods of
teaching humanity has developed, whether modern or ancient. And all
these we must harmonise into a system which will be impregnated with the
spirit of self-reliance so as to build up men and not machines....

\*\*\*

March 5, 1908

        India is the *guru* of the nations, the physician of the human
soul in its profounder maladies; she is destined once more to new-mould
the life of the world....

\*\*\*

March 6, 1908

        When the poison of Western education was first poured into our
veins, it had its immediate effect, and the Hindus \[of Bengal\], who
were then the majority of the Bengali-speaking population, began to
stream away from the village to the town....

        Only the race which does not sacrifice the soundness of its
rural root of life to the urban brilliance of its foliage and flowering,
is in a sound condition and certain of permanence.... We must now turn
to the one field of work in this direction which we have most neglected,
the field of agriculture. The return to the land is as essential to our
salvation as the development of Swadeshi or the fight against famine. If
we train our young men to go back to the fields, they will be able to
become mentors, leaders and examples to the village population.... The
problem is urgent in its call for a solution, and the mere organisation
of village associations will be only partially effective if it is not
backed up by a system of instruction which will bring the educated Hindu
back to the soil as a farmer himself and a local leader of the peasantry
of the race.

\*\*\*

March 16, 1908

        It has been said that democracy is based on the rights of man;
it has been replied that it should rather take its stand on the duties
of man; but both rights and duties are European ideas. Dharma is the
Indian conception in which rights and duties lose the artificial
antagonism created by a view of the world which makes selfishness the
root of action, and regain their deep and eternal unity. Dharma is the
basis of democracy which Asia must recognise, for in this lies the
distinction between the soul of Asia and the soul of Europe.

\*\*\*

March 28, 1908

        We are Hindus and naturally spiritual in our temperament,
because the work which we have to do for humanity is a work which no
other nation can accomplish.... The grand workshop of spiritual
experiment, the laboratory of the soul has been India....

\*\*\*

March 31, 1908

        The increasing poverty of the masses has been the subject of
innumerable pamphlets, speeches and newspaper articles, but we are apt
to think our duty done when we have proved that the poverty problem is
there; we leave the solution to the future and forget that by the time
the solution comes, the masses will have sunk into a condition of decay
from which it will take the nation many decades to recover. We have been
accustomed to deal only with the economical side of this poverty, but
there is a moral side which is even more important. The Indian peasantry
have always been distinguished from the less civilised masses of Europe
by their superior piety, gentleness, sobriety, purity, thrift and native
intelligence. They are now being brutalised by unexampled
oppression;[\[9\]](#_ftn9) attracted to the liquor shops which a
benevolent Government liberally supplies, bestialised by the example of
an increasingly immoral aristocracy and gradually driven to the same
habits of looseness and brutality which disgrace the European
proletariats. This degeneration is proceeding with an alarming rapidity.
In some parts of the country it has gone so far that recovery seems
impossible.... We have heard of villages where the liquor shop and the
prostitute, institutions unknown twenty-five years ago, have now the
mastery of the poorest villagers. Many of the villages in West Bengal
are now well supplied with these essentials of Western civilisation....
These conditions of the worst districts tend to become general and
unless something is done to stem the tide of evil, it will sweep away
the soul of India in its turbid current and leave only a shapeless
monstrosity of all that is worst in human nature.

\*\*\*

April 11, 1908

        The Mother's feet are on the threshold, but she waits to hear
the true cry, the cry that rushes out from the heart, before she will
enter.... The Mother asks us for no schemes, no plans, no methods. She
herself will provide the schemes, the plans, the methods better than any
we can devise. She asks us for our hearts, our lives, nothing less,
nothing more.

        ...

        Regeneration is literally re-birth, and re-birth comes not by
the intellect, not by the fullness of the purse, not by policy, not by
change of machinery, but by the getting of a new heart, by throwing away
all that we were into the fire of sacrifice and being reborn in the
Mother. Self-abandonment is the demand made upon us. She asks of us,
“How many will live for me? How many will die for me?” and awaits our
answer.

\*\*\*

April 12, 1908

        Do not be afraid of obstacles in your path, it does not matter
how great the forces are that stand in your way.... Do not think that
anything is impossible when miracles are being worked on every side. If
you are true to yourself there is nothing to be afraid of. There is
nothing unattainable by truth, love and faith. This is your whole gospel
which will work out miracles.

\*\*\*

April 14, 1908

        Distrust is the atmosphere of modern politics, mutual suspicion
and hatred the secret spring of action. Under the fair outside of its
material civilisation, a deep-seated moral disease is at work eating
into the vitals of European society of which a thousand symptoms strike
the eye.... If India follows in the footsteps of Europe, accepts her
political ideals, social system, economic principles, she will be
overcome with the same maladies. Such a consummation is neither for the
good of India nor for the good of Europe. If India becomes an
intellectual province of Europe, she will never attain to her natural
greatness or fulfil the possibilities within her. *Paradharmah
bhayavahah*, to accept the dharma of another is perilous; it deprives
the man or the nation of its secret of life and vitality and substitutes
an unnatural and stunted growth for the free, large and organic
development of Nature. Whenever a nation has given up the purpose of its
existence, it has been at the cost of its growth. India must remain
India if she is to fulfil her destiny. Nor will Europe profit by
grafting her civilisation on India, for if India, who is the distinct
physician of Europe's maladies, herself falls into the clutches of the
disease, the disease will remain uncured and uncurable and European
civilisation will perish as it perished when Rome declined, first by dry
rot within itself and last by irruption from without.

\*\*\*

April (?), 1908

        We knew so little of life that we expected others who lived on
our service to prepare our freedom, so little of history that we thought
reform could precede liberty, so little of science that we believed an
organism could be reshaped from outside. We were ruled by shopkeepers
and consented enthusiastically to think of them as angels. We affected
virtues we were given no opportunity of assimilating and lost those our
fathers had handed down to us. All this in perfect good faith, in the
full belief that we were Europeanising ourselves and moving rapidly
toward political, social, economical, moral, intellectual progress. The
consummation of our political progress was a Congress which yearly
passed resolutions it had no power to put in practice, statesmen whose
highest function was to ask questions which need not even be answered,
councillors who would have been surprised if they had been consulted,
politicians who did not even know that a Right never lives until it has
a Might to support it. Socially we have initiated by a few petty
mechanical changes a feeble attempt to revivify the very basis of our
society, which \[failed to\] be equal to so high a task; a spiritual
renovation was hardly even attempted; economically, we attained great
success in destroying our industries and enslaving ourselves to the
British trader; morally, we successfully compassed the disintegration of
the old moral ideas and habits and substituted for them a superficial
respectability; intellectually, we prided ourselves on the tricking out
of our minds in a few leavings, scraps and strays of European thought at
the sacrifice of an immense and eternal heritage. Never was an education
more remote from all that education truly denotes....

        British rule, Britain's civilising mission in India has been the
record success in history in the hypnosis of a nation. It persuaded us
to live in a death of the will and its activities, taking a series of
hallucinations for real things and creating in ourselves the condition
of morbid weakness the hypnotist desired, until the Master of a mightier
hypnosis laid His finger on India's eyes and cried, “Awake.” Then only
the spell was broken, the slumbering mind realised itself and the dead
soul lived again.[\[10\]](#_ftn10)

        ...

        The new \[Nationalism\] overleaps every barrier; it calls to the
clerk at his counter, the trader in his shop, the peasant at his plough;
it summons the Brahmin from his temple and takes the hand of the
Chandala in his degradation; it seeks out the student in his College,
the schoolboy at his book, it touches the very child in its mother's
arms; and the secluded zenana has thrilled to its voice; its eye
searches the jungle for the Santal and travels the hills for the wild
tribes of the mountains. It cares nothing for age or sex or caste or
wealth or education or respectability; it mocks at the talk of a stake
in the country; it spurns aside the demand for a property qualification
or a certificate of literacy. It speaks to the illiterate or the man in
the street in such rude vigorous language as he best understands, to
youth and the enthusiast in accents of poetry, in language of fire, to
the thinker in the terms of philosophy and logic, to the Hindu it
repeats the name of Kali, the Mahomedan it spurs to action for the glory
of Islam. It cries to all to come forth, to help in God's work and
remake a nation, each with what his creed or his culture, his strength,
his manhood or his genius can give to the new nationality. The only
qualification it asks for is a body made in the womb of an Indian
mother, a heart that can feel for India, a brain that can think and plan
for her greatness, a tongue that can adore her name or hands that can
fight in her quarrel.... \[The new Nationalism\] is the rebirth in India
of the Kshatriya, the Samurai.⁵

\*

        Man is of a less terrestrial mould than some would have him to
be. He has an element of the divine which the practical politician
ignores. The practical politician looks to the position at the moment
and imagines that he has taken everything into consideration. He has
indeed studied the surface and the immediate surroundings, but he has
missed what lies beyond material vision. He has left out of account the
divine, the incalculable in man, that element which upsets the
calculations of the schemer and disconcerts the wisdom of the diplomat.⁶

\*

        The Nationalist never loses sight of the truth that law was made
for man and not man for the law. Its chief function and reason for
existence is to safeguard and foster the growth and happy flowering into
strength and health of national life and a law which does not subserve
this end or which opposes and contradicts this end, however rigidly it
may enforce peace, order and security, forfeits its claim to respect and
obedience. Nationalism refuses to accept Law as a fetish or peace and
security as an aim in themselves.... It will not prefer violent or
strenuous methods simply because they are violent or strenuous, but
neither will it cling to mild and peaceful methods simply because they
are mild and peaceful. It asks of a method whether it is effective for
its purpose, whether it is worthy of a great people struggling to be,
whether it is educative of national strength and activity, and these
things ascertained, it asks nothing farther.⁷

\*

        A certain class of minds shrink from aggressiveness as if it
were a sin. Their temperament forbids them to feel the delight of battle
and they look on what they cannot understand as something monstrous and
sinful. “Heal hate by love, drive out injustice by justice, slay sin by
righteousness” is their cry. Love is a sacred name, but it is easier to
speak of love than to love.... The Gita is the best answer to those who
shrink from battle as a sin and aggression as a lowering of morality.

        ...

        It is a barren philosophy which applies a mechanical rule to all
actions, or takes a word and tries to fit all human life into it. The
sword of the warrior is as necessary to the fulfilment of justice and
righteousness as the holiness of the saint. Ramdas is not complete
without Shivaji. To maintain justice and prevent the strong from
despoiling and the weak from being oppressed is the function for which
the Kshatriya was created. Therefore, says Sri Krishna in the
Mahabharat, God created battle and armour, the sword, the bow and the
dagger.^(8[\[11\]](#_ftn11))

\*\*\*

(On May 2, 1908, following a failed assassination attempt on a British
judge by revolutionaries belonging to Barin's secret society, Sri
Aurobindo was arrested. The British were now confident of having a
chance to silence forever “the most dangerous man we have to deal with
at present.”[\[12\]](#_ftn12) While the famous Alipore Bomb trial went
on, Sri Aurobindo, defended by Chittaranjan Das, spent a year in jail,
during which he had crucial experiences and revelations; as he wrote
later, “Now the inner spiritual life and realisation which had
continually been increasing in magnitude and universality and assuming a
larger place took him up entirely and his work became a part and result
of it and besides far exceeded the service and liberation of the country
and fixed itself in an aim, previously only glimpsed, which was
world-wide in its bearing and concerned with the whole future of
humanity.”¹¹

When after his acquittal on May 6, 1909, Sri Aurobindo came out of the
“Alipore ashram,” as he called it, the Bande Mataram had been stopped by
the British, most of the Nationalist leaders jailed, deported or in
self-imposed exile, and the few who remained were dispirited—the
Nationalist movement was at a low ebb. Sri Aurobindo set about pouring
fresh life into it, giving many speeches and starting a new English
weekly, the Karmayogin, as well as a Bengali weekly, the Dharma. The
following excerpts are from the Karmayogin.)

May 30, 1909

(Extracts from the famous Uttarpara speech.)

        When I approached God at that time \[after Sri Aurobindo's
return from England\], I hardly had a living faith in Him. The agnostic
was in me, the atheist was in me, the sceptic was in me and I was not
absolutely sure that there was a God at all. I did not feel His
presence. Yet something drew me to the truth of the Vedas, the truth of
the Gita, the truth of the Hindu religion.[\[13\]](#_ftn13) I felt there
must be a mighty truth somewhere in this Yoga, a mighty truth in this
religion based on the Vedanta. So when I turned to the Yoga and resolved
to practise it and find out if my idea was right, I did it in this
spirit and with this prayer to Him, “If Thou art, then Thou knowest my
heart. Thou knowest that I do not ask for Mukti, I do not ask for
anything which others ask for. I ask only for strength to uplift this
nation, I ask only to be allowed to live and work for this people whom I
love and to whom I pray that I may devote my life.” I strove long for
the realisation of Yoga and at last to some extent I had it, but in what
I most desired I was not satisfied. Then in the seclusion of the jail,
of the solitary cell I asked for it again, I said, “Give me Thy Adesh. I
do not know what work to do or how to do it. Give me a message.” In the
communion of Yoga two messages came. The first message said, “I have
given you a work and it is to help to uplift this nation. Before long
the time will come when you will have to go out of jail; for it is not
my will that this time either you should be convicted or that you should
pass the time, as others have to do, in suffering for their country. I
have called you to work, and that is the Adesh for which you have asked.
I give you the Adesh to go forth and do my work.” The second message
came and it said, “Something has been shown to you in this year of
seclusion, something about which you had your doubts and it is the truth
of the Hindu religion. It is this religion that I am raising up before
the world, it is this that I have perfected and developed through the
Rishis, saints and Avatars, and now it is going forth to do my work
among the nations. I am raising up this nation to send forth my word....
When therefore it is said that India shall rise, it is the Sanatan
Dharma that shall rise. When it is said that India shall be great, it is
the Sanatan Dharma that shall be great. When it is said that India shall
expand and extend herself, it is the Sanatan Dharma that shall expand
and extend itself over the world. It is for the Dharma and by the Dharma
that India exists....”

        But what is the Hindu religion? What is this religion which we
call Sanatan, eternal? It is the Hindu religion only because the Hindu
nation has kept it, because in this Peninsula it grew up in the
seclusion of the sea and the Himalayas, because in this sacred and
ancient land it was given as a charge to the Aryan race to preserve
through the ages.[\[14\]](#_ftn14) But it is not circumscribed by the
confines of a single country, it does not belong peculiarly and for ever
to a bounded part of the world. That which we call the Hindu religion is
really the eternal religion, because it is the universal religion which
embraces all others. If a religion is not universal, it cannot be
eternal. A narrow religion, a sectarian religion, an exclusive religion
can live only for a limited time and a limited purpose. This is the one
religion that can triumph over materialism by including and anticipating
the discoveries of science and the speculations of philosophy. It is the
one religion which impresses on mankind the closeness of God to us and
embraces in its compass all the possible means by which man can approach
God. It is the one religion which insists every moment on the truth
which all religions acknowledge that He is in all men and all things and
that in Him we move and have our being. It is the one religion which
enables us not only to understand and believe this truth but to realise
it with every part of our being. It is the one religion which shows the
world what the world is, that it is the Lila of Vasudeva. It is the one
religion which shows us how we can best play our part in that Lila, its
subtlest laws and its noblest rules. It is the one religion which does
not separate life in any smallest detail from religion, which knows what
immortality is and has utterly removed from us the reality of death....

        I said \[last year\] that this movement is not a political
movement and that nationalism is not politics but a religion, a creed, a
faith. I say it again today, but I put it in another way. I say no
longer that nationalism is a creed, a religion, a faith; I say that it
is the Sanatan Dharma which for us is nationalism.... The Sanatan
Dharma, that is nationalism. This is the message that I have to speak to
you.

\*\*\*

June 19, 1909

        We have said that *brahmateja* \[spiritual force\] is the thing
we need most of all and first of all. In one sense, that means the
pre-eminence of religion; but after all, what the Europeans mean by
religion is not *brahmateja* which is rather spirituality, the force and
energy of thought and action arising from communion with or
self-surrender to that within us which rules the world. In that sense we
shall use it. This force and energy can be directed to any purpose God
desires for us; it is sufficient to knowledge, love or service; it is
good for the liberation of an individual soul, the building of a nation
or the turning of a tool. It works from within, it works in the power of
God, it works with superhuman energy. The reawakening of that force in
three hundred millions of men by the means which our past has placed in
our hands, that is our object.

        The European is proud of his success in divorcing religion from
life. Religion, he says, is all very well in its place, but it has
nothing to do with politics or science or commerce, which it spoils by
its intrusion; it is meant only for Sundays when, if one is English, one
puts on black clothes and tries to feel good, and if one is continental,
one puts the rest of the week away and amuses oneself.... But after all
God does exist and if He exists, you cannot shove Him into a corner and
say, “That is your place and as for the world and life it belongs to
us.” He pervades and returns. Every age of denial is only a preparation
for a larger and more comprehensive affirmation.

\*

        It is an error, we repeat, to think that spirituality is a thing
divorced from life.... It is an error to think that the heights of
religion are above the struggles of this world. The recurrent cry of Sri
Krishna to Arjuna insists on the struggle; "Fight and overthrow thy
opponents!", "Remember me and fight!", "Give up all thy works to me with
a heart full of spirituality, and free from craving, free from selfish
claims, fight! Let the fever of thy soul pass from thee."

\*

        There is a mighty law of life, a great principle of human
evolution, a body of spiritual knowledge and experience of which India
has always been destined to be guardian, exemplar and missionary. This
is the *sanatana dharma*....

        The European sets great store by machinery. He seeks to renovate
humanity by schemes of society and systems of government; he hopes to
bring about the millennium by an act of Parliament. Machinery is of
great importance, but only as a working means for the spirit within, the
force behind. The nineteenth century in India aspired to political
emancipation, social renovation, religious vision and rebirth, but it
failed because it adopted Western motives and methods, ignored the
spirit, history and destiny of our race and thought that by taking over
European education, European machinery, European organisation and
equipment we should reproduce in ourselves European prosperity, energy
and progress. We of the twentieth century reject the aims, ideals and
methods of the anglicised nineteenth, precisely because we accept its
experience. We refuse to make an idol of the present; we look before and
after, backward to the mighty history of our race, forward to the
grandiose history for which that destiny has prepared it....

        We say to the nation: “It is God's will that we should be
ourselves and not Europe. We have sought to regain life by following the
law of another being than our own. We must return and seek the sources
of life and strength within ourselves. We must know our past and recover
it for the purpose of our future. Our business is to realise ourselves
first and to mould everything to the law of India's eternal life and
nature....”

        We say to the individual and especially to the young who are now
arising to do India's work, the world's work, God's work: “You cannot
cherish these ideals, still less can you fulfil them if you subject your
minds to European ideas or look at life from the material standpoint.
Materially you are nothing, spiritually you are everything. It is only
the Indian who can believe everything, dare everything, sacrifice
everything. First, therefore, become Indians. Recover the patrimony of
your forefathers. Recover the Aryan thought, the Aryan discipline, the
Aryan character, the Aryan life. Recover the Vedanta, the Gita, the
Yoga. Recover them not only in intellect or sentiment but in your
lives.... Difficulty and impossibility will vanish from your
vocabularies. For it is in the spirit that strength is eternal and you
must win back the kingdom of yourselves, the inner Swaraj, before you
can win back your outer empire.... Recover the source of all strength in
yourselves and all else will be added to you, social soundness,
intellectual pre-eminence, political freedom, the mastery of human
thought, the hegemony of the world.”

\*

        We do not fear Mahomedan opposition; so long as it is the honest
Swadeshi article and not manufactured in Shillong or
Simla,[\[15\]](#_ftn15) we welcome it as a sign of life and aspiration.
We do not shun, we desire the awakening of Islam in India even if its
first crude efforts are misdirected against ourselves; for all strength,
all energy, all action is grist to the mill of the nation-builder. In
that faith we are ready, when the time comes for us to meet in the
political field, to exchange with the Musulman, just as he chooses, the
firm clasp of the brother or the resolute grip of the wrestler....

        Of one thing we may be certain, that Hindu-Mahomedan unity
cannot be effected by political adjustments or Congress
flatteries.[\[16\]](#_ftn16) It must be sought deeper down, in the heart
and in the mind, for where the causes of disunion are, there the
remedies must be sought. We shall do well in trying to solve the problem
to remember that misunderstanding is the most fruitful cause of our
differences, that love compels love and that strength conciliates the
strong. We must strive to remove the causes of misunderstanding by a
better mutual knowledge and sympathy; we must extend the unfaltering
love of the patriot to our Musulman brother, remembering always that in
him too Narayana dwells and to him too our Mother has given a permanent
place in her bosom; but we must cease to approach him falsely or flatter
out of a selfish weakness and cowardice. We believe this to be the only
practical way of dealing with the difficulty. As a political question
the Hindu-Mahomedan problem does not interest us at all, as a national
problem it is of supreme importance.

\*

        We shall never lose our fortitude, our courage, our endurance.
There are some who think that by lowering our heads the country will
escape repression.[\[17\]](#_ftn17) That is not my opinion. It is by
looking the storm in the face and meeting it with a high courage,
fortitude and endurance that the nation can be saved. It is that which
the Mother demands from us,—which God demands from us.

\*\*\*

June 23, 1909

*(From a speech at Bakergunj.)*

        There are times of great change, times when old landmarks are
being upset, when submerged forces are rising, and just as we deal
promptly or linger over the solution of these problems, our progress
will be rapid or slow, sound or broken.... The problem is put to us one
by one, to each nation one by one.... He has shown us the possibility of
strength within us, and then He has shown us where the danger, the
weakness lies. He is pointing out to us how is it that we may become
strong. On us it lies ... to answer the question which God has put to
us, and according as we answer on it depends how this movement will
progress, what route it will take, and whether it will lead to a swift
and sudden salvation, or whether, after so many centuries of tribulation
and sufferings there is still a long period of tribulation and suffering
before us. God has put the question to us and with us entirely it lies
to answer.

\*\*\*

June 25, 1909

*(From a speech at Khulna.)*

        The virtue of the Brahmin is a great virtue. You shall not kill.
This is what Ahimsa means. If the virtue of Ahimsa comes to the
Kshatriya, if you say I will not kill, there is no one to protect the
country. The happiness of the people will be broken down. Injustice and
lawlessness will reign. The virtue becomes a source of misery, and you
become instrumental in bringing misery and conflict to the people.

\*\*\*

July 3, 1909

        When confronted with the truths of Hinduism, the experience of
deep thinkers and the choice spirits of the race through thousands of
years, \[the rationalist\] shouts “Mysticism, mysticism!” and thinks he
has conquered. To him there is order, development, progress, evolution,
enlightenment in the history of Europe, but the past of India is an
unsightly mass of superstition and ignorance best torn out of the book
of human life. These thousands of years of our thought and aspiration
are a period of the least importance to us and the true history of our
progress only begins with the advent of European education!

\*\*\*

July 17, 1909

        There are particular movements in particular epochs in which the
Divine Force manifests itself with supreme power shattering all human
calculations, making a mock of the prudence of the careful statesman and
the scheming politician, falsifying the prognostications of the
scientific analyser and advancing with a vehemence and velocity which is
obviously the manifestation of a higher than human force. The
intellectual man afterwards tries to trace the reasons for the movement
and lay bare the forces that made it possible, but at the time he is
utterly at fault, his wisdom is falsified at every step and his science
serves him not. These are the times when we say God is in the movement,
He is its leader and it must fulfil itself however impossible it may be
for man to see the means by which it will succeed.

\*\*\*

July 24, 1909

        Terrorism thrives on administrative violence and injustice; that
is the only atmosphere in which it can thrive and grow. It sometimes
follows the example of indiscriminate violence from above; it sometimes,
though very rarely, sets it from below. But the power above which
follows the example from below is on the way to committing suicide.

\*\*\*

July 31, 1909

        Our ideal is that of Swaraj or absolute autonomy free from
foreign control. We claim the right of every nation to live its own life
by its own energies according to its own nature and ideals. We reject
the claim of aliens to force upon us a civilisation inferior to our own
or to keep us out of our inheritance on the untenable ground of a
superior fitness. While admitting the stains and defects which long
subjection has induced upon our native capacity and energy, we are
conscious of that capacity and energy reviving in us.

\*\*\*

August 7, 1909

        The future belongs to the young. It is a young and new world
which is now under process of development and it is the young who must
create it. But it is also a world of truth, courage, justice, lofty
aspiration and straightforward fulfilment which we seek to create. For
the coward, for the self-seeker, for the talker who goes forward at the
beginning and afterwards leaves his fellows in the lurch there is no
place in the future of this movement. A brave, frank, clean-hearted,
courageous and aspiring youth is the only foundation on which the future
nation can be built.... God does not want falterers and flinchers for
his work, nor does he want unstable enthusiasts who cannot maintain the
energy of their first movements.

\*\*\*

August 21, 1909

        The spiritual force within not only creates the future but
creates the materials for the future. It is not limited to the existing
materials either in their nature or in their quantity. It can transform
bad material into good material, insufficient means into abundant means.
It was a deep consciousness of this great truth that gave Mazzini the
strength to create modern Italy....

        It is our hope that ... not only the political circumstances of
India be changed but her deeper disease be cured and by a full evocation
of her immense stores of moral and spiritual strength that be
accomplished for India which Mazzini could not accomplish for Italy, to
place her in the head and forefront of the new world whose birth-throes
are now beginning to convulse the Earth.

\*\*\*

August 28, 1909

        Strength attracts strength; firm and clear-minded courage
commands success and respect; strong and straight dealing can dispense
with the methods of dissimulation and intrigue. All these are signs of
character and it is only character that can give freedom and greatness
to nations.

\*

        We suppose in a bureaucracy it is inevitable that officials
should be masters and be able to inflict inconvenience and loss on the
citizen without any means of redress.... If officialdom were to acquire
a common sense, the laws of Nature would be sadly contravened.

\*\*\*

September 4, 1909

        Every action for instance which may be objectionable to a number
of Mahomedans is now liable to be forbidden because it is likely to lead
to a breach of the peace, and one is dimly beginning to wonder whether
the day may not come when worship in Hindu temples may be forbidden on
that valid ground.

\*\*\*

September 11, 1909

        Action solves the difficulties which action creates. Inaction
can only paralyse and slay.... The errors of life and progress are more
exuberant and striking but less fatal than the errors of decay and
reaction.

\*\*\*

September 18, 1909

        The end of a stage of evolution is usually marked by a powerful
recrudescence of all that has to go out of the evolution.... The law is
the same for the mass as for the individual. The process of human
evolution has been seen by the eye of inspired observation to be that of
working out the tiger and the ape. The forces of cruelty, lust,
mischievous destruction, pain-giving, folly, brutality, ignorance were
once rampant in humanity, they had full enjoyment; then by the growth of
religion and philosophy they began in periods of satiety such as the
beginning of the Christian era in Europe to be partly replaced, partly
put under control. As is the law of such things, they have always
reverted again with greater or less virulence and sought with more or
less success to re-establish themselves. Finally, in the nineteenth
century it seemed for a time as if some of these forces had, for the
time at least, exhausted themselves and the hour for *samyama*
\[rejection\] and gradual dismissal from the evolution had really
arrived. Such hopes always recur and in the end they are likely to bring
about their own fulfilment, but before that happens another recoil is
inevitable. We see plenty of signs of it in the reeling back into the
beast which is in progress in Europe and America behind the fair outside
of Science, progress, civilisation and humanitarianism, and we are
likely to see more signs of it in the era that is coming upon us.

\*\*\*

September 25, 1909

        The debasement of our mind, character and tastes by a grossly
commercial, materialistic and insufficient European education is a fact
on which the young Nationalism has always insisted. The practical
destruction of our artistic perceptions and the plastic skill and
fineness of eye and hand which once gave our productions pre-eminence,
distinction and mastery of the European markets, is also a thing
accomplished. Most vital of all, the spiritual and intellectual divorce
from the past which the present schools and universities have effected,
has beggared the nation of the originality, high aspiration and forceful
energy which can alone make a nation free and great. To reverse the
process and recover what we have lost, is undoubtedly the first object
to which we ought to devote ourselves. And as the loss of originality,
aspiration and energy was the most vital of all these losses, so their
recovery should be our first and most important objective. The primary
aim of the prophets of Nationalism was to rid the nation of the idea
that the future was limited by the circumstances of the present, that
because temporary causes had brought us low and made us weak, low
therefore must be our aims and weak our methods. They pointed the mind
of the people to a great and splendid destiny, not in some distant
millennium but in the comparatively near future.... To raise the mind,
character and tastes of the people, to recover the ancient nobility of
temper, the strong Aryan character and the high Aryan outlook, the
perceptions which made earthly life beautiful and wonderful, and the
magnificent spiritual experiences, realisations and aspirations which
made us the deepest-hearted, deepest-thoughted and most delicately
profound in life of all the peoples of the earth, is the task next in
importance and urgency....

        We must remember also why the degradation and denationalisation,
“the mighty evil in our souls” of which the writer[\[18\]](#_ftn18)
complains, came into being. A painful but necessary work had to be done,
and because the English nation were the fittest instrument for his
purpose, God led them all over those thousands of miles of alien Ocean,
gave strength to their hearts and subtlety to their brains, and set them
up in India to do His work, which they have been doing faithfully, if
blindly, ever since and are doing at the present moment. The spirit and
ideals of India had come to be confined in a mould which, however
beautiful, was too narrow and slender to bear the mighty burden of our
future. When that happens, the mould has to be broken and even the ideal
lost for a while, in order to be recovered free of constraint and
limitation.... We must not cabin the expanding and aggressive spirit of
India in temporary forms which are the creation of the last few hundred
years. That would be a vain and disastrous endeavour. The mould is
broken; we must remould in larger outlines and with a richer content.
For the work of destruction England was best fitted by her stubborn
individuality and by that very commercialism and materialism which made
her the anti-type in temper and culture of the race she governed. She
was chosen too for the unrivalled efficiency and skill with which she
has organised an individualistic and materialistic democracy. We had to
come to close quarters with that democratic organisation, draw it into
ourselves and absorb the democratic spirit and methods so that we might
rise beyond them.... We have to throw away the individualism and
materialism and keep the democracy. We have to solve for the human race
the problem of harmonising and spiritualising its impulses towards
liberty, equality and fraternity.

\*\*\*

October 2, 1909

        An imitation of the forms and workings of the old Congress is
also inadvisable. We were never satisfied with those forms and that
working. The three days' show \[i.e. the Congress sessions\], the
excessively festal aspect of the occasion, the monstrous preponderance
of speech and resolution-passing over action and work, the want of true
democratic rule and order, the weary waste of formal oratory without any
practical use or object, the incapacity of the assembly for grappling
with the real problems of our national existence and progress, the
anxiety to avoid public discussion which is the life-breath of
democratic politics, these and many other defects made the Congress in
our view an instrument ill-made, wasteful of money and energy, and the
centre of a false conception of political deliberation and action. If we
imitate the Congress, we shall contract all the faults of the Congress.

\*\*\*

November 6, 1909

(In 1909, the Morley-Minto Reform Scheme gave Indian Muslims a separate
electorate to “reformed” legislative councils, in effect encouraging
them to assert their separate identity.)

        The question of separate representation for the Mahomedan
community is one of those momentous issues raised in haste by a
statesman unable to appreciate the forces with which he is dealing,
which bear fruit no man expected and least of all the ill-advised
Frankenstein who was first responsible for its creation. The common
belief among Hindus is that the Government have decided to depress the
Hindu element in the Indian people by raising the Mahomedan element, and
ensure a perpetual preponderance in their own favour by leaning on a
Mahomedan vote purchased by a system of preference. The denials of
high-placed officials, who declare that it is only out of a careful
consideration for the rights and interests of minorities that they have
made special Mahomedan representation an essential feature of the Reform
Scheme, have not convinced a single Hindu mind; for the obvious retort
is that it is only one minority which is specially cared for and this
special care is extended to it even in provinces where it is in a large
majority. No provision at all has been made for the safe-guarding of
Hindu minorities, for the Parsis, the Sikhs, the Christians and other
sections which may reasonably declare that they too are Indians and
citizens of the Empire no less than the Mahomedans....

        Our own attitude is clear. We will have no part or lot in
reforms which give no popular majority, no substantive control, no
opportunity for Indian capacity and statesmanship, no seed of democratic
expansion. We will not for a moment accept separate electorates or
separate representation, not because we are opposed to a large Mahomedan
influence in popular assemblies when they come but because we will be no
party to a distinction which recognises Hindu and Mahomedan as
permanently separate political units and thus precludes the growth of a
single and indivisible Indian nation. We oppose any such attempt at
division whether it comes from an embarrassed Government seeking for
political support or from an embittered Hindu community allowing the
passions of the moment to obscure their vision of the future.

\*

        Dr. U. N. Mukherji recently published a very interesting
brochure in which he tried to prove that the Hindus were a dying race
and would do well to imitate the social freedom and equality of the
still increasing Mahomedans....

        The real truth is that, owing to an immense transition being
effected under peculiarly unfavourable conditions, both communities, but
chiefly the more progressive Hindu, are in a critical stage in which
various deep-seated maladies have come to the surface, with effects of
an inevitable though lamentable character. None of these maladies is
mortal and the race is not dying. But the knife of the surgeon is needed
and it is to the remedy rather than the diagnosis that attention should
be pointedly directed. The mere decline in the rate of increase is in
itself nothing. It is a phenomenon which one now sees becoming more and
more marked all the world over and it is only countries backward in
development and education which keep up the old rate of increase. The
unfit tend to multiply, the fit to be limited in propagation. This is an
abnormal state of things which indicates something wrong in modern
civilisation. But, whatever the malady is, it is not peculiar to Hindus
or to India, but a world-wide disease.

\*

        The Mahomedans base their separateness and their refusal to
regard themselves as Indians first and Mahomedans afterwards on the
existence of great Mahomedan nations to which they feel themselves more
akin, in spite of our common birth and blood, than to us. Hindus have no
such resource. For good or evil, they are bound to the soil and to the
soil alone. They cannot deny their Mother, neither can they mutilate
her. Our ideal therefore is an Indian Nationalism, largely Hindu in its
spirit and traditions, because the Hindu made the land and the people
and persists, by the greatness of his past, his civilisation and his
culture and his invincible virility, in holding it, but wide enough also
to include the Moslem and his culture and traditions and absorb them
into itself.

\*\*\*

November 20, 1909

        Not only class, as was formerly the case, but creed has been
made the basis of representation \[in the Morley-Minto reforms\] and,
therefore, unless the Hindus have the strength of mind to boycott a
system which creates a distinction insulting as well as injurious to the
community, this measure, while giving us not an atom of self-government,
will be a potent engine for dividing the nation into two hostile
interests and barring the way towards the unity of India. Formerly,
there were only two classes in India, the superior European and the
inferior Indian; now there will be three, the supreme European, the
superior Mahomedan and the inferior Hindu. This is loss number one, and
it is no small one, to the Mahomedan no less than the Hindu. The
official of course gains.

\*

        In India ... we have been cut off by a mercenary and soulless
education from all our ancient roots of culture and tradition....

        The value attached by ancients to music, art and poetry has
become almost unintelligible to an age bent on depriving life of its
meaning by turning earth into a sort of glorified ant-heap or
beehive....

        ...

        The future is mightier than the past and evolution proceeds
relentlessly in its course trampling to pieces all that it no longer
needs. Those who fight against her fight against the will of God,
against a decree written from of old, and are already defeated and slain
in the *karanajagat*, the world of types and causes where Nature fixes
everything before she works it out in the visible world.

\*\*\*

November 27, 1909

        A purely scientific education tends to make thought keen and
clear-sighted within certain limits, but narrow, hard and cold.... Man
intellectually developed, mighty in scientific knowledge and the mastery
of the gross and subtle nature, using the elements as his servants and
the world as his footstool, but underdeveloped in heart and spirit,
becomes only an inferior kind of *asura* using the powers of a demigod
to satisfy the nature of an animal.

\*\*\*

December 11, 1909

        Between them music, art and poetry are a perfect education for
the soul; they make and keep its movements purified, self-controlled,
deep and harmonious. These, therefore, are agents which cannot
profitably be neglected by humanity on its onward march or degraded to
the mere satisfaction of sensuous pleasure which will disintegrate
rather than build the character. They are, when properly used, great
educating, edifying and civilising forces.

\*\*\*

December 25, 1909

        The system of education which, instead of keeping artistic
training apart as a privilege for a few specialists frankly introduces
it as a part of culture no less necessary than literature or science,
will have taken a great step forward in the perfection of national
education and the general diffusion of a broad-based human culture. It
is not necessary that every man should be an artist. It is necessary
that every man should have his artistic faculty developed, his taste
trained, his sense of beauty and insight into form and colour and that
which is expressed in form and colour, made habitually active, correct
and sensitive. It is necessary that those who create, whether in great
things or small, whether in the unusual master-pieces of art and genius
or in the small common things of use that surround a man's daily life,
should be habituated to produce and the nation habituated to expect the
beautiful in preference to the ugly, the noble in preference to the
vulgar, the fine in preference to the crude, the harmonious in
preference to the gaudy. A nation surrounded daily by the beautiful,
noble, fine and harmonious becomes that which it is habituated to
contemplate and realises the fullness of the expanding Spirit in
itself....

        In India the revival of a truly national Art is already an
accomplished fact and the masterpieces of the school can already
challenge comparison with the best work of other
countries.[\[19\]](#_ftn19) Under such circumstances it is unpardonable
that the crude formal teaching of English schools and the vulgar
commercial aims and methods of the West should subsist in our midst. The
country has yet to evolve a system of education which shall be really
national. The taint of Occidental ideals and alien and unsuitable
methods has to be purged out of our minds, and nowhere more than in the
teaching which should be the foundation of intellectual and aesthetic
renovation. The spirit of old Indian Art must be revived, the
inspiration and directness of vision which even now subsists among the
possessors of the ancient traditions, the inborn skill and taste of the
race, the dexterity of the Indian hand and the intuitive gaze of the
Indian eye must be recovered and the whole nation lifted again to the
high level of the ancient culture—and higher.

\*\*\*

Undated

        We of today have been overpowered by the European tradition as
interpreted by the English, the least artistic of civilised nations. We
have therefore come to make on a picture the same demand as on a
photograph,—the reproduction of the thing as the eye sees it.... The
conception that Art exists not to copy, but for the sake of a deeper
truth and vision, and we must seek in it not the object but God in the
object, not things but the soul of things, seems to have vanished for a
while from the Indian consciousness....

        Indian Art demands of the artist the power of communion with the
soul of things, the sense of spiritual taking precedence of the sense of
material beauty, and fidelity to the deeper vision within....

\*\*\*

January 1, 1910

        It is foolish to expect men to make great sacrifices while
discouraging their hope and enthusiasm. It is not intellectual
recognition of duty that compels sustained self-sacrifice in masses of
men; it is hope, it is the lofty ardour of a great cause, it is the
enthusiasm of a noble and courageous effort.

\*\*\*

January 15, 1910

        A bureaucracy is always inclined to be arrogant,
self-sufficient, self-righteous and unsympathetic, to ignore the abuses
with which it abounds....

\*\*\*

Early 1910

        There is no word so plastic and uncertain in its meaning as the
word religion. The word is European.... The average Christian believes
that the Bible is God's book, but ordinarily he does not consider
anything in God's book binding on him in practice except to believe in
God and go to Church once a week; the rest is only meant for the
exceptionally pious. On the whole, therefore, to believe in God, to
believe that He wrote a book,—only one book in all these ages,—and to go
to Church on Sunday is the minimum of religion in Europe; on these
essentials piety and morality may supervene and deepen the meaning.

        Religion in India is a still more plastic term and may mean
anything from the heights of Yoga to strangling your fellowman and
relieving him of the worldly goods he may happen to be carrying with
him. It would therefore take too long to enumerate everything that can
be included in Indian religion. Briefly, however, it is *dharma* or
living religiously, the whole life being governed by religion. But again
what is living religiously? It means, in ordinary practice, living
according to authority. The authority generally accepted is the Shastra;
but when one studies the Shastra and Indian life side by side, one finds
that the two have very little to do with each other; the Indian governs
his life not by the Shastra but by custom and the opinion of the nearest
Brahmin. In practice this resolves itself into certain observances and
social customs of which he understands neither the spiritual meaning nor
the practical utility. To venerate the Scriptures without knowing them
and to obey custom in their place; to reverence all Brahmins whether
they are venerable or despicable; to eat nothing cooked by a social
inferior; to marry one's daughter before puberty and one's son as soon
as possible after it; to keep women ignorant and domestically useful; to
bathe scrupulously and go through certain fixed ablutions; to eat on the
floor and not at a table; to do one's devotions twice a day without
understanding them; to observe a host of meaningless minutiae in one's
daily conduct; to keep the Hindu holidays, when an image is set up,
worshipped and thrown away,—this in India is the minimum of religion.
This is glorified as Hinduism and the Sanatana Dharma. If, in addition,
a man has emotional or ecstatic piety, he is a Bhakta; if he can talk
fluently about the Veda, Upanishads, Darshanas and Puranas, he is a
Jnani. If he puts on a yellow robe and does nothing, he is a *tyagi* or
*sannyasin*. The latter is liberated from the ordinary dharma, but only
if he does nothing but beg and vegetate. All work must be according to
custom and the Brahmin. The one superiority of average Indian religion
is that it does really reverence the genuine Bhakta or Sannyasin
provided he does not come with too strange a garb or too revolutionary
an aspect. The European almost invariably sets him down as a charlatan,
professional religionist, idle drone or religious maniac.

        ...

        The average Hindu is right in his conception of religion as
dharma, to live according to holy rule; but the holy rule is not a mass
of fugitive and temporary customs, but this, to live for God in oneself
and others and not for oneself only, to make the whole life a sadhana
the object of which is to realise the Divine in the world by work, love
and knowledge.¹²

\*\*\*

*  
*

(Early in 1910, the Colonial government took advantage of a few
terrorist acts to stamp out all opposition, arrest and deport
Nationalist leaders and pass increasingly tyrannical laws. There
remained in the field the impotent Moderates on the one hand, and on the
other fruitless and directionless violence. Simultaneously, there were
more pressing portents that the government had finally decided to arrest
Sri Aurobindo again, deport him under its draconian laws, and silence
the Karmayogin. In mid-February, following news of an impending arrest,
Sri Aurobindo received an Adesh to go to Chandernagore, then under
French government. Leaving the Karmayogin office at once, he reached
Chandernagore the next morning, where he remained for a month and a
half, immersed in sadhana. Most of the following extracts are from
articles he had written before leaving, or perhaps sent from
Chandernagore to the Karmayogin, which he had left in the charge of
Sister Nivedita. At the end of March, he received a second Adesh to go
to Pondicherry. The last issue of the Karmayogin came out on April 2,
1910.)

February 19, 1910

        Life creates institutions; institutions do not create, but
express and preserve life. This is a truth we are too apt to forget. The
Europeans and especially our Gurus, the English, attach an exaggerated
importance to machinery, because their own machinery has been so
successful, their organisation so strong and triumphant. In the conceit
of this success they imagine that their machinery is the only machinery
and that the adoption of their organisation by foreign peoples is all
that is needed for perfect social and political felicity.... To take
over those institutions and think that they will magically develop
European virtues, force and robustness, or the vivid and vigorous life
of Europe, is as if a man were to steal another's coat and think to take
over with it his character. Have not indeed many of us thought by
masquerading in the amazing garb which nineteenth century Europe
developed, to become so many brown Englishmen? This curious conjuring
trick did not work; hatted, coated and pantalooned, we still kept the
Chaddar and the Dhoty in our characters. The fond attempt to become
great, enlightened and civilised by borrowing European institutions will
be an equally disastrous failure.

        ...

        But in Europe and India alike we seem to stand on the threshold
of a vast revolution, political, social and religious. Whatever nation
now is the first to solve the problems which are threatening to hammer
Governments, creeds, societies into pieces all the world over, will lead
the world in the age that is coming. It is our ambition that India
should be that nation. But in order that she should be what we wish, it
is necessary that she should be capable of unsparing revolution. She
must have the courage of her past knowledge and the immensity of soul
that will measure itself with her future.

\*

        Men see the waves, they hear the rumour and the thousand voices
and by these they judge the course of the future and the heart of God's
intention; but in nine cases out of ten they misjudge. Therefore it is
said that in history it is always the unexpected that happens. But it
would not be the unexpected if men could turn their eyes from
superficies and look into substance, if they accustomed themselves to
put aside appearances and penetrate beyond them to the secret and
disguised reality, if they ceased listening to the noise of life and
listened rather to its silence.

\*\*\*

February 26, 1910

        The attempt to make boys moral and religious by the teaching of
moral and religious text-books is a vanity and a delusion, precisely
because the heart is not the mind and to instruct the mind does not
necessarily improve the heart.... The danger of moral text-books is that
they make the thinking of high things mechanical and artificial, and
whatever is mechanical and artificial is inoperative for good....

        You can impose a certain discipline on children, dress them into
a certain mould, lash them into a desired path, but unless you can get
their hearts and natures on your side the conformity to this imposed
rule becomes a hypocritical and heartless, a conventional, often a
cowardly compliance....

        The first rule of moral training is to suggest and invite, not
command or impose. The best method of suggestion is by personal example,
daily converse and the books read from day to day. These books should
contain, for the younger student, the lofty example of the past given,
not as moral lessons, but as things of supreme human interest, and, for
the elder student, the great thoughts of great souls, the passages of
literature which set fire to the highest emotions and prompt the highest
ideals and aspirations, the records of history and biography which
exemplify the living of those great thoughts, noble emotions and
aspiring ideals. This is a kind of good company, *satsanga*, which can
seldom fail to have effect so long as sententious sermonising is
avoided, and becomes of the highest effect if the personal life of the
teacher is itself moulded by the great things he places before his
pupils. It cannot, however, have full force unless the young life is
given opportunity, within its limited sphere, of embodying in action the
moral impulses which rise within it.

\*

        The events that sway the world are often the results of trivial
circumstances. When immense changes and irresistible movements are in
progress, it is astonishing how a single event, often a chance event,
will lead to a train of circumstances that alter the face of a country
or the world. At such times a slight turn this way or that produces
results out of all proportion to the cause. It is on such occasions that
we feel most vividly the reality of a Power which disposes of events and
defeats the calculations of men. The end of many things is brought about
by the sudden act of a single individual. A world vanishes, another is
created almost at a touch. Certainty disappears and we begin to realise
what the *pralaya* of the Hindus, the passage from one age to another,
really means and how true is the idea that it is by rapid transitions
long-prepared changes are induced. Such a change now impends all over
the world, and in almost all countries events are happening, the final
results of which the actors do not foresee. Small incidents pass across
the surface of great countries and some of them pass and are forgotten,
others precipitate the future.

\*\*\*

March 5, 1910

        A very remarkable feature of modern training which has been
subjected in India to a *reductio ad absurdum* is the practice of
teaching by snippets. A subject is taught a little at a time, in
conjunction with a host of others, with the result that what might be
well learnt in a single year is badly learned in seven and the boy goes
out ill-equipped, served with imperfect parcels of knowledge, master of
none of the great departments of human knowledge....

        The old system was to teach one or two subjects well and
thoroughly and then proceed to others, and certainly it was a more
rational system than the modern. If it did not impart so much varied
information, it built up a deeper, nobler and more real culture. Much of
the shallowness, discursive lightness and fickle mutability of the
average modern mind is due to the vicious principle of teaching by
snippets. The one defect that can be alleged against the old system was
that the subject earliest learned might fade from the mind of the
student while he was mastering his later studies. But the excellent
training given to the memory by the ancients obviated the incidence of
this defect. In the future education we need not bind ourselves either
by the ancient or the modern system, but select only the most perfect
and rapid means of mastering knowledge.

        In defence of the modern system it is alleged that the attention
of children is easily tired and cannot be subjected to the strain of
long application to a single subject. The frequent change of subject
gives rest to the mind. The question naturally arises: are the children
of modern times then so different from the ancients, and, if so, have we
not made them so by discouraging prolonged concentration?... A child of
seven or eight, and that is the earliest permissible age for the
commencement of any regular kind of study, is capable of a good deal of
concentration if he is interested. Interest is, after all, the basis of
concentration. We make his lessons supremely uninteresting and repellent
to the child, a harsh compulsion the basis of teaching and then complain
of his restless inattention? The substitution of a natural
self-education by the child for the present unnatural system will remove
this objection of inability. A child, like a man, if he is interested,
much prefers to get to the end of his subject rather than leave it
unfinished. To lead him on step by step, interesting and absorbing him
in each as it comes, until he has mastered his subject is the true art
of teaching.

        ...

        The mother-tongue is the proper medium of education and
therefore the first energies of the child should be directed to the
thorough mastering of the medium. Almost every child has an imagination,
an instinct for words, a dramatic faculty, a wealth of idea and fancy.
These should be interested in the literature and history of the nation.
Instead of stupid and dry spelling and reading books, looked on as a
dreary and ungrateful task, he should be introduced by rapidly
progressive stages to the most interesting parts of his own literature
and the life around him and behind him, and they should be put before
him in such a way as to attract and appeal to the qualities of which I
have spoken. All other study at this period should be devoted to the
perfection of the mental functions and the moral character. A foundation
should be laid at this time for the study of history, science,
philosophy, art, but not in an obtrusive and formal manner. Every child
is a lover of interesting narrative, a hero-worshipper and a patriot.
Appeal to these qualities in him and through them let him master without
knowing it the living and human parts of his nation's history. Every
child is an inquirer, an investigator, analyser, a merciless anatomist.
Appeal to those qualities in him and let him acquire without knowing it
the right temper and the necessary fundamental knowledge of the
scientist. Every child has an insatiable intellectual curiosity and turn
for metaphysical enquiry. Use it to draw him on slowly to an
understanding of the world and himself. Every child has the gift of
imitation and a touch of imaginative power. Use it to give him the
ground-work of the faculty of the artist....

        Teaching by snippets must be relegated to the lumber-room of
dead sorrows.

\*\*\*

March 26, 1910

        The work that was begun at Dakshineshwar is far from finished,
it is not even understood. That which Vivekananda received and strove to
develop, has not yet materialised. The truth of the future that Bijoy
Goswami hid within himself, has not yet been revealed utterly to his
disciples. A less discrete revelation prepares, a more concrete force
manifests, but where it comes, when it comes, none knoweth.

\*\*\*

(The following extracts are from “Epistles from Abroad,” written to an
imaginary correspondent in India. Sri Aurobindo wrote these Epistles
early in 1910 and probably intended to publish them in the Karmayogin,
but could not owing to his abrupt departure from Calcutta. Some of the
last extracts are from Epistles he wrote shortly after his arrival at
Pondicherry.)

Dearly beloved,

        ...

        Was life always so trivial, always so vulgar, always so
loveless, pale and awkward as the Europeans have made it? This
well-appointed comfort oppresses me, this perfection of machinery will
not allow the soul to remember that it is not itself a machine.

        Is this then the end of the long march of human civilisation,
this spiritual suicide, this quiet petrifaction of the soul into matter?
Was the successful businessman that grand culmination of manhood toward
which evolution was striving? After all, if the scientific view is
correct, why not? An evolution that started with the protoplasm and
flowered in the ourang-outang and the chimpanzee, may well rest
satisfied with having created hat, coat and trousers, the British
Aristocrat, the American Capitalist and the Parisian Apache. For these,
I believe, are the chief triumphs of the European enlightenment to which
we bow our heads. For these Augustus created Europe, Charlemagne
refounded civilisation, Louis XIV regulated society, Napoleon
systematised the French Revolution. For these Goethe thought,
Shakespeare imagined and created, St. Francis loved, Christ was
crucified. What a bankruptcy! What a beggary of things that were rich
and noble!

        Europe boasts of her science and its marvels. But an Indian
cannot content himself with asking like Voltaire, as the supreme
question, “What have you invented?” His glance is at the soul; it is
that into which he is accustomed to enquire. To the braggart intellect
of Europe he is bound to reply, “I am not interested in what you know, I
am interested in what you are. With all your discoveries and inventions,
what have you become? Your enlightenment is great,—but what are these
strange creatures that move about in the electric light you have
installed and imagine that they are human?” Is it a great gain for the
human intellect to have grown more acute and discerning, if the human
soul dwindles?

        But Science does not admit the existence of soul. The soul, it
says, is only an organised republic of animalcules, and it is in the
mould of that idea Europe has recast herself;—that is what the European
nations are becoming, organised republics of animalcules,—very
intelligent, very methodical, very wonderful talking and reasoning
animalcules but still animalcules. Not what the race set out to be,
creatures made in the image of the Almighty, gods that having fallen
from heaven remember and strive to recover their heritage. Man in Europe
is descending steadily from the human level and approximating to the ant
and the hornet. The process is not complete but it is progressing apace,
and if nothing stops the debacle, we may hope to see its culmination in
this twentieth century. After all our superstitions were better than
this enlightenment, our social abuses less murderous to the hopes of the
race than this social perfection.

        It is a very pleasant inferno they have created in Europe, a
hell not of torments but of pleasures, of lights and carriages, of balls
and dances and suppers, of theatres and cafés and music-halls, of
libraries and clubs and Academies, of National Galleries and
Exhibitions, of factories, shops, banks and Stock Exchanges. But it is
hell all the same, not the heaven of which the saints and the poets
dreamed, the new Jerusalem, the golden city. London and New York are the
holy cities of the new religion, Paris its golden Paradise of Pleasure.

        It is not with impunity that men decide to believe that they are
animals and God does not exist. For what we believe, that we become. The
animal lives by a routine arranged for him by Nature; his life is
devoted to the satisfaction of his instincts bodily, vital and
emotional, and he satisfies himself mechanically, by a regular response
to the working of those instincts. Nature has regularised everything for
him and provided the machinery. Man in Europe arranges his own routine,
invents his own machinery, and adds to the needs of which he is a slave,
the intellectual. But there will soon be no other difference.

        System, organisation, machinery have attained their perfection.
Bondage has been carried to its highest expression, and from a passion
for organising external liberty Europe is slaying her spiritual freedom.
When the inner freedom is gone, the external liberty will follow it, and
a social tyranny more terrible, inquisitorial and relentless than any
that caste ever organised in India, will take its place. The process has
already begun. The shell of external liberty remains, the core is
already being eaten away. Because he is still free to gratify his senses
and enjoy himself, the European thinks himself free. He does not know
what teeth are gnawing into the heart of his liberty.¹³

\*

        It will be well when every Indian, instead of taking a waxlike
stamp from his foreign surroundings, is able to carry India with him
wherever he goes. For that will mean that India is destined to conquer
and place her stamp upon the whole world.¹⁴

\*

        For my part I see failure written large over all the splendid
and ostentatious achievements of Europe. Her costliest experiments, her
greatest expenditure of intellectual and moral force have led to the
swiftest exhaustion of creative activity, the completest bankruptcy of
moral elevation and discouraging of man's once infinite hope. When one
considers how many and swift her bankruptcies have been, the imagination
is appalled by the swiftness of this motor ride to ruin. The bankruptcy
of the ideas of the French Revolution, the bankruptcy of utilitarian
Liberalism, the bankruptcy of national altruism, the bankruptcy of
humanitarianism, the bankruptcy of religious faith, the bankruptcy of
political sincerity, the bankruptcy of true commercial honesty, the
bankruptcy of the personal sense of honour, how swiftly they have all
followed on each other or raced with each other for precedence and kept
at least admirable pace. Only her many-sided science with its great
critical and analytical power and all the contrivances that come of
analysis, is still living and keeps her erect. There remains that last
bankruptcy yet to come and when that is once over, what will be left?
Already I see a dry rot begun in this its most sapful and energetic
part. The firm materialism which was its life and protection, is
beginning also to go bankrupt, and one sees nothing but craze and
fantasy ready to take its place.

        ...

        A thousand newspapers vulgarise knowledge, debase aesthetical
appreciation, democratise success and make impossible all that was once
unusual and noble. The man of letters has become a panderer to the
intellectual appetites of a mob or stands aloof in the narrowness of a
coterie. There is plenty of brilliance everywhere, but one searches in
vain for a firm foundation, the power or the solidity of knowledge. The
select seek paradox in order to distinguish themselves from the herd; a
perpetual reiteration of some startling novelty can alone please the
crowd.... Of all literary forms the novel only has still some genius and
even that is perishing of the modern curse of overproduction.

        Learning and scholarship are unendingly active over the dead
corpse of creative power as in Alexandria and with the later Romans
before the great darkness.... Yesterday's opinion is today exploded and
discarded, new fireworks of theory, generalisation and speculation take
the place of the old, and to this pyrotechnic rushing in a circle they
give the name of progress....

        In a word, the whole of Europe is now a magnified Alexandria,
brilliant forms with a perishing soul in imitation of the forms of
health, feverish activity with no capital but the energy of the sickbed.
One has to concede however that it is not altogether sterile, for all
Europe and America pullulate with ever multiplying machinery.¹⁵

\*

        These hollow worm-eaten outsides of Hinduism crumbling so
sluggishly, so fatally to some sudden and astonishing dissolution, do
not frighten me. Within them I find the soul of a civilisation alive,
though sleeping. I see upon it the consoling sentence of God, “Because
thou hast believed in me, therefore thou shalt live and not perish.”
Also, I look through the garnished outsides, gaudy, not beautiful,
pretentious, not great, boastful, not secure, of this vaunting,
aggressive, dominant Europe and I have seen written on the heart of its
civilisation a sentence of death and mounting already from the heart to
the brain an image of annihilation....

        It is not in noble figures that she presents herself to my
imagination, this sole enlightened continent, it is not fear or respect
that they awaken in my mind, these civilised superior nations. I see a
little girl wearing a new frock and showing herself off to Mamma and all
the world, unable to conceal her pride and delight in the thought that
never was a frock so new and nice or a little girl so pretty,—never was
and never will be! I think of a very small boy to whom somebody has
given a very big cane—one can see him brandishing it, executing now and
then an exultant war-dance, tormenting, tyrannising over and plundering
of their little belongings all the smaller boys he can get within his
cane's reach, not displeased if they show a little fight so that he can
exhibit his heroic strength of arm by punishing them. And then he adorns
himself with glittering Victoria crosses and calls on all his associates
to admire his gallant and his daredevil courage. Sometimes it reminds me
of an old man, a man very early old, still strong in his decrepitude,
garrulous, well-informed, luxurious, arrogant, intelligent, still busy
toddling actively from place to place, looking into this, meddling in
that, laying down the law dogmatically on every point under the sun; and
through it all the clutch already nearing the brain, the shaking of the
palsy already foreshadowed in tremulous movement and uncertain nerve.
Very true, Europe, your frock is the cleanest and newest, for the
present, your stick the biggest, your war-dance a very frightening
spectacle,—frightening even to yourselves—with Krupp and Mauser and
machine gun what else should it be, you are indeed for a while the
robust, enlightened oldster you seem. But afterwards. Well, afterwards
there will be a newer frock, a bigger stick, a war-dance much more
terrible and a real Titan grasping at the earth for his own instead of
the sham.¹⁶

\*

        There are two Hinduisms; one which takes its stand on the
kitchen and seeks its Paradise by cleaning the body; another which seeks
God, not through the cooking pot and the social convention, but in the
soul. The latter is also Hinduism and it is a good deal older and more
enduring than the other; it is the Hinduism of Bhishma and Srikrishna,
of Shankara and Chaitanya, the Hinduism which exceeds Hindusthan, was
from of old and will be for ever, because it grows eternally through the
aeons.

        ...

        Let us have done with sects and churches and worship God only.
The destruction of bondage, the realisation of freedom, the trampling
upon our fetters, that is the first need of the future.... The soul of
Hinduism languishes in an unfit body. Break the mould that the soul may
live.... If the body were young, adaptable, fit, the liberated soul
might use it, but it is decrepit, full of ill-health and impurity. It
must be changed, not by the spirit of Western iconoclasm which destroys
the soul with the body, but by national Yoga.¹⁷

\*\*\*

</div>

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) References to two largely meaningless reforms that
the Congress was at the time begging from the British rulers.

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) See references at the end of the book.

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) The population of India, which at the time included
present-day Pakistan and Bangladesh.

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) This is one of the first times, if not the first,
that an Indian had the courage to publicly call for India's complete
independence.

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) A writer who, defending British imperialism, spoke of
“the justifiable pride which the cultivated members of a civilised
community feel in the beneficent exercise of dominion and in the
performance by their nation of the noble task of spreading the highest
kind of civilisation \[*sic*!\].”

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) This policy led two years later to the Morley-Minto
reforms (see November 6 & 20, 1909). The first meeting of the Muslim
League was held at Karachi on December 29, 1907.

</div>

<div id="ftn7" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) Sri Aurobindo seldom used the words “Extremism” or
“Extremist Party,” which were the British government's and the Congress
Moderates' derogatory designation of the Nationalist movement. By
“Nationalism,” Sri Aurobindo did not mean any narrow doctrine, but
called upon his countrymen to be proud of their country and civilization
and to work for the fulfilment of the Indian genius.

</div>

<div id="ftn8" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) A mantra capable of bringing a dead man back to life.

</div>

<div id="ftn9" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) Sri Aurobindo is referring not only to the exactions
of the Zamindars, but also to the British planters' cruel treatment of
the peasantry and the ruthless imposition of high taxes which greatly
impoverished it, often resulting in recurring famines. The huge drain of
wealth to Britain from all fields of India's economic life was well
documented at the time in Dadabhai Naoroji’s *Poverty and Un-British
Rule in India* (1876), in Romesh Dutt’s *Economic History of India*
(1901), and in Sakharam Ganesh Deuskar's *Desher Katha* (1904, in
Bengali); the last two books, in particular, had a great influence on
the birth of the Swadeshi movement.

</div>

<div id="ftn10" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) An allusion to the 1905 awakening.

</div>

<div id="ftn11" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) This passage and the preceding one are from
unpublished articles which the police seized at the time of Sri
Aurobindo's arrest in May, 1908. These two articles were produced as
evidence in the Alipore Bomb case, as the prosecution hoped to show that
they were seditious and advocated violence to overthrow British rule in
India.

</div>

<div id="ftn12" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[12\]](#_ftnref12) Thus wrote Lord Minto, the then Viceroy of India on
Sri Aurobindo.⁹ Sir Edward Baker, Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal,
concurred: “I attribute the spread of seditious doctrines to him
personally in a greater degree than to any other single individual in
Bengal, or possibly in India.”¹⁰

</div>

<div id="ftn13" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[13\]](#_ftnref13) It is important to note that Sri Aurobindo, in the
Indian context, uses the word “religion” not in a narrow dogmatic sense,
but always in the broader Hindu view of *dharma* (see for instance March
16, 1908 & August 4, 1926).

</div>

<div id="ftn14" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[14\]](#_ftnref14) Sri Aurobindo always used the word “Aryan” (whether
people or culture) in its original sense of Vedic Indian. As further
passages will make clear, he did not subscribe to the nineteenth-century
theories which conjectured the existence of an Aryan race which invaded
India in pre-Vedic times; those theories are now discredited (see notes
7 & 8, part II).

</div>

<div id="ftn15" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[15\]](#_ftnref15) Seats of the British colonial government in India.

</div>

<div id="ftn16" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[16\]](#_ftnref16) Flatteries directed, since the beginnings of the
Congress last century, to the leaders of Muslim political groups. This
politics of flattery, which Gandhi took up again later and raised to
extremes, only gave strength to Muslim politicians and encouraged them
to assert their demands, leading ultimately to the demand for India’s
partition and the creation of Pakistan.

</div>

<div id="ftn17" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[17\]](#_ftnref17) Since the uprising that followed the partition of
Bengal, the Colonial government's repression had become particularly
cunning and ruthless.

</div>

<div id="ftn18" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[18\]](#_ftnref18) Sri Aurobindo is referring to “The Message of the
East,” an article by A. K. Coomaraswamy in *The Modern Review*.

</div>

<div id="ftn19" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[19\]](#_ftnref19) Sri Aurobindo is referring in particular to the
remarkable artistic awakening which Bengal witnessed at the end of the
nineteenth century, with the Tagore family providing its most talented
leaders. This revival, however, could not resist the utilitarian
onslaught and started fading away in the 1930s.

</div>

</div>

  
  
  

**[Editor's Note](IR_editnote.htm)      [Front
Page](IR_frontpage.htm)    [VOI Online
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.org/books/)     [Part
II](IR_part2.htm)**
