---
title: 02 IR part2

---
<div class="Section1">

II

1910-1922

(On April 4, 1910, Sri Aurobindo, still wanted by the British, reached
Pondicherry clandestinely. A third charge of sedition against him, for
an article in the Karmayogin, failed in his absence. For several years
he was going to live in this French colony as a fugitive, with spies and
rumours hovering about him and his small group of companions.

For some time Sri Aurobindo thought of returning to British India, but
he soon saw that “enough had been done to change the whole face of
Indian politics and the whole spirit of the Indian people to make
independence its aim,” as he wrote later. “His own personal intervention
in politics would therefore no longer be indispensable. Apart from all
this, the magnitude of the spiritual work set before him became more and
more clear to him, and he saw that the concentration of all his energies
on it was necessary.” But Sri Aurobindo's retirement from political
activity “did not mean, as most people supposed, that he had retired
into some height of spiritual experience devoid of any further interest
in the world or in the fate of India.”¹⁸

The following excerpts are from letters, articles and essays; many of
the latter appeared in the Arya, an English monthly Sri Aurobindo
published from 1914 to 1921, in which he wrote most of his important
works.)

1910-1912

        We have, most of us, our chosen explanation of this dolorous
phenomenon \[of the decline of Indian civilisation\]. The patriot
attributes our decline to the ravages of foreign invasion and the
benumbing influences of foreign rule; the disciple of European
materialism finds out the enemy, the evil, the fount and origin of all
our ills, in our religion and its time-honoured social self-expression.
Such explanations, like most human thoughts, have their bright side of
truth as well as their obscure side of error; but they are not, in any
case, the result of impartial thinking. Man may be, as he has been
defined, a reasoning animal, but it is necessary to add that he is, for
the most part, a very badly reasoning animal. He does not ordinarily
think for the sake of finding out the truth, but much more for the
satisfaction of his mental preferences and emotional tendencies; his
conclusions spring from his preferences, prejudices and passions; and
his reasoning and logic paraded to justify them are only a specious
process or a formal mask for his covert approach to an upshot previously
necessitated by his heart or by his temperament. When we are awakened
from our modern illusions, as we have been awakened from our mediaeval
superstitions, we shall find that the intellectual conclusions of the
rationalist, for all their pomp and protest of scrupulous enquiry, were
as much dogmas as those former dicta of Pope and theologian, which
confessed without shame their simple basis in the negation of reason....
It is always best, therefore, to scrutinise very narrowly those bare,
trenchant explanations which so easily satisfy the pugnacious animal in
our intellect; when we have admitted that small part of the truth on
which they seize, we should always look for the large part which they
have missed.

        ...

        Few societies have been so tamasic, so full of inertia and
contentment in increasing narrowness as Indian society in later times;
few have been so eager to preserve themselves in inertia. Few therefore
have attached so great an importance to authority. Every detail of our
life has been fixed for us by Shastra and custom, every detail of our
thought by Scripture and its commentators,—but much oftener by the
commentators than by Scripture. Only in one field, that of individual
spiritual experience, have we cherished the ancient freedom and
originality out of which our past greatness sprang; it is from some new
movement in this inexhaustible source that every fresh impulse and
rejuvenated strength has arisen. Otherwise we should long ago have been
in the grave where dead nations lie, with Greece and Rome of the
Caesars, with Esarhaddon[\[1\]](#_ftn1) and the
Chosroes[\[2\]](#_ftn2)....

        The result of this well-meaning bondage \[to the outer forms of
Hinduism\] has been an increasing impoverishment of the Indian
intellect, once the most gigantic and original in the world. Hence a
certain incapacity, atrophy, impotence have marked our later activities
even at their best. The most striking instance is our continued
helplessness in the face of the new conditions and new knowledge imposed
on us by recent European contact. We have tried to assimilate, we have
tried to reject, we have tried to select; but we have not been able to
do any of these things successfully. Successful assimilation depends on
mastery; but we have not mastered European conditions and knowledge,
rather we have been seized, subjected and enslaved by them. Successful
rejection is possible only if we have intelligent possession of that
which we wish to keep. Our rejection too must be an intelligent
rejection; we must reject because we have understood, not because we
have failed to understand. But our Hinduism, our old culture are
precisely the possessions we have cherished with the least intelligence;
throughout the whole range of our life we do things without knowing why
we do them, we believe things without knowing why we believe them, we
assert things without knowing what right we have to assert them,—or, at
most, it is because some book or some Brahmin enjoins it, because
Shankara thinks it, or because someone has so interpreted something that
he asserts to be a fundamental Scripture of our religion. Nothing is our
own, nothing native to our intelligence, all is derived. As little have
we understood the new knowledge; we have only understood what the
Europeans want us to think about themselves and their modern
civilisation. Our English culture—if culture it can be called—has
increased tenfold the evil of our dependence instead of remedying it.

        ...

        How shall we recover our lost intellectual freedom and
elasticity? By reversing, for a time at least, the process by which we
lost it, by liberating our minds in all subjects from the thraldom to
authority. That is not what reformers and the Anglicised require of us.
They ask us, indeed, to abandon authority, to revolt against custom and
superstition, to have free and enlightened minds. But they mean by these
sounding recommendations that we should renounce the authority of Sayana
for the authority of Max Müller, the Monism of Shankara for the Monism
of Haeckel, the written Shastra for the unwritten law of European social
opinion, the dogmatism of Brahmin Pandits for the dogmatism of European
scientists, thinkers and scholars. Such a foolish exchange of servitude
can receive the assent of no self-respecting mind. Let us break our
chains, venerable as they are, but let it be in order to be free,—in the
name of truth, not in the name of Europe. It would be a poor bargain to
exchange our old Indian illuminations, however dark they may have grown
to us, for a derivative European enlightenment or replace the
superstitions of popular Hinduism by the superstitions of materialistic
Science.

        Our first necessity, if India is to survive and do her appointed
work in the world, is that the youth of India should learn to think,—to
think on all subjects, to think independently, fruitfully, going to the
heart of things, not stopped by their surface, free of prejudgments,
shearing sophism and prejudice asunder as with a sharp sword, smiting
down obscurantism of all kinds as with the mace of Bhima....

        Let us not, either, select at random, make a nameless hotchpotch
and then triumphantly call it the assimilation of East and West. We must
begin by accepting nothing on trust from any source whatsoever, by
questioning everything and forming our own conclusions. We need not fear
that we shall by that process cease to be Indians or fall into the
danger of abandoning Hinduism. India can never cease to be India or
Hinduism to be Hinduism, if we really think for ourselves. It is only if
we allow Europe to think for us that India is in danger of becoming an
ill-executed and foolish copy of Europe.... We must ... take our stand
on that which is true and lasting. But in order to find out what in our
conceptions is true and lasting, we must question all alike rigorously
and impartially. The necessity of such a process not for India, but for
all humanity has been recognised by leading European thinkers. It was
what Carlyle meant when he spoke of swallowing all formulas. It was the
process by which Goethe helped to reinvigorate European thinking. But
... Europe has for some time ceased to produce original thinkers, though
it still produces original mechanicians.... China, Japan and the
Mussulman states are sliding into a blind European imitativeness. In
India alone there is self-contained, dormant, the energy and the
invincible spiritual individuality which can yet arise and break her own
and the world's fetters.¹⁹

\*

        Even causes hopelessly lost and deserving to be lost will find
their defenders and unworthy altars do not lack incense.²⁰

\*

        Reform is not an excellent thing in itself as many Europeanised
intellects imagine; neither is it always safe and good to stand unmoved
in the ancient paths as the orthodox obstinately believe. Reform is
sometimes the first step to the abyss, but immobility is the most
perfect way to stagnate and to putrefy. Neither is moderation always the
wisest counsel: the mean is not always golden. It is often an euphemism
for purblindness, for a tepid indifference or for a cowardly
inefficiency. Men call themselves moderates, conservatives or extremists
and manage their conduct and opinions in accordance with a formula. We
like to think by systems and parties and forget that truth is the only
standard. Systems are merely convenient cases for keeping arranged
knowledge, parties a useful machinery for combined action; but we make
of them an excuse for avoiding the trouble of thought.

        One is astonished at the position of the orthodox. They labour
to deify everything that exists. Hindu society has certain arrangements
and habits which are merely customary. There is no proof that they
existed in ancient times nor any reason why they should last into the
future.... Neither antiquity nor modernity can be the test of truth or
the test of usefulness. All the Rishis do not belong to the past; the
Avatars still come; revelation still continues.... To recreate Manu
entire in modern society is to ask Ganges to flow back to the Himalayas.
Manu is no doubt national, but so is the animal sacrifice and the burnt
offering. Because a thing is national of the past, it need not follow
that it must be national of the future. It is stupid not to recognise
altered conditions.... To all things there is a date and a limit. All
long-continued customs have been sovereignly useful in their time, even
totemism and polyandry. We must not ignore the usefulness of the past,
but we seek in preference a present and a future utility.

        Custom and Law may then be altered. For each age its Shastra.
But we cannot argue straight off that it must be altered, or even if
alteration is necessary, that it must be altered in a given direction.
One is repelled by the ignorant enthusiasm of social reformers. Their
minds are usually a strange jumble of ill-digested European notions.
Very few of them know anything about Europe, and even those who have
visited it know it badly. But they will not allow things or ideas
contrary to European notions to be anything but superstitious,
barbarous, harmful and benighted, they will not suffer what is praised
and practised in Europe to be anything but rational and enlightened....

        Almost every point that the social reformers raise could be
settled one way or the other without effecting the permanent good of
society. It is pitiful to see men labouring the point of marriage
between subcastes and triumphing over an isolated instance. Whether the
spirit as well as the body of caste should remain, is the modern
question. Let Hindus remember that caste as it stands is merely *jat*,
the trade guild sanctified but no longer working, it is not the eternal
religion, it is not *caturvarnya*. I do not care whether widows marry or
remain single; but it is of infinite importance to consider how woman
shall be legally and socially related to man, as his inferior, equal or
superior; for even the relation of superiority is no more impossible in
the future than it was in the far-distant past. And the most important
question of all is whether society shall be competitive or cooperative,
individualistic or communistic. That we should talk so little about
these things and be stormy over insignificant details, shows painfully
the impoverishment of the average Indian intellect. If these greater
things are decided, as they must be, the smaller will arrange
themselves....

        Men have long been troubling themselves about social reform and
blameless orthodoxy, and orthodoxy has crumbled without social reform
being effected. But all the time God has been going about India getting
His work done in spite of the talking. Unknown to men the social
revolution prepares itself, and it is not in the direction they think,
for it embraces the world, not India only. Whether we like it or not, He
will sweep out the refuse of the Indian past and the European present.
But the broom is not always sufficient; sometimes He uses the sword in
preference. It seems probable that it will be used, for the world does
not mend itself quickly, and therefore it will have violently to be
mended....

        Men cry out dismally and lament that all is perishing. But if
they trust in God's Love and Wisdom, not preferring to it their
conservative and narrow notions, they would rather insist that all is
being reborn.

        So much depends on Time and God's immediate purpose that it is
more important to seek out His purpose than to attach ourselves to our
own nostrums. The Kala Purusha, Zeitgeist and Death-Spirit, has risen to
his dreadful work—*lokaksayakrt pravrddhah,* increasing to destroy a
world \[Gita, 11.32\],—and who shall stay the terror and mightiness and
irresistibility of Him? But He is not only destroying the world that
was, He is creating the world that shall be; it is therefore more
profitable for us to discover and help what He is building than to
lament and hug in our arms what He is destroying.... Kali is the age for
a destruction and rebirth, not for a desperate clinging to the old that
can no longer be saved....

        Has the time arrived for that destruction? We think that it has.
Listen to the crash of those waters, more formidable than the noise of
assault,—mark that slow, sullen, remorseless sapping,—watch pile after
pile of our patched incoherent ramshackle structure corroding, creaking,
shaking with the blows, breaking, sinking silently or with a splash,
suddenly or little by little into the yeast of those billows. Has the
time arrived for a new construction? We say it has. Mark the activity,
eagerness and hurrying to and fro of mankind, the rapid prospecting,
seeking, digging, founding,—see the Avatars and great *vibhutis* coming,
arising thickly, treading each close behind the other. Are not these the
signs and do they not tell us that the great Avatar of all arrives to
establish the first Satya Yuga of the Kali?...

        Yes, a new harmony, but not the scrannel pipes of European
materialism, not an Occidental foundation upon half truths and whole
falsehoods. When there is destruction, it is the form that perishes, not
the spirit—for the world and its ways are forms of one Truth which
appears in this material world in ever new bodies.... In India, the
chosen land, \[that Truth\] is preserved; in the soul of India it sleeps
expectant on that soul's awakening, the soul of India leonine, luminous,
locked in the closed petals of the ancient lotus of love, strength and
wisdom, not in her weak, soiled, transient and miserable externals.
India alone can build the future of mankind.²¹

\*

        Ancient or pre-Buddhistic Hinduism sought Him both in the world
and outside it; it took its stand on the strength and beauty and joy of
the Veda, unlike modern or post-Buddhistic Hinduism which is oppressed
with Buddha's sense of universal sorrow and Shankara's sense of
universal illusion,—Shankara who was the better able to destroy Buddhism
because he was himself half a Buddhist. Ancient Hinduism aimed socially
at our fulfilment in God in life, modern Hinduism at the escape from
life to God. The more modern ideal is fruitful of a noble and ascetic
spirituality, but has a chilling and hostile effect on social soundness
and development; social life under its shadow stagnates for want of
belief and delight, *sraddha* and *ananda*. If we are to make our
society perfect and the nation is to live again, then we must revert to
the earlier and fuller truth.²²

\*\*\*

July 13, 1911

*(From a letter to a friend.)*

        Be very careful to follow my instructions in avoiding the old
kind of politics. Spirituality is India's only politics, the fulfilment
of the Sanatana Dharma its only Swaraj. I have no doubt we shall have to
go through our Parliamentary period in order to get rid of the notion of
Western democracy by seeing in practice how helpless it is to make
nations blessed. India is passing really through the first stages of a
sort of national Yoga. It was mastered in the inception by the inrush of
divine force which came in 1905 and aroused it from its state of
complete tamasic *ajñanam* \[ignorance\]. But, as happens also with
individuals, all that was evil, all the wrong *samskaras* \[imprints\]
and wrong emotions and mental and moral habits rose with it and misused
the divine force. Hence all that orgy of political oratory, democratic
fervour, meetings, processions, passive resistance, all ending in bombs,
revolvers and Coercion laws.... God has struck it all down,—Moderatism,
the bastard child of English Liberalism; Nationalism, the mixed progeny
of Europe and Asia; Terrorism, the abortive offspring of Bakunin and
Mazzini.... It is only when this foolishness is done with that truth
will have a chance, the sattwic mind in India emerge and a really strong
spiritual movement begin as a prelude to India's regeneration. No doubt,
there will be plenty of trouble and error still to face, but we shall
have a chance of putting our feet on the right path. In all I believe
God to be guiding us, giving the necessary experiences, preparing the
necessary conditions.²³

\*\*\*

1910-1914

(In the first years of his stay at Pondicherry, Sri Aurobindo made a
deep study of the Veda and, struck by the light it threw on his own
experiences, rediscovered its lost meaning. A series of extracts from
early manuscripts on the Veda:)

        I seek a light that shall be new, yet old, the oldest indeed of
all lights.... I seek not science, not religion, not Theosophy, but
Veda—the truth about Brahman, not only about His essentiality, but about
His manifestation, not a lamp on the way to the forest, but a light and
a guide to joy and action in the world, the truth which is beyond
opinion, the knowledge which all thought strives after—*yasmin vijñate
sarvam vijñatam* \[which being known, all is known\]. I believe that
Veda to be the foundation of the Sanatan Dharma; I believe it to be the
concealed divinity within Hinduism,—but a veil has to be drawn aside, a
curtain has to be lifted. I believe it to be knowable and discoverable.
I believe the future of India and the world to depend on its discovery
and on its application, not to the renunciation of life, but to life in
the world and among men.²⁴

\*

        Men set up an authority and put it between themselves and
knowledge. The orthodox are indignant that a mere modern should presume
to differ from Shankara in interpreting the Vedanta or from Sayana in
interpreting the Veda. They forget that Shankara and Sayana are
themselves moderns, separated from ourselves by some hundreds of years
only, but the Vedas are many thousands of years old. The commentator
ought to be studied, but instead we put him in place of the text. Good
commentaries are always helpful even when they are wrong, but the best
cannot be allowed to fetter inquiry. Sayana's commentary on the Veda
helps me by showing what a man of great erudition some hundreds of years
ago thought to be the sense of the Scripture. But I cannot forget that
even at the time of the Brahmanas[\[3\]](#_ftn3) the meaning of the Veda
had become dark to the men of that prehistoric age.... I find that
Shankara had grasped much of Vedantic truth, but that much was dark to
him. I am bound to admit what he realised; I am not bound to exclude
what he failed to realise. *Aptavakyam*, authority, is one kind of
proof; it is not the only kind: *pratyaksa* \[direct knowledge\] is more
important.

        The heterodox on the other hand swear by Max Müller and the
Europeans.... The Europeans have seen in our Veda only the rude chants
of an antique and primitive pastoral race sung in honour of the forces
of Nature, and for many their opinion is conclusive of the significance
of the *mantras*. All other interpretation is to them superstitious. But
to me the ingenious guesses of foreign grammarians are of no more
authority than the ingenious guesses of Sayana. It is irrelevant to me
what Max Müller thinks of the Veda or what Sayana thinks of the Veda. I
should prefer to know what the Veda has to say for itself and, if there
is any light there on the unknown or on the infinite, to follow the ray
till I come face to face with that which it illumines.²⁵

\*

        Europe has formed certain views about the Veda and the Vedanta,
and succeeded in imposing them on the Indian intellect.... When a
hundred world-famous scholars cry out, “This is so”, it is hard indeed
for the average mind, and even minds above the average but inexpert in
these special subjects not to acquiesce....

        Nevertheless a time must come when the Indian mind will shake
off the darkness that has fallen upon it, cease to think or hold
opinions at second and third hand and reassert its right to judge and
enquire in a perfect freedom into the meaning of its own Scriptures.
When that day comes we shall, I think, discover that the imposing fabric
of Vedic theory is based upon nothing more sound or true than a
foundation of loosely massed conjectures. We shall question many
established philological myths,—the legend, for instance, of an Aryan
invasion of India from the north, the artificial and inimical
distinction of Aryan and Dravidian which an erroneous
philology[\[4\]](#_ftn4) has driven like a wedge into the unity of the
homogenous Indo-Afghan race; the strange dogma of a
“henotheistic”[\[5\]](#_ftn5) Vedic naturalism; the ingenious and
brilliant extravagances of the modern sun and star myth weavers....²⁶

\*

        I will take this Puranic theory \[of cycles of civilisation that
preceded ours\] as a working hypothesis and suppose at least that there
was a great Vedic age of advanced civilisation broken afterwards by Time
and circumstance and of which modern Hinduism presents us only some
preserved, collected or redeveloped fragments.... We need not understand
by an advanced civilisation a culture or a society at all resembling
what our modern notions conceive to be the only model of a civilised
society—the modern European; neither need or indeed can we suppose it to
have been at all on the model of the modern Hindu. It is probable that
this ancient culture had none of those material conveniences on which we
vaunt ourselves,—but it may have had others of a higher, possibly even a
more potent kind.

        ...

        I believe the Vedas to hold a sense which neither mediaeval
India nor modern Europe has grasped, but which was perfectly plain to
the early Vedantic thinkers. Max Müller has understood one thing by the
Vedic mantras, Sayana has understood another, Yaska had his own
interpretations of their antique diction, but none of them understood
what Yajñavalkya and Ajatashatrou understood.... It is because we do not
understand the Vedas that three fourths of the Upanishads are a sealed
book to us. Even of the little we think we can understand, much has been
insecurely grasped and superficially comprehended.... For want of this
key profound scholars have fumbled and for want of this guidance great
thinkers gone astray,—Max Müller emitted his wonderful utterance about
the “babblings of humanity's nonage,”[\[6\]](#_ftn6) Shankara left so
much of his text unexplained or put it by as inferior truth for the
ignorant, Vivekananda found himself compelled to admit his
non-comprehension of the Vedantin's cosmological ideas and mention them
doubtfully as curious speculations.... Only when we thoroughly know the
great Vedic ideas in their totality shall we be able entirely to
appreciate the profound harmonious and grandiose system of thought of
our early forefathers.²⁷

\*

        Religious movements and revolutions have come and gone or left
their mark but after all and through all the Veda remains to us our Rock
of the Ages, our eternal foundation.... The Upanishads, mighty as they
are, only aspire to bring out, arrange philosophically in the language
of later thinking and crown with the supreme name of Brahman the eternal
knowledge enshrined in the Vedas. Yet for some two thousand years at
least no Indian has really understood the Vedas.

        ...

        I find in the Aryan and Dravidian tongues, the Aryan and
Dravidian races not separate and unconnected families but two branches
of a single stock. The legend of the Aryan invasion and settlement in
the Panjab in Vedic times is, to me, a philological
myth.^(28 [\[7\]](#_ftn7))

\*

        The Veda was the beginning of our spiritual knowledge; the Veda
will remain its end. These compositions of an unknown antiquity are as
the many breasts of the eternal Mother of knowledge from which our
succeeding ages have all been fed....

        The recovery of the perfect truth of the Veda is therefore not
merely a desideratum for our modern intellectual curiosity, but a
practical necessity for the future of the human race. For I believe
firmly that the secret concealed in the Veda, when entirely discovered,
will be found to formulate perfectly that knowledge and practice of a
divine life to which the march of humanity, after long wanderings in the
satisfaction of the intellect and senses, must inevitably return.²⁹

\*

        It is a superstition of modern thought that the march of
knowledge has in all its parts progressed always in a line of forward
progress deviating from it, no doubt, in certain periods of obscuration,
but always returning and in the sum constituting everywhere an advance
and nowhere a retrogression. Like all superstitions this belief is
founded on bad and imperfect observation flowering into a logical
fallacy.... The logical fallacy we land in as the goal of our bad
observation is the erroneous conception that because we are more
advanced than certain ancient peoples in our own especial lines of
success, as the physical sciences, therefore necessarily we are also
more advanced in other lines where we are still infants and have only
recently begun to observe and experiment, as the science of psychology
and the knowledge of our subjective existence and of mental forces....
While our forefathers believed that the more ancient might on the whole
be trusted as more authoritative, because nearer to the gods, and the
less ancient less authoritative because nearer to man's ultimate
degeneracy, we \[moderns\] believe on the contrary that the more ancient
is always on the whole more untrue because nearer to the unlettered and
unenquiring savage, the more modern the more true because held as
opinion by the lettered and instructed citizen of Paris or Berlin.
Neither position can be accepted. Verification by experience and
experiment is the only standard of truth, not antiquity, not modernity.
Some of the ideas of the ancients or even of the savage now scouted by
us may be lost truths or statements of valid experience from which we
have turned or become oblivious; many of the notions of the modern
schoolmen will certainly in the future be scouted as erroneous and
superstitious.³⁰

\*

        The time-limit allowed for the growth of civilisation \[by the
theory of a straight-line progression from a primitive age\] is still
impossibly short.... We can no longer argue that no ancient
civilisations can have existed of which the traces have entirely
perished and that prehistoric means, necessarily, savage and
undeveloped.... Everything tends to show that there must be the remains
of other civilisations yet undiscovered. We cannot have exhausted all
that the earth contains.^(31 [\[8\]](#_ftn8))

\*\*\*

1914-1915

(A few of Sri Aurobindo's “Thoughts and Aphorisms”)

How much hatred and stupidity men succeed in packing up decorously and
labelling “Religion”?

The quarrels of religious sects are like the disputing of pots, which
shall be alone allowed to hold the immortalising nectar. Let them
dispute, but the thing for us is to get at the nectar in whatever pot
and attain immortality.

Break the moulds of the past, but keep safe its gains and its spirit, or
else thou hast no future.

There are two for whom there is hope, the man who has felt God's touch
and been drawn to it and the sceptical seeker and self-convinced
atheist; but for the formularists of all the religions and the parrots
of free thought, they are dead souls who follow a death that they call
living.

Thus said Ramakrishna and thus said Vivekananda. Yes, but let me know
also the truths which the Avatar cast not forth into speech and the
prophet has omitted from his teachings. There will always be more in God
than the thought of man has ever conceived or the tongue of man has ever
uttered.

\*

The mediaeval ascetics hated women and thought they were created by God
for the temptation of monks. One may be allowed to think more nobly both
of God and of woman.

\*

Fight, while thy hands are free, with thy hands and thy voice and thy
brain and all manner of weapons. Art thou chained in the enemy's
dungeons and have his gags silenced thee? Fight with thy silent
all-besieging soul and thy wide-ranging will-power and when thou art
dead, fight still with the world-encompassing force that went out from
God within thee.

Thou thinkest the ascetic in his cave or on his mountain-top a stone and
a do-nothing. What dost thou know? He may be filling the world with the
mighty currents of his will and changing it by the pressure of his
soul-state.

\*

The existence of poverty is the proof of an unjust and ill-organised
society, and our public charities are but the first tardy awakening in
the conscience of a robber.

Selfishness kills the soul; destroy it. But take care that your altruism
does not kill the souls of others.

\*

Medical Science has been more a curse to mankind than a blessing. It has
broken the force of epidemics and unveiled a marvellous surgery; but,
also, it has weakened the natural health of man and multiplied
individual diseases; it has implanted fear and dependence in the mind
and body; it has taught our health to repose not on natural soundness
but a rickety and distasteful crutch compact from the mineral and
vegetable kingdoms.

Machinery is necessary to modern humanity because of our incurable
barbarism. If we must encase ourselves in a bewildering multitude of
comforts and trappings, we must needs do without Art and its methods;
for to dispense with simplicity and freedom is to dispense with beauty.
The luxury of our ancestors was rich and even gorgeous, but never
encumbered.

\*

When Asiatics massacre, it is an atrocity; when Europeans, it is a
military exigency. Appreciate the distinction and ponder over this
world’s virtues.

The communistic principle of society is intrinsically as superior to the
individualistic as is brotherhood to jealousy and mutual slaughter; but
all the practical schemes of Socialism invented in Europe are a yoke, a
tyranny and a prison.

If communism ever reestablishes itself successfully upon earth, it must
be on a foundation of soul's brotherhood and the death of egoism. A
forced association and a mechanical comradeship would end in a
world-wide fiasco.

Democracy in Europe is the rule of the Cabinet minister, the corrupt
deputy or the self-seeking capitalist masqued by the occasional
sovereignty of a wavering populace; Socialism in Europe is likely to be
the rule of the official and policeman masqued by the theoretic
sovereignty of an abstract State. It is chimerical to enquire which is
the better system; it would be difficult to decide which is the worse.

The gain of democracy is the security of the individual's life, liberty
and goods from the caprices of the tyrant one or the selfish few; its
evil is the decline of greatness in humanity.

This erring race of human beings dreams always of perfecting their
environment by the machinery of government and society; but it is only
by the perfection of the soul within that the outer environment can be
perfected. What thou art within, that outside thee thou shalt enjoy; no
machinery can rescue thee from the law of thy being.

Europe prides herself on her practical and scientific organisation and
efficiency. I am waiting till her organisation is perfect; then a child
shall destroy her.

\*

So long as a cause has on its side one soul that is intangible in faith,
it cannot perish.³³

\*\*\*

August 29, 1914

(From a letter to Motilal Roy, a revolutionary from Chandernagore who
later attempted to create a commune based on Sri Aurobindo's ideals.)

        Gandhi's loyalism[\[9\]](#_ftn9) is not a pattern for India
which is not South Africa, and even Gandhi's loyalism is corrected by
passive resistance. An abject tone of servility in politics is not
“diplomacy” and is not good politics. It does not deceive or disarm the
opponent; it does encourage nervelessness, fear and a cringing cunning
in the subject people. What Gandhi has been attempting in South Africa
is to secure for Indians the position of kindly treated serfs,—as a
stepping-stone to something better.... Our position is different and our
aim is different, not to secure a few privileges, but to create a nation
of men fit for independence and able to secure and keep it.

\*\*\*

August, 1914

        In the fixed tradition of thousands of years \[the Vedas\] have
been revered as the origin and standard of all that can be held as
authoritative and true in Brahmana and Upanishad, in Tantra and Purana,
in the doctrines of great philosophical schools and in the teachings of
famous saints and sages. The name borne by them was Veda, the
knowledge,—the received name for the highest spiritual truth of which
the human mind is capable. But if we accept the current interpretations,
whether Sayana's or the modern theory, the whole of this sublime and
sacred reputation is a colossal fiction. The hymns are, on the contrary,
nothing more than the naive superstitious fancies of untaught and
materialistic barbarians concerned only with the most external gains and
enjoyments and ignorant of all but the most elementary moral notions or
religious aspirations.³⁴

\*\*\*

September, 1914

        Western Philology has converted it \[the word *arya*\] into a
racial term, an unknown ethnological quantity on which different
speculations fix different values.... \[But\] in the Veda the Aryan
peoples are those who had accepted a particular type of self-culture, of
inward and outward practice, of ideality, of aspiration....

        Whoever seeks to climb from level to level up the hill of the
divine, fearing nothing, deterred by no retardation or defeat, shrinking
from no vastness because it is too vast for his intelligence, no height
because it is too high for his spirit, no greatness because it is too
great for his force and courage, he is the Aryan, the divine fighter and
victor, the noble man.³⁵

\*\*\*

September, 1914 (?)

(From a letter to Motilal Roy.)

        You must understand that my mission is not to create Maths,
ascetics and Sannyasis; but to call back the souls of the strong to the
Lila of Krishna and Kali.... Every ascetic movement since the time of
Buddha has left India weaker and for a very obvious reason. Renunciation
of life is one thing, to make life itself, national, individual,
world-life greater and more divine is another. You cannot enforce one
ideal on the country without weakening the other. You cannot take away
the best souls from life and yet leave life stronger and greater.
Renunciation of ego, acceptance of God in life is the Yoga I teach,—no
other renunciation.

\*\*\*

December, 1914

        Like the majority of educated Indians I had passively accepted
without examination, before myself reading the Veda, the conclusions of
European Scholarship both as to the religious and as to the historical
and ethnical sense of the ancient hymns. In consequence, following again
the ordinary line taken by modernised Hindu opinion, I regarded the
Upanishads as the most ancient source of Indian thought and religion,
the true Veda, the first Book of Knowledge. The Rig-veda in the modern
translations which were all I knew of this profound Scripture,
represented for me an important document of our national history, but
seemed of small value or importance for the history of thought or for a
living spiritual experience....

        It was my stay in Southern India which first seriously turned my
thoughts to the Veda. Two observations that were forced on my mind gave
a serious shock to my second-hand belief in the racial division between
Northern Aryans and Southern Dravidians. The distinction had always
rested for me on a supposed difference between the physical types of
Aryan and Dravidian and a more definite incompatibility between the
northern Sanskritic and the southern non-Sanskritic tongues. I knew
indeed of the later theories which suppose that a single homogeneous
race, Dravidian or Indo-Afghan, inhabits the Indian peninsula; but
hitherto I had not attached much importance to these speculations. I
could not, however, be long in Southern India without being impressed by
the general recurrence of northern or “Aryan” type in the Tamil race.
Wherever I turned, I seemed to recognise with a startling distinctness,
not only among the Brahmins but in all castes and classes, the old
familiar faces, features, figures of my friends of Maharashtra, Gujerat,
Hindustan, even, though this similarity was less widely spread, of my
own province Bengal. The impression I received was as if an army of all
the tribes of the North had descended on the South and submerged any
previous populations that may have occupied it. A general impression of
a Southern type survived, but it was impossible to fix it rigidly while
studying the physiognomy of individuals. And in the end I could not but
perceive that whatever admixtures might have taken place, whatever
regional differences might have been evolved, there remains, behind all
variations, a unity of physical as well as of cultural
type[\[10\]](#_ftn10) throughout India....

        But what then of the sharp distinction between Aryan and
Dravidian races created by the philologists? It disappears. If at all an
Aryan invasion is admitted, we have either to suppose that it flooded
India and determined the physical type of the people, with whatever
modifications, or that it was the incursion of small bands of a less
civilised race who melted away into the original population. We have
then to suppose that entering a vast peninsula occupied by a civilised
people, builders of great cities, extensive traders, not without mental
and spiritual culture, they were yet able to impose on them their own
language, religion, ideas and manners. Such a miracle would be just
possible if the invaders possessed a very highly organised language, a
greater force of creative mind and a more dynamic religious form and
spirit.

        And there was always the difference of language to support the
theory of a meeting of races. But here also my preconceived ideas were
disturbed and confounded. For on examining the vocables of the Tamil
language,[\[11\]](#_ftn11) in appearance so foreign to the Sanskritic
form and character, I yet found myself continually guided by words or by
families of words supposed to be pure Tamil in establishing new
relations between Sanskrit and its distant sister, Latin, and
occasionally, between the Greek and the Sanskrit. Sometimes the Tamil
vocable not only suggested the connection, but proved the missing link
in a family of connected words. And it was through this Dravidian
language that I came first to perceive what seems to me now the true
law, origins and, as it were, the embryology of the Aryan tongues. I was
unable to pursue my examination far enough to establish any definite
conclusion, but it certainly seems to me that the original connection
between the Dravidian and Aryan tongues was far closer and more
extensive than is usually supposed and the possibility suggests itself
that they may even have been two divergent families derived from one
lost primitive tongue. If so, the sole remaining evidence of an Aryan
invasion of Dravidian India would be the indications to be found in the
Vedic hymns.

        It was, therefore, with a double interest that for the first
time I took up the Veda in the original, though without any immediate
intention of a close or serious study. It did not take long to see that
the Vedic indications of a racial division between Aryans and
Dasyus[\[12\]](#_ftn12) and the identification of the latter with the
indigenous Indians were of a far flimsier character than I had supposed.
But far more interesting to me was the discovery of a considerable body
of profound psychological thought and experience lying neglected in
these ancient hymns. And the importance of this element increased in my
eyes when I found, first, that the mantras of the Veda illuminated with
a clear and exact light psychological experiences of my own for which I
had found no sufficient explanation either in European psychology or in
the teachings of Yoga or of Vedanta, so far as I was acquainted with
them, and, secondly, that they shed light on obscure passages and ideas
of the Upanishads to which, previously, I could attach no exact meaning
and gave at the same time a new sense to much in the Puranas.³⁶

\*\*\*

1915 (?)

(Extracts from an interview given to a correspondent of The Hindu:)

        I am convinced and have long been convinced that a spiritual
awakening, a reawakening to the true self of the nation is the most
important condition of our national greatness.... India, if she chooses,
can guide the world.

        ... I quite agree with you that our social fabric will have to
be considerably altered before long.... Our past with all its faults and
defects should be sacred to us; but the claims of our future with its
immediate possibilities should be still more sacred.

        *\[The correspondent notes that Sri Aurobindo's "concluding
words were spoken in a very solemn mood":\]* It is more important that
the thought of India should come out of the philosophical school and
renew its contact with life, and the spiritual life of India issue out
of the cave and the temple and, adapting itself to new forms, lay its
hand upon the world. I believe also that humanity is about to enlarge
its scope by new knowledge, new powers and capacities, which will create
as great a revolution in human life as the physical science of the
nineteenth century. Here, too, India holds in her past, a little rusted
and put out of use, the key of humanity's future.

        It is in these directions that I have been for some time
impelled to turn my energies rather than to the petty political
activities which are alone open to us at the present moment. This is the
reason of my continued retirement and detachment from action. I believe
in the necessity at such times and for such great objects of *tapasya*
in silence for self-training, for self-knowledge and storage of
spiritual force. Our forefathers used that means, though in different
forms. And it is the best means for becoming an efficient worker in the
great days of the world.³⁷

\*

(From a letter to Motilal Roy.)

        It is regrettable that Bengal should be unable to find anything
in the *Arya*,[\[13\]](#_ftn13) but not surprising. The intellect of
Bengal has been so much fed on chemical tablets of thought and
hot-spiced foods that anything strong and substantial is indigestible to
it. Moreover people in India are accustomed only to second-hand
thoughts,—the old familiar ideas of the six philosophies, Patanjali
etc., etc. Any new presentation of life and thought and Yoga upsets
their expectations and is unintelligible to them. The thought of the
*Arya* demands close thinking from the reader; it does not spare him the
trouble of thinking and understanding and the minds of the people have
long been accustomed to have the trouble of thought spared them. They
know how to indulge their minds, they have forgotten how to exercise
them....

        Soon after the *Arya* began, I got a letter from some graduates
saying that what they wanted was “man-making”. I have done my share of
man-making and it is a thing which now anybody can do; Nature herself is
looking after it all over the world, though more slowly in India than
elsewhere. My business is now not man-making, but divine man-making. My
present teaching is that the world is preparing for a new progress, a
new evolution. Whatever race, whatever country seizes on the lines of
that new evolution and fulfils it, will be the leader of humanity....

        India and especially Bengal have the best chance and the best
right to create that race and become the leaders of the future,—to do in
the right way what Germany thought of doing in the wrong way. But first
they must learn to think, to cast away old ideas, and turn their faces
resolutely to the future. But they cannot do this, if they merely copy
European politics or go on eternally reproducing Buddhistic asceticism.
I am afraid the Ramakrishna Mission with all its good intentions is only
going to give us Shankaracharya and Buddhistic humanitarianism. But that
is not the goal to which the world is moving.

\*\*\*

January, 1915

        Charity and altruism are often essentially egoistic in their
immediate motive. They are stirred by the discomfort of the sight of
suffering to the nervous system or by the pleasurableness of others'
appreciation of our kindliness or by the egoistic self-appreciation of
our own benevolence or by the need of indulgence in sympathy. There are
philanthropists who would be troubled if the poor were not always with
us, for they would then have no field for their charity....

        Nor is detailed sympathy and alleviation of particular
sufferings the only help that can be given to men. To cut down branches
of a man's tree of suffering is good, but they grow again; to aid him to
remove its roots is a still more divine helpfulness.³⁸

\*\*\*

1915

        Vivekananda was a soul of puissance if ever there was one, a
very lion among men, but the definite work he has left behind is quite
incommensurate with our impression of his creative might and energy. We
perceive his influence still working gigantically, we know not well how,
we know not well where, in something that is not yet formed, something
leonine, grand, intuitive, upheaving that has entered the soul of India
and we say, "Behold, Vivekananda still lives in the soul of his Mother
and in the souls of her children."³⁹

\*

        To be clear in one's own mind, entirely true and plain with
one's self and with others, wholly honest with the conditions and
materials of one's labour, is a rare gift in our crooked, complex and
faltering humanity. It is the spirit of the Aryan worker and a sure
secret of vigorous success. For always Nature recognises a clear, honest
and recognisable knock at her doors and gives the result with an
answering scrupulosity and diligence.⁴⁰

\*\*\*

(On March 29, 1914, Sri Aurobindo met Mirra, a French lady who had come
from France to see him. She remained at Pondicherry for a year, went
back to France, and in 1916 journeyed to Japan where she stayed until
her return to Pondicherry on April 24, 1920.

For thirty years she was going to work with Sri Aurobindo. We know her
as “Mother.”

These two passages are from letters Sri Aurobindo wrote to Mother in
France, while World War I was raging.)

May 6, 1915

        One needs to have a calm heart, a settled will, entire
self-abnegation and the eyes constantly fixed on the beyond to live
undiscouraged in times like these which are truly a period of universal
decomposition.⁴¹

\*

(From a letter of September 16, 1915.)

        It is a singular condition of the world, the very definition of
chaos with the superficial form of the old world resting apparently
intact on the surface. But a chaos of long disintegration or of some
early new birth? It is the thing that is being fought out from day to
day, but as yet without any approach to a decision.⁴²

\*\*\*

August, 1915

        The Vedic ritual, well-nigh obsolete, has lost its profound
symbolic meaning; the pastoral, martial and rural images of the early
Aryan poets sound remote, inappropriate, or, if natural and beautiful,
yet void of the old deeper significance to the imagination of their
descendants. Confronted with the stately hymns of the ancient dawn, we
are conscious of a blank incomprehension. And we leave them as a prey to
the ingenuity of the scholar who gropes for forced meanings amid
obscurities and incongruities where the ancient bathed their souls in
harmony and light.... The sense is dead and only the obscurity of a
forgotten poetic form remains. Therefore when we read “Sarama by the
path of the Truth discovers the herds”, the mind is stopped and baffled
by an unfamiliar language. It has to be translated to us ... into a
plainer and less figured thought, “Intuition by the way of the Truth
arrives at the hidden illuminations.”[\[14\]](#_ftn14) Lacking the clue,
we wander into ingenuities about the Dawn and the Sun or even imagine in
Sarama, the hound of heaven, a mythological personification of some
prehistoric embassy to Dravidian nations for the recovery of plundered
cattle!⁴³

\*\*\*

August, 1915

        That stupendous effort \[of Western materialism and
civilisation\] is over; it has not yet frankly declared its bankruptcy,
but it is bankrupt. It is sinking in a cataclysm as gigantic and as
unnatural as the attempt which gave it birth. On the other hand, the
exaggerated spirituality of the Indian effort has also registered a
bankruptcy; we have seen how high individuals can rise by it, but we
have seen also how low a race can fall which in its eagerness to seek
after God ignores His intention in humanity. Both the European and the
Indian attempt were admirable, the Indian by its absolute spiritual
sincerity, the European by its severe intellectual honesty and ardour
for the truth; both have accomplished miracles; but in the end God and
Nature have been too strong for the Titanism of the human spirit and for
the Titanism of the human intellect.⁴⁴

\*\*\*

October, 1915

(From a book review in the Arya.)

        The book before us, Mr. O. C. Gangoly's *South Indian Bronzes*,
must rank as one of the best of them all. Southern India, less ravaged
than the North by the invader and the Vandal and profiting by the
historic displacement of the centre of Indian culture southward, teems
with artistic treasures.... But there are \[in this book\] some
startlingly confident statements against which our critical sense
protests. For instance, “it is *beyond doubt* that the two divisions of
the country indicated by the Vindhya ranges were occupied by people
essentially different in blood and temperament.” Surely the important
theories which hold the whole Indian race to be Dravidian in blood or,
without assigning either an “Aryan” or “non-Aryan” origin, believe it to
be homogeneous—omitting some islander types on the southern coast and
the Mongoloid races of the Himalaya,—cannot be so lightly dismissed....

        It distresses us to see Indian inquirers with their great
opportunities simply following in the path of certain European scholars,
accepting and adding to their unstable fantasies, their huge
superstructures founded on weak and scattered evidence and their
imaginative “history” of our prehistoric ages. There is better and
sounder work to be done and Indians can do it admirably as Mr. Gangoly
himself has shown in this book.⁴⁵

\*\*\*

1916

        Either the Veda is what Sayana says it is, and then we have to
leave it behind for ever as the document of a mythology and ritual which
have no longer any living truth or force for thinking minds, or it is
what the European scholars say it is, and then we have to put it away
among the relics of the past as an antique record of semi-barbarous
worship; or else it is indeed Veda, a book of divine knowledge, and then
it becomes of supreme importance to us to know and to hear its message.

        ...

        Dayananda's view is quite clear, its foundation inexpugnable.
The Vedic hymns are chanted to the One Deity under many names, names
which are used and even designed to express His qualities and powers.
Was this conception of Dayananda's an arbitrary conceit fetched out of
his own too ingenious imagination? Not at all; it is the explicit
statement of the Veda itself: “One existent, sages”—not the ignorant,
mind you, but the seers, the men of knowledge,—“speak of in many ways,
as Indra, as Yama, as Matarishwan, as Agni” \[*Rig-Veda*, I.164.46\].
The Vedic Rishis ought surely to have known something about their own
religion, more, let us hope, than Roth or Max Müller, and this is what
they knew.

        We are aware how modern scholars twist away from the evidence.
This hymn, they say, was a late production, this loftier idea which it
expresses with so clear a force rose up somehow in the later Aryan mind
or was borrowed by those ignorant fire-worshippers, sun-worshippers,
sky-worshippers from their cultured and philosophic Dravidian enemies.
But throughout the Veda we have confirmatory hymns and expressions: Agni
or Indra or another is expressly hymned as one with all the other gods.
Agni contains all other divine powers within himself, the Maruts are
described as all the gods, one deity is addressed by the names of others
as well as his own, or, most commonly, he is given as Lord and King of
the universe attributes only appropriate to the Supreme Deity. Ah, but
that cannot mean, ought not to mean, must not mean, the worship of One;
let us invent a new word, call it henotheism[\[15\]](#_ftn15) and
suppose that the Rishis did not really believe Indra or Agni to be the
Supreme Deity but treated any god or every god as such for the nonce,
perhaps that he might feel the more flattered and lend a more gracious
ear for so hyperbolic a compliment? But why should not the foundation of
Vedic thought be natural monotheism rather than this new-fangled
monstrosity of henotheism? Well, because primitive barbarians could not
possibly have risen to such high conceptions and, if you allow them to
have so risen, you imperil our theory of the evolutionary stages of the
human development and you destroy our whole idea about the sense of the
Vedic hymns and their place in the history of mankind. Truth must hide
herself, commonsense disappear from the field so that a theory may
flourish! I ask, in this point, and it is *the* fundamental point, who
deals most straightforwardly with the text, Dayananda or the Western
scholars?

        ...

        Dayananda goes farther; he affirms that the truths of modern
physical science are discoverable in the hymns.... The ancient
civilisations did possess secrets of science some of which modern
knowledge has recovered, extended and made more rich and precise but
others are even now not recovered. There is then nothing fantastic in
Dayananda's idea that Veda contains truth of science as well as truth of
religion. I will even add my own conviction that Veda contains other
truths of a science the modern world does not at all possess, and in
that case Dayananda has rather understated than overstated the depth and
range of the Vedic wisdom.⁴⁶

\*\*\*

March, 1916

        Sanskrit ought still to have a future as a language of the
learned and it will not be a good day for India when the ancient tongue
ceases entirely to be written or spoken.[\[16\]](#_ftn16) But if it is
to survive, it must get rid of the curse of the heavy pedantic style
contracted by it in its decline with the lumbering impossible compounds
and the overweight of hairsplitting erudition.⁴⁷

\*\*\*

May, 1916

        Human moderation is usually a wiseacre and a botcher; it sews a
patch of new velvet on old fustian or of new fustian on old velvet and
admires its deplorable handiwork. And its cautious advance means an
accumulation of shams, fictions and dead conventions till the burden of
falsehood becomes too great for life to bear and a violent revolution is
necessary to deliver the soul of humanity out of the immobilising
cerements of the past....

        We have to face the future's offer of death as well as its offer
of life, and it need not alarm us, for it is by constant death to our
old names and forms that we shall live most vitally in greater and newer
forms and names. Go on we must; for if we do not, Time itself will force
us forward in spite of our fancied immobility. And this is the most
pitiable and dangerous movement of all. For what can be more pitiable
than to be borne helplessly forward clinging to the old that
disintegrates in spite of our efforts and shrieking frantically to the
dead ghosts and dissolving fragments of the past to save us alive? And
what can be more dangerous than to impose immobility on that which is in
its nature mobile? This means an increasing and horrible rottenness; it
means an attempt to persist on as a putrid and stinking corpse instead
of a living and self-renewing energetic creature. The greatest spirits
are therefore those who have no fear of the future, who accept its
challenge and its wager; they have that sublime trust in the God or
Power that guides the world....⁴⁸

\*

        Help men, but do not pauperise them of their energy; lead and
instruct men, but see that their initiative and originality remain
intact; take others into thyself, but give them in return the full
godhead of their nature. He who can do this is the leader and the
*guru*.⁴⁹

\*\*\*

July, 1916

        In India the institution of slavery was practically absent and
the woman had at first a freer and more dignified position than in
Greece and Rome; but the slave was soon replaced by the proletariate,
called in India the Shudra, and the increasing tendency to deny the
highest benefits of the common life and culture to the Shudra and the
woman brought down Indian society to the level of its Western
congeners.⁵⁰

\*\*\*

August, 1916

        If we look at the beginnings of Indian society, the far-off
Vedic age which we no longer understand, for we have lost that
mentality, we see that everything is symbolic.... Let us take, for this
example will serve us best, the Vedic institution of fourfold order,
*caturvarna*, miscalled the system of the four castes,—for caste is a
conventional, *varna* a symbolic and typal institution.... This
\[symbolic significance of the *caturvarna*\] appears in the
Purushasukta of the Veda where the four orders are described as having
sprung from the body of the creative Deity, from his head, arms, thighs
and feet. To us this is merely a poetical image and its sense is that
the Brahmins were the men of knowledge, the Kshatriyas the men of power,
the Vaishyas the producers and support of society, the Shudras its
servants.... We read always our own mentality into that of these ancient
forefathers and it is therefore that we can find in them nothing but
imaginative barbarians.... \[But\] to them this symbol of the Creator's
body was more than an image, it expressed a divine reality. Human
society was for them an attempt to express in life the cosmic Purusha
who has expressed himself otherwise in the material and the
supraphysical universe. Man and the cosmos are both of them symbols and
expressions of the same hidden Reality.

        ...

        \[Later\] in the evolution of caste, the outward supports of the
ethical fourfold order,—birth, economic function, religious ritual and
sacrament, family custom,—each began to exaggerate enormously its
proportions and its importance in the scheme. At first, birth does not
seem to have been of the first importance in the social order, for
faculty and capacity prevailed; but afterwards, as the type fixed
itself, its maintenance by education and tradition became necessary and
education and tradition naturally fixed themselves in a hereditary
groove. Thus the son of a Brahmin came always to be looked upon
conventionally as a Brahmin; birth and profession were together the
double bond of the hereditary convention at the time when it was most
firm and faithful to its own character. This rigidity once established,
the maintenance of the ethical type passed from the first place to a
secondary or even a quite tertiary importance.... Finally, even the
economic basis began to disintegrate; birth, family custom and remnants,
deformations, new accretions of meaningless or fanciful religious sign
and ritual, the very scarecrow and caricature of the old profound
symbolism, became the riveting links of the system of caste in the iron
age of the old society. In the full economic period of caste the priest
and the Pundit masquerade under the name of the Brahmin, the aristocrat
and feudal baron under the name of the Kshatriya, the trader and
money-getter under the name of the Vaishya, the half-fed labourer and
economic serf under the name of the Shudra. When the economic basis also
breaks down, then the unclean and diseased decrepitude of the old system
has begun; it has become a name, a shell, a sham and must either be
dissolved in the crucible of an individualist period of society or else
fatally affect with weakness and falsehood the system of life that
clings to it. That in visible fact is the last and present state of the
caste system in India.⁵¹

\*\*\*

October, 1916

        \[The Vedic Rishis\] may not have yoked the lightning to their
chariots, nor weighed sun and star, nor materialised all the destructive
forces in Nature to aid them in massacre and domination, but they had
measured and fathomed all the heavens and earths within us, they had
cast their plummet into the inconscient and the subconscient and the
superconscient; they had read the riddle of death and found the secret
of immortality; they had sought for and discovered the One and known and
worshipped Him in the glories of His light and purity and wisdom and
power.⁵²

\*\*\*

        [\[17\]](#_ftn17)The whole Rig-veda reveals itself as a body of
doctrine and practice, esoteric, occult, spiritual, such as might have
been given by the mystics in any ancient country but which actually
survives for us only in the Veda. It is there deliberately hidden by a
veil, but the veil is not so thick as we first imagine; we have only to
use our eyes and the veil vanishes; the body of the Word, the Truth
stands out before us....

        Our life is a battle between the powers of Light and Truth, the
Gods who are the Immortals and the powers of Darkness. These are spoken
of under various names as Vritra and Vritras, Vala and the Panis, the
Dasyus and their kings. We have to call in the aid of the Gods to
destroy the opposition of these powers of Darkness who conceal the
Light[\[18\]](#_ftn18) from us or rob us of it, who obstruct the flowing
of the streams of Truth, *rtasya dharah* \[Rig-Veda, V.12.2\], the
streams of Heaven and obstruct in every way the soul's ascent. We have
to invoke the Gods by the inner sacrifice, and by the Word call them
into us,—that is the specific power of the Mantra.... We give what we
are and what we have in order that the riches of the divine Truth and
Light may descend into our life and become the elements of our inner
birth into the Truth.... Finally, as the summit of the teaching of the
Vedic mystics comes the secret of the one Reality, *ekam sat*
\[I.164.46\], or *tad ekam* \[X.129.2\], which became the central word
of the Upanishads. The Gods, the powers of Light and Truth are powers
and names of the One, each God is himself all the Gods or carries them
in him: there is the one Truth, *tat satyam* \[III.39.5\], and one bliss
to which we must rise.⁵³

\*\*\*

December, 1916

        This is certain that there is not only no construction here
without destruction, no harmony except by a poise of contending forces
won out of many actual and potential discords, but also no continued
existence of life except by a constant self-feeding and devouring of
other life. Our very bodily life is a constant dying and being reborn,
the body itself a beleaguered city attacked by assailing, protected by
defending forces whose business is to devour each other....

        It is good that we should be reminded of \[this truth\]; first,
because to see it has for every strong soul a tonic effect which saves
us from the flabbiness and relaxation encouraged by a too mellifluous
philosophic, religious or ethical sentimentalism, that which loves to
look upon Nature as love and life and beauty and good, but turns away
from her grim mask of death, adoring God as Shiva but refusing to adore
him as Rudra; secondly, because unless we have the honesty and courage
to look existence straight in the face, we shall never arrive at any
effective solution of its discords and oppositions. We must see first
what life and the world are; afterwards, we can all the better set about
finding the right way to transform them into what they should be. If
this repellent aspect of existence holds in itself some secret of the
final harmony, we shall by ignoring or belittling it miss that secret
and all our efforts at a solution will fail by fault of our
self-indulgent ignoring of the true elements of the problem....

        War and destruction are not only a universal principle of our
life here in its purely material aspects, but also of our mental and
moral existence. It is self-evident that in the actual life of man
intellectual, social, political, moral we can make no real step forward
without a struggle, a battle between what exists and lives and what
seeks to exist and live and between all that stands behind either. It is
impossible, at least as men and things are, to advance, to grow, to
fulfil and still to observe really and utterly that principle of
harmlessness which is yet placed before us as the highest and best law
of conduct.[\[19\]](#_ftn19) We will use only soul-force and never
destroy by war or any even defensive employment of physical violence?
Good, though until soul-force is effective, the Asuric force in men and
nations tramples down, breaks, slaughters, burns, pollutes, as we see it
doing today, but then at its ease and unhindered, and you have perhaps
caused as much destruction of life by your abstinence as others by
resort to violence.... Evil cannot perish without the destruction of
much that lives by the evil....

        It is not enough that our own hands should remain clean and our
souls unstained for the law of strife and destruction to die out of the
world; that which is its root must first disappear out of humanity. Much
less will mere immobility and inertia unwilling to use or incapable of
using any kind of resistance to evil, abrogate the law; inertia, Tamas,
indeed, injures much more than can the rajasic principle of strife which
at least creates more than it destroys. Therefore, so far as the problem
of the individual's action goes, his abstention from strife and its
inevitable concomitant destruction in their more gross and physical form
may help his own moral being, but it leaves the Slayer of creatures
unabolished.

        ...

        It is only a few religions which have had the courage to say
without any reserve, like the Indian, that this enigmatic World-Power is
one Deity, one Trinity, to lift up the image of the Force that acts in
the world in the figure not only of the beneficent Durga, but of the
terrible Kali in her blood-stained dance of destruction and to say,
“This too is the Mother; this also know to be God; this too, if thou
hast the strength, adore.” And it is significant that the religion which
has had this unflinching honesty and tremendous courage, has succeeded
in creating a profound and widespread spirituality such as no other can
parallel. For truth is the foundation of real spirituality and courage
is its soul.⁵⁴

\*\*\*

January, 1917

        The gospel of universal peace and goodwill among men—for without
a universal and entire mutual goodwill there can be no real and abiding
peace—has never succeeded for a moment in possessing itself of human
life during the historic cycle of our progress, because morally,
socially, spiritually the race was not prepared and the poise of Nature
in its evolution would not admit of its being immediately prepared for
any such transcendence. Even now we have not actually progressed beyond
the feasibility of a system of accommodation between conflicting
interests which may minimise the recurrence of the worst forms of
strife. And towards this consummation the method, the approach which
humanity has been forced by its own nature to adopt, is a monstrous
mutual massacre unparalleled in history[\[20\]](#_ftn20); a universal
war, full of bitterness and irreconcilable hatred, is the straight way
and the triumphant means modern man has found for the establishment of
universal peace!... A day may come, must surely come, we will say, when
humanity will be ready spiritually, morally, socially for the reign of
universal peace; meanwhile the aspect of battle and the nature and
function of man as a fighter have to be accepted and accounted for by
any practical philosophy and religion.⁵⁵

\*\*\*

February, 1917

        The Gita expressly says that Arjuna has thus lapsed into
unheroic weakness \[by his unwillingness to fight the enemies\], because
he is invaded by pity, *kripayavistam*. Is this not then a divine
weakness? Is not pity a divine emotion which should not thus be
discouraged with \[Krishna's\] harsh rebuke? Or are we in face of a mere
gospel of war and heroic action, a Nietzschean creed of power and
high-browed strength, of Hebraic or old Teutonic hardness which holds
pity to be a weakness and thinks like the Norwegian hero who thanked God
because He had given him a hard heart? But the teaching of the Gita
springs from an Indian creed and to the Indian mind compassion has
always figured as one of the largest elements of the divine nature....

        It is this compassion in the Aryan fighter, the soul of his
chivalry, which will not break the bruised reed, but helps and protects
the weak and the oppressed and the wounded and the fallen. But it is
also the divine compassion that smites down the strong tyrant and the
confident oppressor, not in wrath and with hatred,—for these are not the
high divine qualities, the wrath of God against the sinner, God's hatred
of the wicked are the fables of half-enlightened creeds, as much a fable
as the eternal torture of the Hells they have invented,—but, as the old
Indian spirituality clearly saw, with as much love and compassion for
the strong Titan erring by his strength and slain for his sins as for
the sufferer and the oppressed who have to be saved from his violence
and injustice.⁵⁶

\*\*\*

March, 1917

        Civilisation can never be safe so long as, confining the
cultured mentality to a small minority, it nourishes in its bosom a
tremendous mass of ignorance, a multitude, a proletariate. Either
knowledge must enlarge itself from above or be always in danger of
submergence by the ignorant night from below. Still more must it be
unsafe, if it allows enormous numbers of men to exist outside its pale
uninformed by its light, full of the natural vigour of the barbarian,
who may at any moment seize upon the physical weapons of the civilised
without undergoing an intellectual transformation by their culture....
Knowledge must be aggressive, if it wishes to survive and perpetuate
itself; to leave an extensive ignorance either below or around it, is to
expose humanity to the perpetual danger of a barbaric relapse.

        ...

        If Science has thus prepared us for an age of wider and deeper
culture ... it has encouraged more or less indirectly both by its
attitude to life and its discoveries another kind of barbarism,—for it
can be called by no other name,—that of the industrial, the commercial,
the economic age which is now progressing to its culmination and its
close. This economic barbarism is essentially that of the vital man who
mistakes the vital being[\[21\]](#_ftn21) for the self and accepts its
satisfaction as the first aim of life.... To the natural unredeemed
economic man beauty is a thing otiose or a nuisance, art and poetry a
frivolity or an ostentation and a means of advertisement. His idea of
civilisation is comfort, his idea of morals social respectability, his
idea of politics the encouragement of industry, the opening of markets,
exploitation and trade following the flag, his idea of religion at best
a pietistic formalism or the satisfaction of certain vitalistic
emotions. He values education for its utility in fitting a man for
success in a competitive or, it may be, a socialised industrial
existence, science for the useful inventions and knowledge, the
comforts, conveniences, machinery of production with which it arms him,
its power for organisation, regulation, stimulus to production. The
opulent plutocrat and the successful mammoth capitalist and organiser of
industry are the supermen of the commercial age and the true, if often
occult rulers of its society....

        In a commercial age with its ideal, vulgar and barbarous, of
success, vitalistic satisfaction, productiveness and possession the soul
of man may linger a while for certain gains and experiences, but cannot
permanently rest. If it persisted too long, Life would become clogged
and perish of its own plethora or burst in its straining to a gross
expansion. Like the too massive Titan it will collapse by its own mass,
*mole ruet sua*.⁵⁷

\*\*\*

August, 1917

        The possession of power is the great test of all idealisms and
as yet there have been none religious or secular which have withstood it
or escaped diminution or corruption.⁵⁸

\*

(A few “Thoughts and Glimpses.”)

Wherever thou seest a great end, be sure of a great beginning. Where a
monstrous and painful destruction appals thy mind, console it with the
certainty of a large and great creation. God is there not only in the
still small voice, but in the fire and in the whirlwind.

The greater the destruction, the freer the chances of creation; but the
destruction is often long, slow and oppressive, the creation tardy in
its coming or interrupted in its triumph. The night returns again and
again and the day lingers or seems even to have been a false dawning.
Despair not therefore but watch and work. Those who hope violently,
despair swiftly: neither hope nor fear, but be sure of God's purpose and
thy will to accomplish.

Wherefore God hammers so fiercely at his world, tramples and kneads it
like dough, casts it so often into the blood-bath and the red hell-heat
of the furnace? Because humanity in the mass is still a hard, crude and
vile ore which will not otherwise be smelted and shaped; as is his
material, so is his method. Let it help to transmute itself into nobler
and purer metal, his ways with it will be gentler and sweeter, much
loftier and fairer its uses.

\*

Each religion has helped mankind. Paganism increased in man the light of
beauty, the largeness and height of his life, his aim at a many-sided
perfection; Christianity gave him some vision of divine love and
charity; Buddhism has shown him a noble way to be wiser, gentler, purer;
Judaism and Islam how to be religiously faithful in action and zealously
devoted to God; Hinduism has opened to him the largest and profoundest
spiritual possibilities. A great thing would be done if all these
God-visions could embrace and cast themselves into each other; but
intellectual dogma and cult-egoism stand in the way.

All religions have saved a number of souls, but none yet has been able
to spiritualise mankind. For that there is needed not cult and creed,
but a sustained and all-comprehending effort at spiritual
self-evolution.

The changes we see in the world today are intellectual, moral, physical
in their ideal and intention: the spiritual revolution waits for its
hour and throws up meanwhile its waves here and there. Until it comes
the sense of the others cannot be understood and till then all
interpretations of present happening and forecast of man's future are
vain things. For its nature, power, event are that which will determine
the next cycle of our humanity.⁵⁹

\*\*\*

December, 1917

        Each language is the sign and power of the soul of the people
which naturally speaks it. Each develops therefore its own peculiar
spirit, thought-temperament, way of dealing with life and knowledge and
experience.... A nation, race or people which loses its language, cannot
live its whole life or its real life. And this advantage to the national
life is at the same time an advantage to the general life of the human
race.⁶⁰

\*\*\*

1918 (?)

(“The Hour of God”)

        There are moments when the Spirit moves among men and the breath
of the Lord is abroad upon the waters of our being; there are others
when it retires and men are left to act in the strength or the weakness
of their own egoism. The first are periods when even a little effort
produces great results and changes destiny; the second are spaces of
time when much labour goes to the making of a little result. It is true
that the latter may prepare the former, may be the little smoke of
sacrifice going up to heaven which calls down the rain of God's bounty.

        Unhappy is the man or the nation which, when the divine moment
arrives, is found sleeping or unprepared to use it, because the lamp has
not been kept trimmed for the welcome and the ears are sealed to the
call. But thrice woe to them who are strong and ready, yet waste the
force or misuse the moment; for them is irreparable loss or a great
destruction.

        In the hour of God cleanse thy soul of all self-deceit and
hypocrisy and vain self-flattering that thou mayst look straight into
thy spirit and hear that which summons it. All insincerity of nature,
once thy defence against the eye of the Master and the light of the
ideal, becomes now a gap in thy armour and invites the blow. Even if
thou conquer for the moment, it is the worse for thee, for the blow
shall come afterwards and cast thee down in the midst of thy triumph.
But being pure cast aside all fear; for the hour is often terrible, a
fire and a whirlwind and a tempest, a treading of the winepress of the
wrath of God; but he who can stand up in it on the truth of his purpose
is he who shall stand; even though he fall, he shall rise again; even
though he seem to pass on the wings of the wind, he shall return. Nor
let worldly prudence whisper too closely in thy ear; for it is the hour
of the unexpected, the incalculable, the immeasurable. Mete not the
power of the Breath by thy petty instruments, but trust and go forward.

        But most keep thy soul clear, even if for a while, of the
clamour of the ego. Then shall a fire march before thee in the night and
the storm be thy helper and thy flag shall wave on the highest height of
the greatness that was to be conquered.⁶¹

\*\*\*

1918

(From a letter answering a request for Sri Aurobindo's opinion of a
proposed Hindu law.)

        I can only say that everything will have my full approval which
helps to liberate and strengthen the life of the individual in the frame
of a vigorous society and restore the freedom and energy which India had
in her heroic times of greatness and expansion. Many of our present
social forms were shaped, many of our customs originated, in a time of
contraction and decline. They had their utility for self-defence and
survival within narrow limits, but are a drag upon our progress in the
present hour when we are called upon once again to enter upon a free and
courageous self-adaptation and expansion. I believe in an aggressive and
expanding, not in a narrowly defensive and self-contracting
Hinduism....⁶²

\*

(From an introduction to a book entitled Speeches and Writings of
Tilak.)

        The Congress movement was for a long time purely occidental in
its mind, character and methods, confined to the English-educated few,
founded on the political rights and interests of the people read in the
light of English history and European ideals, but with no roots either
in the past of the country or in the inner spirit of the nation.... To
bring in the mass of the people, to found the greatness of the future on
the greatness of the past, to infuse Indian politics with Indian
religious fervour and spirituality are the indispensable conditions for
a great and powerful political awakening in India. Others, writers,
thinkers, spiritual leaders, had seen this truth. Mr. Tilak was the
first to bring it into the actual field of practical politics.

        ...

        There are always two classes of political mind: one is
preoccupied with details for their own sake, revels in the petty points
of the moment and puts away into the background the great principles and
the great necessities, the other sees rather these first and always and
details only in relation to them. The one type moves in a routine circle
which may or may not have an issue; it cannot see the forest for the
trees and it is only by an accident that it stumbles, if at all, on the
way out. The other type takes a mountain-top view of the goal and all
the directions and keeps that in its mental compass through all the
deflections, retardations and tortuosities which the character of the
intervening country may compel it to accept; but these it abridges as
much as possible. The former class arrogate the name of statesman in
their own day; it is to the latter that posterity concedes it and sees
in them the true leaders of great movements. Mr. Tilak, like all men of
pre-eminent political genius, belongs to this second and greater order
of mind.⁶³

\*\*\*

April, 1918

(Extracts from a message on national education published in New India of
April 8, 1918, a journal edited by Annie Besant.)

        The greatest knowledge and the greatest riches man can possess
are \[India's\] by inheritance; she has that for which all mankind is
waiting.... But the full soul rich with the inheritance of the past, the
widening gains of the present, and the large potentiality of the future,
can come only by a system of National Education. It cannot come by any
extension or imitation of the system of the existing universities with
its radically false principles, its vicious and mechanical methods, its
dead-alive routine tradition and its narrow and sightless spirit. Only a
new spirit and a new body born from the heart of the Nation and full of
the light and hope of its resurgence can create it....

        The new education will open careers which will be at once ways
of honourable sufficiency, dignity and affluence to the individual, and
paths of service to the country. For the men who come out equipped in
every way from its institutions will be those who will give that impetus
to the economic life and effort of the country without which it cannot
survive in the press of the world, much less attain its high legitimate
position. Individual interest and National interest are the same and
call in the same direction.

        ...

        Habituated individually always to the customary groove, we
prefer the safe and prescribed path, even when it leads nowhere, to the
great and effective way, and cannot see our own interest because it
presents itself in a new and untried form. But this is a littleness of
spirit which the Nation must shake off that it may have the courage of
its destiny....

        This is an hour in which, for India as for all the world, its
future destiny and the turn of its steps for a century are being
powerfully decided, and for no ordinary century, but one which is itself
a great turning-point, an immense turn-over in the inner and outer
history of mankind. As we act now, so shall the reward of our Karma be
meted out to us, and each call of this kind at such an hour is at once
an opportunity, a choice, and a test offered to the spirit of our
people.⁶⁴

\*

        It is found that civilisation has created many more problems
than it can solve, has multiplied excessive needs and desires the
satisfaction of which it has not sufficient vital force to sustain, has
developed a jungle of claims and artificial instincts in the midst of
which life loses its way and has no longer any sight of its aim. The
more advanced minds begin to declare civilisation a failure and society
begins to feel that they are right. But the remedy proposed is either a
halt or even a retrogression, which means in the end more confusion,
stagnation and decay, or a reversion to “Nature” which is impossible or
can only come about by a cataclysm and disintegration of society; or
even a cure is aimed at by carrying artificial remedies to their acme,
by more and more Science, more and more mechanical devices, a more
scientific organisation of life, which means that the engine shall
replace life, the arbitrary logical reason substitute itself for complex
Nature and man be saved by machinery. As well say that to carry a
disease to its height is the best way to its cure....

        The radical defect of all our systems is their deficient
development of just that which society has most neglected, the spiritual
element, the soul in man which is his true being.

        ...

        The true and full spiritual aim in society will regard man not
as a mind, a life and a body, but as a soul incarnated for a divine
fulfilment upon earth, not only in heavens beyond, which after all it
need not have left if it had no divine business here in the world of
physical, vital and mental nature.... Therefore it will hold sacred all
the different parts of man's life which correspond to the parts of his
being, all his physical, vital dynamic, emotional, aesthetic, ethical,
intellectual, psychic evolution, and see in them instruments for a
growth towards a diviner living.⁶⁵

\*\*\*

May, 1918

        Man's road to spiritual supermanhood will be open when he
declares boldly that all he has yet developed, including the intellect
of which he is so rightly and yet so vainly proud, are now no longer
sufficient for him, and that to uncase, discover, set free this greater
Light within shall be henceforward his pervading preoccupation. Then
will his philosophy, art, science, ethics, social existence, vital
pursuits be no longer an exercise of mind and life, done for themselves,
carried in a circle, but a means for the discovery of a greater Truth
behind mind and life and for the bringing of its power into our human
existence.⁶⁶

\*\*\*

June, 1918

        A spiritual age of mankind ... will not try to make man perfect
by machinery or keep him straight by tying up all his limbs. It will not
present to the member of the society his higher self in the person of
the policeman, the official and the corporal, nor, let us say, in the
form of a socialistic bureaucracy or a Labour Soviet. Its aim will be to
diminish as soon and as far as possible the element of external
compulsion in human life by awakening the inner divine compulsion of the
Spirit within.⁶⁷

\*\*\*

July, 1918

        The ascent of man into heaven is not the key, but rather his
ascent here into the spirit and the descent also of the Spirit into his
normal humanity and the transformation of this earthly nature. For that
and not some post mortem salvation is the real new birth for which
humanity waits as the crowning movement of its long obscure and painful
course.

        Therefore the individuals who will most help the future of
humanity in the new age will be those who will recognise a spiritual
evolution as the destiny and therefore the great need of the human
being.... They will especially not make the mistake of thinking that
this change can be effected by machinery and outward institutions; they
will know and never forget that it has to be lived out by each man
inwardly or it can never be made a reality for the kind....

        Failures must be originally numerous in everything great and
difficult, but the time comes when the experience of past failures can
be profitably used and the gate that so long resisted opens. In this as
in all great human aspirations and endeavours, an *a priori* declaration
of impossibility is a sign of ignorance and weakness, and the motto of
the aspirant's endeavour must be the *solvitur
ambulando*[\[22\]](#_ftn22) of the discoverer. For by the doing the
difficulty will be solved. A true beginning has to be made; the rest is
a work for Time in its sudden achievements or its long patient
labour....

        This endeavour will be a supreme and difficult labour even for
the individual, but much more for the race. It may well be that, once
started, it may not advance rapidly even to its first decisive stage; it
may be that it will take long centuries of effort to come into some kind
of permanent birth. But that is not altogether inevitable, for the
principle of such changes in Nature seems to be a long obscure
preparation followed by a swift gathering up and precipitation of the
elements into the new birth, a rapid conversion, a transformation that
in its luminous moment figures like a miracle.⁶⁸

\*\*\*

August, 1918

        When we look at the past of India, what strikes us ... is her
stupendous vitality, her inexhaustible power of life and joy of life,
her almost unimaginably prolific creativeness. For three thousand years
at least,—it is indeed much longer,—she has been creating abundantly and
incessantly, lavishly, with an inexhaustible many-sidedness, republics
and kingdoms and empires, philosophies and cosmogonies and sciences and
creeds and arts and poems and all kinds of monuments, palaces and
temples and public works, communities and societies and religious
orders, laws and codes and rituals, physical sciences, psychic sciences,
systems of Yoga, systems of politics and administration, arts spiritual,
arts worldly, trades, industries, fine crafts,—the list is endless and
in each item there is almost a plethora of activity. She creates and
creates and is not satisfied and is not tired; she will not have an end
of it, seems hardly to need a space for rest, a time for inertia and
lying fallow. She expands too outside her borders; her ships cross the
ocean and the fine superfluity of her wealth brims over to Judea and
Egypt and Rome; her colonies spread her arts and epics and creeds in the
Archipelago[\[23\]](#_ftn23); her traces are found in the sands of
Mesopotamia; her religions conquer China and Japan and spread westward
as far as Palestine and Alexandria, and the figures of the Upanishads
and the sayings of the Buddhists are re-echoed on the lips of Christ.
Everywhere, as on her soil, so in her works there is the teeming of a
super-abundant energy of life....

        Indeed without this opulent vitality and opulent intellectuality
India could never have done so much as she did with her spiritual
tendencies. It is a great error to suppose that spirituality flourishes
best in an impoverished soil with the life half-killed and the intellect
discouraged and intimidated. The spirituality that so flourishes is
something morbid, hectic and exposed to perilous reactions. It is when
the race has lived most richly and thought most profoundly that
spirituality finds its heights and its depths and its constant and
many-sided fruition.⁶⁹

\*\*\*

September, 1918

        ... the shifty language of politics,—that strange language full
of Maya and falsities of self-illusion and deliberate delusion of
others, which almost immediately turns all true and vivid phrases into a
jargon, so that men may fight in a cloud of words without any clear
sense of the thing they are battling for....⁷⁰

\*

        The subjection of woman, the property of the man over the woman,
was once an axiom of social life and has only in recent times been
effectively challenged. So strong was or had become the instinct of this
domination in the male animal man, that even religion and philosophy
have had to sanction it.... This idea too is crumbling into the dust,
though its remnants still cling to life by many strong tentacles of old
legislation, continued instinct, persistence of traditional ideas; the
fiat has gone out against it in the claim of woman to be regarded, she
too, as a free individual being.⁷¹

\*\*\*

November, 1918

        We are sometimes asked what on earth we mean by spirituality in
art and poetry or in political and social life,—a confession of
ignorance strange enough in any Indian mouth at this stage of our
national history.... We have here really an echo of the European idea,
now of sufficiently long standing, that religion and spirituality on the
one side and intellectual activity and practical life on the other are
two entirely different things and have each to be pursued on its own
entirely separate lines and in obedience to its own entirely separate
principles....

        Spirituality \[does not mean\] the moulding of the whole type of
the national being to suit the limited dogmas, forms, tenets of a
particular religion, as was often enough attempted by the old
societies.... Spirituality is much wider than any particular
religion.... True spirituality rejects no new light, no added means or
materials of our human self-development. It means simply to keep our
centre, our essential way of being, our inborn nature and assimilate to
it all we receive, and evolve out of it all we do and create....
\[India\] can, if she will, give a new and decisive turn to the problems
over which all mankind is labouring and stumbling, for the clue to their
solutions is there in her ancient knowledge. Whether she will rise or
not to the height of her opportunity in the renaissance which is coming
upon her, is the question of her destiny.⁷²

\*\*\*

December, 1918

        In the stupendous rush of change which is coming on the human
world as a result of the present tornado of upheaval, ancient India's
culture, attacked by European modernism, overpowered in the material
field, betrayed by the indifference of her children, may perish for ever
along with the soul of the nation that holds it in its keeping.... Each
nation is a Shakti or power of the evolving spirit in humanity and lives
by the principle which it embodies. India is the Bharata Shakti, the
living energy of a great spiritual conception, and fidelity to it is the
very principle of her existence....

        To follow a law or principle involuntarily or ignorantly or
contrary to the truth of one's consciousness is a falsehood and a
self-destruction. To allow oneself to be killed, like the lamb attacked
by the wolf, brings no growth, farthers no development, assures no
spiritual merit. Concert or unity may come in good time, but it must be
an underlying unity with a free differentiation, not a swallowing up of
one by another or an incongruous and inharmonious mixture. Nor can it
come before the world is ready for these greater things. To lay down
one's arms in a state of war is to invite destruction and it can serve
no compensating spiritual purpose....

        India is indeed awaking and defending herself, but not
sufficiently and not with the whole-heartedness, the clear sight and the
firm resolution which can alone save her from the peril. Today it is
close; let her choose,—for the choice is imperatively before her, to
live or to perish.

        ...

        A political Europeanisation would be followed by a social turn
of the same kind and bring a cultural and spiritual death in its
train.... Either India will be rationalised and industrialised out of
all recognition and she will be no longer India or else she will be the
leader in a new world-phase, aid by her example and cultural
infiltration the new tendencies of the West and spiritualise the human
race. That is the one radical and poignant question at issue. Will the
spiritual motive which India represents prevail on Europe and create
there new forms congenial to the West, or will European rationalism and
commercialism put an end for ever to the Indian type of culture?⁷³

\*

        The old world that is shaken outwardly in its bases and already
crumbling in some of its parts, is the economical and materialistic
civilisation which mankind has been forming for the last few
centuries.... An era of revolutions has opened which is likely to
complete the ruin and prepare the building of a new structure.

        ...

        No paltering mechanisms which have the appearance but not the
truth of freedom, will help us; the new structure, however imposing,
will only become another prison and compel a fresh struggle for
liberation. The one safety for man lies in learning to live from within
outward, not depending on institutions and machinery to perfect him, but
out of his growing inner perfection availing to shape a more perfect
form and frame of life.... It is because there are plenty of signs that
the old error continues and only a minority, leaders perhaps in light,
but not yet in action, are striving to see more clearly, inwardly and
truly, that we must expect as yet rather the last twilight which divides
the dying from the unborn age than the real dawning. For a time, since
the mind of man is not yet ready, the old spirit and method may yet be
strong and seem for a short while to prosper; but the future lies with
the men and nations who first see beyond both the glare and the dusk the
gods of the morning and prepare themselves to be fit instruments of the
Power that is pressing towards the light of a greater ideal.⁷⁴

\*\*\*

February, 1919

        Even in failure there is a preparation for success: our nights
carry in them the secret of a greater dawn.

        ...

        If the will in a race or civilisation is towards death, if it
clings to the lassitude of decay and the laissez-faire of the moribund
or even in strength insists blindly upon the propensities that lead to
destruction or if it cherishes only the powers of dead Time and puts
away from it the powers of the future, if it prefers life that was to
life that will be, nothing, not even abundant strength and resources and
intelligence, not even many calls to live and constantly offered
opportunities will save it from an inevitable disintegration or
collapse. But if there comes to it a strong faith in itself and a robust
will to live, if it is open to the things that shall come, willing to
seize on the future and what it offers and strong to compel it where it
seems adverse, it can draw from adversity and defeat a force of
invincible victory and rise from apparent helplessness and decay in a
mighty flame of renovation to the light of a more splendid life. This is
what Indian civilisation is now rearising to do as it has always done in
the eternal strength of its spirit.⁷⁵

\*\*\*

April, 1919

        There is nothing in the most ascetic notes of the Indian mind
like the black gloom of certain kinds of European pessimism, a city of
dreadful night without joy here or hope beyond, and nothing like the sad
and shrinking attitude before death and the dissolution of the body
which pervades Western literature. The note of ascetic pessimism often
found in Christianity is a distinctly Western note; for it is absent in
Christ's teachings. The mediaeval religion with its cross, its salvation
by suffering, its devil-ridden and flesh-ridden world and the flames of
eternal hell waiting for man beyond the grave has a character of pain
and terror alien to the Indian mind, to which indeed religious terror is
a stranger....

        Indian asceticism is not a mournful gospel of sorrow or a
painful mortification of the flesh in morbid penance, but a noble effort
towards a higher joy and an absolute possession of the spirit....
Practised not by the comparatively few who are called to it, but
preached in its extreme form to all and adopted by unfit thousands, its
values may be debased, counterfeits may abound and the vital force of
the community lose its elasticity and its forward spring. It would be
idle to pretend that such defects and untoward results have been absent
in India. I do not accept the ascetic ideal as the final solution of the
problem of human existence; but even its exaggerations have a nobler
spirit behind them than the vitalistic exaggerations which are the
opposite defect of Western culture.⁷⁶

\*\*\*

May, 1919

        The inner principle of Hinduism, the most tolerant and receptive
of religious systems, is not sharply exclusive like the religious spirit
of Christianity or Islam; as far as that could be without loss of its
own powerful idiosyncrasy and law of being, it has been synthetic,
acquisitive, inclusive....

        Europe where men have constantly fought, killed, burned,
tortured, imprisoned, persecuted in every way imaginable by human
stupidity and cruelty for the sake of dogmas, words, rites and forms of
church government, Europe where these things have done duty for
spirituality and religion, has hardly a record which would entitle it to
cast this reproach in the face of the East....

        \[Hinduism\] is in the first place a non-dogmatic inclusive
religion and would have taken even Islam and Christianity into itself,
if they had tolerated the process.⁷⁷

\*

        This world of our battle and labour is a fierce dangerous
destructive devouring world in which life exists precariously and the
soul and body of man move among enormous perils, a world in which by
every step forward, whether we will it or no, something is crushed and
broken, in which every breath of life is a breath too of death. To put
away the responsibility for all that seems to us evil or terrible on the
shoulders of a semi-omnipotent Devil, or to put it aside as part of
Nature, making an unbridgeable opposition between world-nature and
God-Nature, as if Nature were independent of God, or to throw the
responsibility on man and his sins, as if he had a preponderant voice in
the making of this world or could create anything against the will of
God, are clumsily comfortable devices in which the religious thought of
India has never taken refuge. We have to look courageously in the face
of the reality and see that it is God and none else who has made this
world in his being and that so he has made it. We have to see that
Nature devouring her children, Time eating up the lives of creatures,
Death universal and ineluctable and the violence of the Rudra forces in
man and Nature are also the supreme Godhead in one of his cosmic
figures....

        No real peace can be till the heart of man deserves peace; the
law of Vishnu cannot prevail till the debt to Rudra is paid. To turn
aside then and preach to a still unevolved mankind the law of love and
oneness? Teachers of the law of love and oneness there must be, for by
that way must come the ultimate salvation. But not till the Time-Spirit
in man is ready, can the inner and ultimate prevail over the outer and
immediate reality. Christ and Buddha have come and gone, but it is Rudra
who still holds the world in the hollow of his hand. And meanwhile the
fierce forward labour of mankind tormented and oppressed by the powers
that are profiteers of egoistic force and their servants cries for the
sword of the Hero of the struggle and the word of its prophet.⁷⁸

\*\*\*

1919 (?)

(From a letter to Motilal Roy.)

        All difficulties can be conquered, but only on condition of
fidelity to the Way that you have taken. There is no obligation on any
one to take it,—it is a difficult and trying one, a way for heroes, not
for weaklings,—but once taken, it must be followed, or you will not
arrive.

        ...

        Hunger-striking to force God or to force anybody or anything
else is not the true spiritual means. I do not object to Mr. Gandhi or
any one else following it for quite other than spiritual purposes, but
here it is out of place; these things, I repeat, are foreign to the
fundamental principle of our Yoga.

        ...

        I myself have had for these fourteen years, and it is not yet
finished, to bear all the possible typical difficulties, troubles,
downfalls and backslidings that can rise in this great effort to change
the whole normal human being.... We are the pioneers hewing our way
through the jungle of the lower Prakriti. It will not do for us to be
cowards and shirkers and refuse the burden, to clamour for everything to
be made quick and easy for us. Above all things I demand from you
endurance, firmness, heroism,—the true spiritual heroism. I want strong
men. I do not want emotional children.

\*\*\*

August, 1919

        The religious culture which now goes by the name of Hinduism ...
gave itself no name, because it set itself no sectarian limits; it
claimed no universal adhesion, asserted no sole infallible dogma, set up
no single narrow path or gate of salvation; it was less a creed or cult
than a continuously enlarging tradition of the Godward endeavour of the
human spirit. An immense many-sided and many-staged provision for a
spiritual self-building and self-finding, it had some right to speak of
itself by the only name it knew, the eternal religion, *sanatana
dharma*....

        Now just here is the first baffling difficulty over which the
European mind stumbles; for it finds itself unable to make out what
Hindu religion is.... How can there be a religion which has no rigid
dogmas demanding belief on pain of eternal damnation, no theological
postulates, even no fixed theology, no credo, distinguishing it from
antagonistic or rival religions? How can there be a religion which has
no papal head, no governing ecclesiastic body, no church, chapel or
congregational system, no binding religious form of any kind obligatory
on all its adherents, no one administration and discipline? For the
Hindu priests are mere ceremonial officiants without any ecclesiastical
authority or disciplinary powers and the Pundits are mere interpreters
of the Shastra, not the law-givers of the religion or its rulers. How
again can Hinduism be called a religion when it admits all beliefs,
allowing even a kind of high-reaching atheism and agnosticism and
permits all possible spiritual experiences, all kinds of religious
adventures?...

        To the Indian mind the least important part of religion is its
dogma; the religious spirit matters, not the theological credo....

        Hinduism has always attached to \[the organisation of the
individual and collective life\] a great importance; it has left out no
part of life as a thing secular and foreign to the religious and
spiritual life.... The people of India, even the “ignorant masses” have
this distinction that they are by centuries of training nearer to the
inner realities, are divided from them by a less thick veil of the
universal ignorance and are more easily led back to a vital glimpse of
God and Spirit, self and eternity than the mass of men or even the
cultured elite anywhere else. Where else could the lofty, austere and
difficult teaching of a Buddha have seized so rapidly on the popular
mind? Where else could the songs of a Tukaram, a Ramprasad, a Kabir, the
Sikh Gurus and the chants of the Tamil saints with their fervid devotion
but also their profound spiritual thinking have found so speedy an echo
and formed a popular religious literature? This strong permeation or
close nearness of the spiritual turn, this readiness of the mind of a
whole nation to turn to the highest realities is the sign and fruit of
an agelong, a real and a still living and supremely spiritual culture.

        ...

        The mentality of the West has long cherished the aggressive and
quite illogical idea of a single religion for all mankind, a religion
universal by the very force of its narrowness, one set of dogmas, one
cult, one system of ceremonies, one array of prohibitions and
injunctions, one ecclesiastical ordinance. That narrow absurdity prances
about as the one true religion which all must accept on peril of
persecution by men here and spiritual rejection or fierce eternal
punishment by God in other worlds. This grotesque creation of human
unreason, the parent of so much intolerance, cruelty, obscurantism and
aggressive fanaticism, has never been able to take firm hold of the free
and supple mind of India. Men everywhere have common human failings, and
intolerance and narrowness especially in the matter of observances there
has been and is in India.... But these things have never taken the
proportions which they assumed in Europe. Intolerance has been confined
for the most part to the minor forms of polemical attack or to social
obstruction or ostracism; very seldom have they transgressed across the
line to the major forms of barbaric persecution which draw a long, red
and hideous stain across the religious history of Europe. There has
played ever in India the saving perception of a higher and purer
spiritual intelligence, which has had its effect on the mass mentality.
Indian religion has always felt that since the minds, the temperaments,
the intellectual affinities of men are unlimited in their variety, a
perfect liberty of thought and of worship must be allowed to the
individual in his approach to the Infinite.⁷⁹

\*\*\*

1920

        The will of a single hero can breathe courage into the hearts of
a million cowards.⁸⁰

\*

        No system indeed by its own force can bring about the change
that humanity really needs; for that can only come by its growth into
the firmly realised possibilities of its own higher nature, and this
growth depends on an inner and not an outer change. But outer changes
may at least prepare favourable conditions for that more real
amelioration,—or on the contrary they may lead to such conditions that
the sword of Kalki[\[24\]](#_ftn24) can alone purify the earth from the
burden of an obstinately Asuric humanity. The choice lies with the race
itself; for as it sows, so shall it reap the fruit of its Karma.⁸¹

\*\*\*

January 5, 1920

(From a letter to Joseph Baptista, a co-worker of Tilak who had
requested Sri Aurobindo to take up the editorship of a Nationalist
English paper proposed to be brought out from Bombay. Sri Aurobindo
explained his reasons for turning down this request, through which the
Nationalists were hoping to give him an opportunity to return to
politics.)

Dear Baptista,

        ...

        I do not at all look down on politics or political action or
consider I have got above them. I have always laid a dominant stress and
I now lay an entire stress on the spiritual life, but my idea of
spirituality has nothing to do with ascetic withdrawal or contempt or
disgust of secular things. There is to me nothing secular, all human
activity is for me a thing to be included in a complete spiritual life,
and the importance of politics at the present time is very great. But my
line and intention of political activity would differ considerably from
anything now current in the field. I entered into political action and
continued it from 1903 to 1910 with one aim and one alone, to get into
the mind of the people a settled will for freedom and the necessity of a
struggle to achieve it in place of the futile ambling Congress methods
till then in vogue. That is now done and the Amritsar Congress is the
seal upon it....[\[25\]](#_ftn25) What preoccupies me now is the
question what \[the country\] is going to do with its
self-determination, how will it use its freedom, on what lines is it
going to determine its future?

        You may ask why not come out and help, myself, so far as I can,
in giving a lead? But my mind has a habit of running inconveniently
ahead of the times,—some might say, out of time altogether into the
world of the ideal. Your party, you say, is going to be a social
democratic party. Now I believe in something which might be called
social democracy, but not in any of the forms now current, and I am not
altogether in love with the European kind, however great an improvement
it may be on the past. I hold that India having a spirit of her own and
a governing temperament proper to her own civilisation, should in
politics as in everything else strike out her own original path and not
stumble in the wake of Europe. But this is precisely what she will be
obliged to do, if she has to start on the road in her present chaotic
and unprepared condition of mind. No doubt people talk of India
developing on her own lines, but nobody seems to have very clear or
sufficient ideas as to what those lines are to be. In this matter I have
formed ideals and certain definite ideas of my own, in which at present
very few are likely to follow me,—since they are governed by an
uncompromising spiritual idealism of an unconventional kind and would be
unintelligible to many and an offence and stumbling-block to a great
number.⁸²

\*\*\*

April, 1920

(Barin Ghose, Sri Aurobindo's brother, was sentenced to death at the
Alipore Bomb Case. On appeal his sentence was commuted to deportation
for life to the Andamans; he was released early in 1920, after an
amnesty. Soon afterwards, Barin wrote to Sri Aurobindo for guidance both
from a political and a spiritual point of view. A few excerpts from Sri
Aurobindo's long reply in Bengali.)

        What the Divine wants is for man to embody Him here, in the
individual and in the collectivity—to realise God in life. The old
system of yoga could not harmonise or unify Spirit and life; it
dismissed the world as Maya or a transient play of God. The result has
been a diminution of life-power and the decline of India. The Gita says,
*utsideyur ime loka na kuryam karma cedaham* \[“These peoples would
crumble to pieces if I did not do actions,” 3.24\]. Truly “these
peoples” of India have gone to ruin. What kind of spiritual perfection
is it if a few Sannyasins, Bairagis and Saddhus attain realisation and
liberation, if a few Bhaktas dance in a frenzy of love, god-intoxication
and Ananda, and an entire race, devoid of life, devoid of intelligence,
sinks to the depths of extreme tamas?

        ...

        Why did I leave politics? Because our politics is not the
genuine Indian article; it is a European import, just an imitation of
European ways. But that too was needed. Both of us also engaged in
politics of the European style; had we not done so, the country would
not have risen, and we too would not have had the experience or obtained
a full development.... But now the time has come to take hold of the
substance instead of extending the shadow. We have to awaken the true
soul of India and in its image fashion all works. For the last ten years
I have been silently pouring my influence into this European political
vessel, and there has been some result. I can continue to do this
wherever necessary. But if I went out to do that work again, associating
myself with the political leaders and working with them, it would be
supporting an alien law of being and a false political life. People now
want to spiritualise politics—Gandhi, for instance—but they can't get
hold of the right way. What is Gandhi doing? Making a hodge-podge called
*satyagraha* out of *ahimsa paramo dharmah* \[non-violence is the
highest law\], Jainism, *hartal*, passive resistance, etc.; bringing a
sort of Indianised Tolstoyism into the country. The result—if there is
any lasting result—will be a sort of Indianised Bolshevism. I have no
objection to his work; let each one act according to his own
inspiration. But that is not the real thing.

        ...

        I believe that the main cause of India's weakness is not
subjection, nor poverty, nor a lack of spirituality or Dharma, but a
diminution of thought-power, the spread of ignorance in the motherland
of Knowledge. Everywhere I see an inability or unwillingness to
think—incapacity of thought or “thought-phobia”. Whatever may have been
in the mediaeval period, now this attitude is the sign of a great
decline. The mediaeval period was a night, a time of victory for the man
of ignorance; the modern world is a time of victory for the man of
knowledge. It is the one who can fathom and learn the truth of the world
by thinking more, searching more, labouring more, who will gain more
Shakti. Look at Europe, and you will see two things: a wide limitless
sea of thought and the play of a huge and rapid, yet disciplined force.
The whole Shakti of Europe lies there. It is by virtue of this Shakti
that she has been able to swallow the world, like our Tapaswins of old,
whose might held even the gods of the universe in awe, suspense and
subjection. People say that Europe is rushing into the jaws of
destruction. I do not think so. All these revolutions, all these
upsettings are the initial stages of a new creation. Now look at India:
a few solitary giants aside, everywhere there is your “simple man”, that
is your average man who will not think and cannot think, who has not the
least Shakti but only a momentary excitement.... The difference lies
there. But there is a fatal limitation to the power and thought of
Europe. When she enters the field of spirituality, her thought-power
stops working. There Europe sees everything as a riddle, nebulous
metaphysics, yogic hallucination—“It rubs its eyes as in smoke and can
see nothing clearly.” Still, in Europe there is now a great striving to
surmount even this limitation. Thanks to our forefathers, we have the
spiritual sense, and whoever has this sense has within his reach such
Knowledge, such Shakti that with one breath he could blow away like a
blade of grass all the huge power of Europe. But to get that Shakti,
Shakti is needed. We, however, are not worshippers of Shakti; we are
worshippers of the easy way.... Our civilisation has become ossified,
our Dharma a bigotry of externals, our spirituality a faint glimmer of
light or a momentary wave of intoxication. So long as this state of
things lasts, any permanent resurgence of India is impossible....

        We have abandoned the sadhana of Shakti and so the Shakti has
abandoned us. We practise the yoga of love, but where there is no
Knowledge or Shakti, love does not stay, narrowness and littleness come
in. In a narrow and small mind, life and heart, love finds no room.
Where in Bengal is there love? Nowhere else even in this division-ridden
India is there so much quarrelling, strained relations, jealousy, hatred
and factionalism as in Bengal. In the noble heroic age of the Aryan
people there was not so much shouting and gesticulating, but the
endeavour they set in motion lasted many centuries. The Bengali's
endeavour lasts for a day or two. You say what is needed is emotional
excitement, to fill the country with enthusiasm. We did all that in the
political field during the Swadeshi period; but all we did now lies in
the dust.... Therefore I no longer wish to make emotional excitement,
feeling and mental enthusiasm the base. I want to make a vast and heroic
equality the foundation of my yoga; in all the activities of the being,
of the *adhar* \[vessel\] based on that equality, I want a complete,
firm and unshakable Shakti; over that ocean of Shakti I want the vast
radiation of the sun of Knowledge and in that luminous vastness an
established ecstasy of infinite love and bliss and oneness. I do not
want tens of thousands of disciples; it will be enough if I can get as
instruments of God a hundred complete men free from petty egoism. I have
no faith in the customary trade of guru. I do not want to be a guru.
What I want is that a few, awakened at my touch or at that of another,
will manifest from within their sleeping divinity and realise the divine
life. It is such men who will raise this country.⁸³

\*\*\*

May, 1920

(From a letter to Motilal Roy.)

        The old politics in India persist in a chaos of parties and
programmes.... and in Bengal we have a rush of the commercial and
industrial spirit which follows the Western principle and, if it
succeeds on these lines, is likely to create a very disastrous
reproduction or imitation of the European situation with its corrupt
capitalism and the Labour struggle and the war of classes.

        ...

        People care nothing about the spiritual basis of life which is
India's real mission and the only possible source of her greatness, or
give to it only a slight, secondary or incidental value, a something
that has to be stuck on as a sentiment or a bit of colouring matter. Our
whole principle is different.

\*\*\*

August, 1920

        Our call is to young India. It is the young who must be the
builders of the new world,—not those who accept the competitive
individualism, the capitalism or the materialistic communism of the West
as India's future ideal, not those who are enslaved to old religious
formulas and cannot believe in the acceptance and transformation of life
by the spirit, but all who are free in mind and heart to accept a
completer truth and labour for a greater ideal.... It is with a
confident trust in the spirit that inspires us that we take our place
among the standard-bearers of the new humanity that is struggling to be
born amidst the chaos of a world in dissolution, and of the future
India, the greater India of the rebirth that is to rejuvenate the mighty
outworn body of the ancient Mother.⁸⁴

\*

        We used the Mantra *Bande Mataram* with all our heart and soul,
and so long as we used and lived it, relied upon its strength to
overbear all difficulties, we prospered. But suddenly the faith and the
courage failed us, the cry of the Mantra began to sink and as it rang
feebly, the strength began to fade out of the country. It was God, who
made it fade out and falter, for it had done its work. A greater Mantra
than *Bande Mataram* has to come. Bankim was not the ultimate seer of
Indian awakening. He gave only the term of the initial and public
worship, not the formula and the ritual of the inner secret *upasana*
\[worship\]. For the greatest Mantras are those which are uttered
within, and which the seer whispers or gives in dream or vision to his
disciples. When the ultimate Mantra is practised even by two or three,
then the closed Hand of God will begin to open; when the *upasana* is
numerously followed the closed Hand will open absolutely.⁸⁵

\*\*\*

August 30, 1920

(From a letter to Dr. B. S. Munje, a Congress leader from Nagpur who
asked Sri Aurobindo to return to British India to preside over the
Nagpur session of the Congress a few months later.[\[26\]](#_ftn26)
Tilak had just passed away on August 1.)

Dear Dr. Munje,

        As I have already wired to you, I find myself unable to accept
your offer of the Presidentship of the Nagpur Congress. There are
reasons even within the political field itself which in any case would
have stood in my way. In the first place I have never signed and would
never care to sign as a personal declaration of faith the Congress
creed, as my own is of a different character.... I am entirely in
sympathy with all that is being done so far as its object is to secure
liberty for India, but I should be unable to identify myself with the
programme of any of the parties. The President of the Congress is really
a mouthpiece of the Congress and to make from the presidential chair a
purely personal pronouncement miles away from what the Congress is
thinking and doing would be grotesquely out of place.

        The central reason however is this that I am no longer first and
foremost a politician, but have definitely commenced another kind of
work with a spiritual basis, a work of spiritual, social, cultural and
economic reconstruction of an almost revolutionary kind, and am even
making or at least supervising a sort of practical or laboratory
experiment in that sense which needs all the attention and energy that I
can have to spare.

        ...

        A gigantic movement of non-cooperation merely to get some Punjab
officials punished or to set up again the Turkish Empire which is dead
and gone, shocks my ideas both of proportion and of common
sense.^(86[\[27\]](#_ftn27))

\*\*\*

November, 1920

(From an article entitled “A Preface on National Education.”)

        The living spirit of the demand for national education no more
requires a return to the astronomy and mathematics of
Bhaskara[\[28\]](#_ftn28) or the forms of the system of
Nalanda[\[29\]](#_ftn29) than the living spirit of Swadeshi a return
from railway and motor traction to the ancient chariot and the
bullock-cart.... It is the spirit, the living and vital issue that we
have to do with, and there the question is not between modernism and
antiquity, but between an imported civilisation and the greater
possibilities of the Indian mind and nature, not between the present and
the past, but between the present and the future. It is not a return to
the fifth century but an initiation of the centuries to come, not a
reversion but a break forward away from a present artificial falsity to
her own greater innate potentialities that is demanded by the soul, by
the Shakti of India.

        ...

        A language, Sanskrit or another, should be acquired by whatever
method is most natural, efficient and stimulating to the mind and we
need not cling there to any past or present manner of teaching: but the
vital question is how we are to learn and make use of Sanskrit and the
indigenous languages so as to get to the heart and intimate sense of our
own culture and establish a vivid continuity between the still living
power of our past and the yet uncreated power of our future, and how we
are to learn and use English or any other foreign tongue so as to know
helpfully the life, ideas and culture of other countries and establish
our right relations with the world around us. This is the aim and
principle of a true national education, not, certainly, to ignore modern
truth and knowledge, but to take our foundation on our own being, our
own mind, our own spirit....

        The scientific, rationalistic, industrial, pseudo-democratic
civilisation of the West is now in process of dissolution and it would
be a lunatic absurdity for us at this moment to build blindly on that
sinking foundation. When the most advanced minds of the occident are
beginning to turn in this red evening of the West for the hope of a new
and more spiritual civilisation to the genius of Asia, it would be
strange if we could think of nothing better than to cast away our own
self and potentialities and put our trust in the dissolving and moribund
past of Europe.⁸⁷

\*\*\*

January, 1921

        India has never been nationally and politically one. India was
for close on a thousand years swept by barbaric invasions and for almost
another thousand years in servitude to successive foreign masters....
But in India at a very early time the spiritual and cultural unity was
made complete and became the very stuff of the life of all this great
surge of humanity between the Himalayas and the two seas.... Invasion
and foreign rule, the Greek, the Parthian and the Hun, the robust vigour
of Islam, the levelling steam-roller heaviness of the British occupation
and the British system, the enormous pressure of the Occident have not
been able to drive or crush the ancient soul out of the body her Vedic
Rishis made for her.

        ...

        India of the ages is not dead nor has she spoken her last
creative word; she lives and has still something to do for herself and
the human peoples. And that which must seek now to awake is not an
anglicised oriental people, docile pupil of the West and doomed to
repeat the cycle of the occident's success and failure, but still the
ancient immemorable Shakti recovering her deepest self, lifting her head
higher towards the supreme source of light and strength and turning to
discover the complete meaning and a vaster form of her Dharma.⁸⁸

\*\*\*

November 18, 1922

(From a letter to Chittaranjan Das, the Nationalist leader who had
defended Sri Aurobindo at the Alipore Bomb Case. C. R. Das came to
Pondicherry to meet Sri Aurobindo in June, 1923; he passed away two
years later, on June 16, 1925, his health broken by numerous
imprisonments.)

Dear Chitta,

        ...

        I think you know my present idea and the attitude towards life
and work to which it has brought me. I have become confirmed in a
perception which I had always, less clearly and dynamically then, but
which has now become more and more evident to me, that the true basis of
work and life is the spiritual,—that is to say, a new consciousness to
be developed only by Yoga. I see more and more manifestly that man can
never get out of the futile circle the race is always treading until he
has raised himself on to the new foundation. I believe also that it is
the mission of India to make this great victory for the world. But what
precisely was the nature of the dynamic power of this greater
consciousness? What was the condition of its effective truth? How could
it be brought down, mobilised, organised, turned upon life? How could
our present instruments, intellect, mind, life, body be made true and
perfect channels for this great transformation? This was the problem I
have been trying to work out in my own experience and I have now a sure
basis, a wide knowledge and some mastery of the secret....⁸⁹

\*\*\*

December 1, 1922

(From a letter to Barin.)

Dear Barin,

        ...

        As you know, I do not believe that the Mahatma's principle \[of
non-cooperation\] can be the true foundation or his programme the true
means of bringing out the genuine freedom and greatness of India, her
Swarajya and Samrajya.[\[30\]](#_ftn30) On the other hand ... I hold
that school \[of Tilakite nationalism\] to be out of date. My own
policy, if I were in the field, would be radically different in
principle and programme from both, however it might coincide in certain
points. But the country is not yet ready to understand its principle or
to execute its programme.

        Because I know this very well, I am content to work still on the
spiritual and psychic plane, preparing there the ideas and forces, which
may afterwards at the right moment and under the right conditions
precipitate themselves into the vital and material field....⁹⁰

\*\*\*

</div>

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) One of the last Assyrian kings in the seventh century
BC.

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Members of the last dynasty of native rulers of
Persia, the Sassanids, who ruled from the third to the seventh century
AD, until the Mahomedan conquests engulfed Persia.

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) The Brahmanas are the part of the Veda consisting of
commentaries on the Mantras, instructions for rituals, myths and
legends, etc.

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) Sri Aurobindo is referring here to the linguistic
theories in vogue in Europe during the second half of the nineteenth
century, according to which Sanskrit was brought into Northern India by
“Aryan” tribes coming from central Asia, while Southern India’s
languages (Tamil particularly) were supposed to belong to a “Dravidian”
family of distinct origin. These “inimical” theories, still largely
accepted today by linguists (although archaeologists find no evidence
for them), were in reality based on nothing but the desire to cause
divisions among the Indian people so as to dominate them more easily
(let us recall Britain’s motto of “divide and rule”), or often to
convert them more easily to Christianity. It is therefore no wonder that
this “philology” was mostly propagated by scholars and missionaries at
the service of the Empire.

          To that end, they were content to highlight differences
between southern languages and Sanskrit, while ignoring their numerous
and deep common points, which Sri Aurobindo studied closely, and which
led him to the conclusion that Tamil and Sanskrit both derived from a
single, more ancient language spoken in India in pre-Vedic times.

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) From “henotheism,” a word coined by Max Müller in an
attempt to characterize the nature of the Aryans’ belief in the Vedic
gods.

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) “What can be more tedious than the Veda?” he also
asked. Most other nineteenth-century European scholars agreed: “The
verses of the Veda appear singularly prosaic,” says Wilson, “and at any
rate their chief value lies not in their fancy \[*sic*\] but in their
facts, social and religious.” Monier-Williams finds them “to abound more
in puerile ideas than in striking thoughts and lofty conceptions.”
Griffith is struck by the “intolerable monotony of a great number of the
hymns,” whose language and style, according to Cowell, “is singularly
artificial.” The latter, however, concedes that “far wider and deeper
study is needed to pierce to the real meaning of these old hymns.”

</div>

<div id="ftn7" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) And an enduring one. Sri Aurobindo's luminously
consistent exposition in *The Secret of the Veda* of its symbolic sense,
which refuted the “Aryan invasion theory,” has been ignored by most
Western and Indian scholars, although some of the latter have begun to
recognize the importance of Sri Aurobindo's discovery. Yet it is
striking that this theory and the resulting contrived reconstruction of
India's ancient history, still presented and taught—especially in
India—as a solid certainty, is in head-on contradiction not only with
archaeology (see next note), but also with two mainstays of Indian
tradition: 1. The one that regards the Ramayana and Mahabharata as based
on historical tradition *(itihasa),* considerably embellished, to be
sure, but still with a kernel of historicity: we find depicted in these
epics a highly developed civilization spanning millennia, and a Great
War waged around 3100 BC, both of which are incompatible with
semiprimitive cattle-worshipping Aryans’ coming into India around
1500 BC; 2. The more central tradition that holds the Veda to be a book
of divine and eternal knowledge: nineteenth-century scholars found none
in it, which is hardly surprising since they decided to force their
reading of history, geography and ethnology into the Veda and ruled out
any deeper, symbolic and spiritual significance in the Rishis’
experience; they were also compelled to date the Veda about 1000 BC, a
ridiculously late date. Moreover, they neglected the fact that the
Rig-Veda makes no mention of any invasion into India and records no
homeland outside India.

          The result is the fallacy of a rigid break between Aryan and
Dravidian races, languages, civilizations, even deities (Shiva is
Dravidian, Vishnu is Aryan!). India, maimed in her spirit and her
physical being, has also been maimed in her past. We await a broader,
bolder and unblinkered scholarship, which will neither ignore the
elements supplied by archaeology, nor close its eyes to what has been
for millennia the source of India's spiritual life and strength.

</div>

<div id="ftn8" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) Sri Aurobindo wrote this some eight years before the
first archaeological discoveries in 1921-22 of the Indus Valley or
Harappan civilization (2600-1900 BC, with its early phase going back to
5000 BC). Since most scholars had arbitrarily decided that the supposed
“Aryans” entered India around 1500 BC, they were compelled to assume
that the Harappan civilization was pre-Vedic. Yet seals depicting
deities seated in yogic postures, fire and sacrificial altars, figures
of the so-called Pasupati and the bull, worship of a Mother goddess,
recent indications of a connection between the Indus Valley language and
Sanskrit—all these are perfectly compatible with Vedic culture, and
indeed a number of archaeologists are veering to the view that the
Harappan civilization was late or even post-Vedic. On the other hand,
they agree that no findings have been made east of the Indus which could
be traced to an Aryan people coming into India: mysteriously, the
supposed conquerors of the Indian subcontinent left no physical trace of
their arrival.

          South of the Indus, the rediscovery of the bed of the Vedic
river Saraswati, confirmed by satellite photography, geological and
archaeological explorations, has dealt a final blow to the “invasionist”
theories: this great river, which dried up in stages between 3000-2000
BC, is lavishly honoured in the Rig-Veda, supposedly composed a thousand
years after its drying up! (Recent studies of all available elements
from archaeology, geography, mathematics, astronomy, etc., have argued
that the Vedic hymns must have been composed between 7000 and 4000
BC.³²) In fact, hundreds of Harappan settlements have been found along
the Saraswati’s dry bed, confirming their connection with Vedic culture,
and prompting some scholars to propose the new name of “Indus-Saraswati
civilization.”

          Whatever twists and turns Indian civilization may have had,
whatever migrations may have taken place to or from India, a sharp
demarcation between pre- and post-Aryan India finds justification
neither in the Scriptures nor in archaeology. It is safe to predict that
future archaeological findings will further confirm the essential
continuity of Indian civilization.

</div>

<div id="ftn9" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) Loyalism to the British Empire in South Africa during
the Boer War (1899-1902) and the 1906 Zulu rebellion. When Sri Aurobindo
wrote this letter, Gandhi was still in South Africa; he returned to
India a few months later, in January 1915.

</div>

<div id="ftn10" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) I prefer not to use the term race, for race is a
thing much more obscure and difficult to determine than is usually
imagined. In dealing with it the trenchant distinctions current in the
popular mind are wholly out of place. \[Sri Aurobindo's note.\]

</div>

<div id="ftn11" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) Sri Aurobindo studied Tamil for a few years with
the help of Subramania Bharati, the well-known Tamil revolutionary and
poet.

</div>

<div id="ftn12" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[12\]](#_ftnref12) In the Rig-Veda, the Dasyus are beings and forces
of darkness, which the gods and Rishis fight together and conquer.

</div>

<div id="ftn13" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[13\]](#_ftnref13) The monthly edited and published by Sri Aurobindo
from 1914 to 1921.

</div>

<div id="ftn14" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[14\]](#_ftnref14) We cannot in these few extracts give a fair idea of
the Vedic symbolism which Sri Aurobindo brought to light; the reader is
invited to study *The Secret of the Veda*.

</div>

<div id="ftn15" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[15\]](#_ftnref15) “Henotheism”: see note 5.

</div>

<div id="ftn16" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[16\]](#_ftnref16) Yet Sanskrit, the only language that was ever used
over the whole of India and the one best expressive of her spirit and
richness, is today on the way to extinction, its study discouraged in
both North and South India.

</div>

<div id="ftn17" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[17\]](#_ftnref17) This text, although written in 1946 in the Foreword
to *Hymns to the Mystic Fire*, has been included here in conclusion to
the preceding series of extracts from Sri Aurobindo's writings on the
Veda.

</div>

<div id="ftn18" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[18\]](#_ftnref18) Symbolized in the Veda by the cows or “shining
herds.”

</div>

<div id="ftn19" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[19\]](#_ftnref19) When Sri Aurobindo wrote this, Gandhi, back in
India, had just started propagating his doctrine of ahimsa.

</div>

<div id="ftn20" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[20\]](#_ftnref20) World War I is raging as Sri Aurobindo writes this.

</div>

<div id="ftn21" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[21\]](#_ftnref21) The vital, in Sri Aurobindo's terminology,
represents the region of consciousness between the physical and the
mind, i.e. the region of emotions, feelings, passions, etc., which
constitute the various expressions of the Life-Energy.

</div>

<div id="ftn22" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[22\]](#_ftnref22) The answer of Stephenson to those who argued by
strict scientific logic that his engine on rails could not and should
not move, “Your difficulty is solved by its moving.” \[Sri Aurobindo's
note.\]

</div>

<div id="ftn23" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[23\]](#_ftnref23) The Malay Archipelago, which includes Indonesia and
the Philippines.

</div>

<div id="ftn24" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[24\]](#_ftnref24) Kalki: the last Avatar, who comes riding a white
winged horse, armed with a sword. He will come “like a burning comet.”

</div>

<div id="ftn25" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[25\]](#_ftnref25) The 1919 Amritsar session declared Swaraj to be the
aim of the Congress, as did the following 1920 Nagpur session; but this
demand was soon eclipsed by the Khilafat movement (for the continuance
of the Sultan of Turkey as the Caliph of the Mahomedan world), and
returned to the fore only in 1929, at the Lahore session.

</div>

<div id="ftn26" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[26\]](#_ftnref26) Dr. Munje also visited Sri Aurobindo in October,
1920, and had long talks with him; he later became a leader of the Hindu
Mahasabha.

</div>

<div id="ftn27" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[27\]](#_ftnref27) References to the officials responsible for the
Jallianwala Bagh massacre, and to the Khilafat movement.

</div>

<div id="ftn28" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[28\]](#_ftnref28) Bhaskara: famous mathematician and astronomer of
the twelfth century.

</div>

<div id="ftn29" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[29\]](#_ftnref29) The Buddhist university of Nalanda, as large as a
city, was built near today’s Patna; it had as many as 10,000 students
from various parts of the world. In the twelfth century, like most great
monuments and temples of North India, it was sacked and destroyed by
Muslim invaders.

</div>

<div id="ftn30" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[30\]](#_ftnref30) I.e., her self-rule and perfect empire.

</div>

</div>

  
  
  

**[Part I](IR_part1.htm)      [Front Page](IR_frontpage.htm)    [VOI
Online Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.org/books/)     [Part
III](IR_part3.htm)**
