+++
title = "04 CHAPTER TWO - NEGATIONISM IN INDIA"

+++
## CHAPTER TWO - NEGATIONISM IN INDIA

The negationism regarding the Nazi crimes has been the object of much
public discussion. Turkish negationism about the Armenian genocide has
received some attention. Less well-known is that India has its own brand
of negationism.

Since about 1920 an effort has been going on in India to rewrite history
and to deny the millennium-long attack of Islam on Hinduism. Today, most
politicians and English- writing intellectuals in India will go out of
their way to condemn any public reference to this long and painful
conflict in the strongest terms. They will go to any length to create
the illusion of a history of *communal amity* between Hindus and
Muslims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.1 HINDU VS. MUSLIM

Making people believe in a history of Hindu-Muslim amity is not an easy
task: the number of victims of the persecutions of Hindus by Muslims is
easily of the same order of magnitude as that of the Nazi extermination
policy, though no one has yet made the effort of tabulating the reported
massacres and proposing a reasonable estimate of how many millions
exactly must have died in the course of the Islamic campaign against
Hinduism (such research is taboo). On top of these there is a similar
number of abductions and deportations to harems and slave-markets, as
well as centuries of political oppression and cultural destruction.

The American historian Will Durant summed it up like this:*"The Islamic
conquest of India is probably the bloodiest story in history. It is a
discouraging tale, for its evident moral is that civilization is a
precious good, whose delicate complex of order and freedom, culture and
peace, can at any moment be overthrown by barbarians invading from
without or multiplying within."*

Only off and on did this persecution have the intensity of a genocide,
but it was sustained much longer and spread out much wider
geographically than the Nazi massacre. Whereas the Germans including
most members of the Nazi party, were horrified at the Nazi crimes
against humanity within a few years, the Muslims, for whom *Gott mit
uns* (God with us) was not a slogan but a religious certainty, managed
to keep a good conscience for centuries. We will encounter similarities
as well as differences between Nazi and Islamic crimes against humanity,
but the most striking difference is definitely the persistence with
which Islamic persecutions have continued for 14 centuries. This is
because it had more spine, a more powerful psychological grip on its
adherents than Nazism.

The ideological foundation of the Islamic campaign was similar to the
Nazi ideology. The Muslium invaders (as we can read in numerous
documents which they left us, from the Quran and the Hadith onwards)
distinguished between three kinds of people: first of all the Muslims,
the Herrenvolk (master nation) to which Allah had promised the world;
secondly the Jews and Christians, who could live on under Muslim rule
but only as third-class citizens, just like the Slavic Untermenschen
(inferior people) in Hitler's planned new order, thirdly the species to
be eliminated, the real Pagans who had to disappear from the face of the
earth.

Different from Hitler's victims, the non-combatants among the
*unbelievers* often got a chance to opt for conversion rather than
death. What Mohammed (imitated by his successors) wanted, was his
recognition as God's final prophet, so he preferred people to live and
give him this recognition (by pronouncing the Islamic creed, i.e.
converting), and only those who refused him this recognition were to be
killed. Still, conversion often came too late to save defeated Pagans
from slavery. At this point, Mohammed deserves comparison with Stalin:
unlike Hitler, he killed people not for their race but for their
opinions. But one can hardly say that the one totalitarianism is better
than the other.

The Blitzkrieg of the Muslim armies in the first decades after the birth
of their religion had such enduring results precisely because the Pagan
populations in West- and Central-Asia had no choice (except death) but
to convert. Whatever the converts' own resentment, their children grew
up as Muslims and gradually identified with this religion. Within a few
generations the initial resistance against these forcible converions was
forgotten, and these areas became heidenfrei (free from Pagans, cfr.
judenfrei). In India it didn't go like that, because the Muslims needed
five centuries of attempts at invasion before they could catch hold of
large parts of India, and even then they encountered endless resistance,
so that they often had to settle for a compromise.

The Muslim conquests, down to the 16th century, were for the Hindus a
pure struggle of life and death. Entire cities were burnt down and the
populations massacred, with hundreds of thousands killed in every
campaign, and similar numbers deported as slaves. Every new invader made
(often literally) his hills of Hindus skulls. Thus, the conquest of
Afghanistan in the year 1000 was followed by the annihilation of the
Hindu population; the region is still called the Hindu Kush, i.e. *Hindu
slaughter*. The Bahmani sultans (1347-1480) in central India made it a
rule to kill 100,000 captives in a single day, and many more on other
occasions. The conquest of the Vijayanagar empire in 1564 left the
capital plus large areas of Karnataka depopulated. And so on.

As a contribution to research on the quantity of the Islamic crimes
against humanity, we may mention Prof. K.S.Lal's estimates about the
population figures in medieval India (Growth of Muslim Population in
India). According to his calculations, the Indian (subcontinent)
population decreased by 80 million between 1000 (conquest of
Afghanistan) and 1525 (end of Delhi Sultanate). More research is needed
before we can settle for a quantitatively accurate evaluation of Muslim
rule in India, but at least we know for sure that the term *crime
against humanity* is not exaggerated.

But the Indian Pagans were far too numerous and never fully surrendered.
What some call the *Muslim period* in Indian history, was in reality a
continuous war of occupiers against resisters, in which the Muslim
rulers were finally defeated in the 18th century. Against these
rebellious Pagans the Muslim rulers preferred to avoid total
confrontation, and to accept the compromise which the (in India
dominant) Hanifite school of Islamic law made possible. Alone among the
four Islamic law schools, the school of Hanifa gave Muslim rulers the
right not to offer the Pagans the sole choice between death and
conversion, but to allow them toleration as zimmis (protected ones)
living under 20 humiliating conditions, and to collect the jizya
(toleration tax) from them. Normally the zimmi status was only open to
Jews and Christians (and even that concession was condemned by jurists
of the Hanbalite school like lbn Taymiya), which explains why these
communities have survived in Muslim countries while most other religions
have not. On these conditions some of the higher Hindu castes could be
found willing to collaborate, so that a more or less stable polity could
be set up. Even then, the collaboration of the Rajputs with the Moghul
rulers, or of the Kayasthas with the Nawab dynasty, one became a smooth
arrangement when enlightened rulers like Akbar (whom orthodox Muslims
consider an apostate) cancelled these humiliating conditions and the
jizya tax.

It is because of Hanifite law that many Muslim rulers in India
considered themselves exempted from the duty to continue the genocide on
the Hindus (self-exemption for which they were persistently reprimanded
by their mullahs). Moreover, the Turkish and Afghan invaders also fought
each other, so they often had to ally themselves with accursed
unbelievers against fellow Muslims. After the conquests, Islamic
occupation gradually lost its character of a total campaign to destroy
the Pagans. Many Muslim rulers preferred to enjoy the revenue from
stable and prosperous kingdoms, and were content to extract the jizya
tax, and to limit their conversion effort to material incentives and
support to the missionary campaigns of sufis and mullahs (in fact, for
less zealous rulers, the jizya was an incentive to discourage
conversions, as these would mean a loss of revenue). The Moghul dynasty
(from 1526 onwards) in effect limited its ambition to enjoying the zimma
system, similar to the treatment of Jews and Christians in the Ottoman
empire. Muslim violence would thenceforth be limited to some
slave-taking, crushing the numerous rebellions, destruction of temples
and killing or humiliation of Brahmins, and occasional acts of terror by
small bands of raiders. A left-over from this period is the North-Indian
custom of celebrating weddings at midnight: this was a safety measure
against the Islamic sport of bride-catching.

The last jihad against the Hindus before the full establishment of
British rule was waged by Tipu Sultan at the end of the 18th century. In
the rebellion of 1857, the near-defunct Muslim dynasties (Moghuls,
Nawabs) tried to curry favour with their Hindu subjects and neighbours,
in order to launch a joint effort to re-establish their rule. For
instance, the Nawab promised to give the Hindus the Ram
Janmabhoomi/Babri Masjid site back, in an effort to quench their
anti-Muslim animosity and redirect their attention towards the new
common enemy from Britain. This is the only instance in modern history
when Muslims offered concessions to the Hindus; after that, all the
concessions made for the sake of communal harmony were a one-way traffic
from Hindu to Muslim.

After the British had crushed the rebellion of 1857, the Indian Muslims
fell into a state of depression, increasing backwardness due to their
refusal of British education, and nostalgia for the past. While the
Hindu elites took to Western notions like secular nationalism, the
Muslims remained locked up in their communal separateness. As soon as
the British drew them into the political process (founding of Muslim
League in 1906) in order to use them as a counter-weight against the
Indian National Congress, they immediately made heavy and hurtful
demands on the Hindus, such as the unlimited right to slaughter cows,
and they started working for political separation. First they obtained
separate electorates where Muslim candidates would only have to please
Muslim voters, and later they would succeed in separating a Muslim state
from India.

By the twenties, they took to the unscrupled use of muscle power in a
big way, creating street riots and outright pogroms. If Hindus
retaliated in kind, it was a welcome help in instilling the separate
communal identity into the ordinary Muslim, who would have preferred to
coexist with his Hindu neighbours in peace. By creating riots and
provoking relatiatory violence, the Muslim League managed to swing the
vast majority of the Muslim electorate towards supporting its demand for
the partition of India. The roughly 600,000 victims of the violence
accompanying the Partition were the price which the Muslim League was
willing to pay for its Islamic state of Pakistan. While every Hindu and
Muslim who took part in the violence is responsible for his own
excesses, the over-all responsibility for this mass- slaughter lies
squarely with the Muslim leadership.

After independence, the Islamic persecution of Hindus has continued in
different degrees of intensity, in Pakistan, Bangla Desh and Kashmir (as
well as heavy discrimination in Malaysia). This is not the place for
detailing these facts, which the international media have been ignoring
completely. What may cut short all denials of this continued pestering
of Hindus in Muslim states, are the resulting migration figures: in
1948, Hindus formed 23% of the population of Bangla Desh (then East
Pakistan), in 1971 the figure was down to 15%, and today it stands at
about 8%. No journalist or human rights body goes in to ask the minority
Hindus for their opinion about the treatment they get from the Muslim
authorities and populations; but they vote with their feet.

In the first months of 1990, the entire Hindu population (about 2 lakhs)
was forcibly driven from the Kashmir Valley, which used to be advertised
as a showpiece of communal harmony. Muslim newspapers and mosque
loudspeakers had warned the Hindus to leave the valley or face bullets.
After the Islamic conquest of Kabul in April 1992, 50,000 Hindus had to
flee Afghanistan (with the Indian government unwilling to extend help,
and Inder Kumar Gujral denying that the expulsion of *Indians* had a
communal motive). The pogroms in Pakistan and Bangladesh after the
demolition of the Babri Masjid left 50,000 Hindus homeless in Bangladesh
and triggered another wave of refugees from both countries towards
India. In Pakistan, 245 Hindu temples were demolished, in Bangladesh a
similar number was attacked, and even in England some temples were set
on fire by Muslim mobs. And then we haven't even mentioned the recurrent
attacks on Hindu processions and on police stations.

It will now be evident that the Hindu psyche has very little sympathy
for Islam. Doing something about this was the chief motive for
negationism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.2 NEGATIONISM AND THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS

The political context of the frist attempts at negationism was chiefly
the attempt of the independence movement, led by the Indian National
Congress, to eliminate all factors of disunity between Hindus and
Muslims. It was the time of the Khilafat movement (1919-23), the
agitation of Indian Muslims against the British take-over of the Islamic
sacred places from the deceased Ottoman empire. The khilafatists
demanded the restoration of the Ottoman caliph's authority over the
sacred places. Congress saw in this the occasion to enlist the Muslims
in the national freedom struggle against the same British imperialists.

This was a miscalculation: the khilafat movement intensified the Islamic
sense of communal identity (therefore the rejection of Indian
nationalism), and added considerably to Muslim separatism and the
Pakistan ideology. But before 1923, when the Turks themselves abolished
the caliphate so that the movement lost its raison d'etre (and got
transmuted into pogroms against the Hindus), there was great expectation
in Congress circles. Therefore, Congress people were willing to go to
any length to iron out the differences between Hindus and Muslims,
including the invention of *centuries of communal amity*.

At that time, the Congress leders were not yet actively involved in the
rewriting of history. They were satisfied to quietly ignore the true
history of Hindu-Muslim relations. After the communal riots of Kanpur in
1931, a Congress report advised the elimination of the mutual enemy-
image by changing the contents of the history-books.

The next generation of political leaders, especially the left-wing that
was to gain control of Congress in the thirties, and complete control in
the fifties, would profess negationism very explicitly. The *radical
humanist* (i.e. bourgeois Marxist) M.N. Roy wrote that Islam had
fulfilled a historic mission of equality and abolition of
discrimination, and that for this, Islam had been welcomed into India by
the lower castes. If at all any violence had occurred, it was as a
matter of justified class struggle by the *progressive forces* against
the *reactionary forces*, meaning the *fedual* Hindu upper castes.

This is a modern myth springing from an incorrect and much too grim
picture of the caste system, a back-projection of modern ideas of class
struggle, and an uncritical swallowing of contemporary Islamic
apologetics, which has incorporated some voguish socialist values. There
is no record anywhere of low-caste people *welcoming the Muslims as
liberators*. Just like in their homeland, the Muslim generals had
nothing but contempt for the common people, and all the more so because
these were idolaters. They made no distinction between rich Pagans and
poor Pagans: in the Quran, Allah had promised the same fate to all
idolaters.

By contrast, there is plenty of testimony that these common people rose
in revolt, not against their high-caste co-religionists, but against the
Muslim rulers. And not only against heavy new taxes (50% of the land
revenue for Alauddin Khilji, whom the negationists hail as the
*precursor of socialism*) and land expropriations, but especially
against the rape and abduction of women and children and the destruction
of their idols, acts which have been recorded with so much glee by the
Muslim chroniclers, without anywhere mentioning a separate treatment of
Hindu rich and Hindu poor, upper-caste Kafir or low-caste Kafir. Even
when some of the high-caste people started collaborating, the common
people gave the invaders no rest, attacking them from hiding-places in
the forests. The conversion of low-caste people only began when Muslim
rulers were safely in power and in a position to reward and encourage
conversion by means of tax discrimination, legal discrimination (win the
dispute with your neighbour if you convert), handing out posts to
converts, and simple coercion. Nevertheless, the myth which M.N. Roy
spread, has gained wide currency.

The best-known propounder of negationism was certainly Jawarharlal
Nehru. He was rather illiterate concerning Indian culture and history,
so his admirers may invoke for him the benefit of doubt. At any rate,
his writings contain some crude cases of glorification of Muslim tyrants
and concealment or denial of their crimes. Witness his assessment of
Mahmud Ghaznavi, who, according to his chronicler Utbi, sang the praise
of the temple complex at Mathura and then immediately proceeded to
destroy it. Nehru writes: *"Building interested Mahmud, and he was much
impressed by the city of Mathura near Delhi"*. About this he wrote:
*"There are here a thousand edifices as firm as the faith of the
faithful; nor is it likely that this city has attained its present
condition but at the expense of many millions of dinars, nor could such
another be constructed under a period of 200 years."* And that is all:
Nehru described the destroyer of Mathura as an admirer of Mathura,
apparently without noticing the gory sarcasm in Ghaznavi's eulogy.

Moreover, Nehru denied that Mahmud had committed his acts of destruction
out of any religious motive: *"Mahmud was not a religious man. He was a
Mohammedan, but that was just by the way. He was in the first place a
soldier, and a brilliant soldier."* That Mahmud was definitely a
religious man, and that he had religious motives for his campaigns
against the Hindus, is quite clear from Utbi's contemporary chronicle.
Every night Mahmud copied from the Quran *for the benefit of his soul*.
He risked his life several times for the sake of destroying and
desecrating temples in which there was nothing to plunder, just to
terrorize and humiliate the Pagans. In his campaigns, he never neglected
to invoke the appropriate Quran verses. In venerating Mahmud as a pious
hero of Islam, Indian Muslims are quite faithful to history: unlike
Nehru, the ordinary Muslim refuses to practise negationism.

With Nehru, negationmism became the official line of the Indian National
Congress, and after Independence also of the Indian state and
government.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.3 THE ALIGARH SCHOOL

A second factor in the genesis of negationism was the penetration of
Western ideas among a part of the Muslim elite, and especially the (in
Europe newly emerged) positive valuation of tolerance. The Islamic elite
was concentrated around two educational institutes, spearheads of the
traditional and of the (superficially) westernizing trends among Indian
Muslims. One was the theological academy at Deoband, the other the
British-oriented Aligarh Muslim university.

The Deoband school was (and is) orthodox-Islamic, and rejected modern
values like nationalism and democracy. It simply observed that India had
once been a Dar-ul-Islam (house of Islam), and that therefore it had to
be brought back under Muslim control. The fact that the majority of the
population consisted of non-Muslims was not important: in the medieval
Muslim empires the Muslims had not been in a majority either, and
moreover, demography and conversion could yet transform the Muslim
minority into a majority.

Among the scions of the Deoband school we find Maulana Maudoodi, the
chief ideologue of modern fundamentalism. He opposed the Pakistan scheme
and demanded the Islamization of all of British India. After
independence, he settled in Pakistan and agitated for the full
Islamization of the (still too British) polity. Shortly before his death
in 1979, his demands were largely met when general Zia launched his
Islamization policy.

Outsiders will be surprised to find that the same school of which
Maudoodi was a faithful spokesman, also brought forth Maulana Abul Kalam
Azad, who was Congress president for several terms and who was to become
minister of Education in free India. Understandably but unjustifiably,
Azad has often been described as as *moderate* and *nationalist* Muslim:
he rejected the Partition of India and the foundation of Pakistan, not
because he rejected the idea of a Muslim state, but because he wanted
all of India to become a Muslim state in time.

When in the forties the Partition seemed unavoidable, Azad patronized
proposals to preserve India's unity, stipulating that half of all
members of parliament and of the government had to be Muslims (then 24%
of the population), with the other half to be divided between Hindus,
Ambedkarites, Christians, and the rest. Short, a state in which Muslims
would rule and non-Muslims would be second-class citizens electorally
and politically. The Cabinet Mission Plan, proposed by the British as
the ultimate sop for the Muslim League, equally promised an effective
parity between Muslims and non-Muslims at the Central Government level
and a veto right for the Muslim minority. Without Gandhiji's and other
Congress leaders' knowing, Congress president Azad assured the British
negotiators that he would get the plan accepted by the Congress. When he
was caught in the act of lying to the Mahatma about the plan and his
assurance, he lost some credit even among the naive Hindus who
considered him a *moderate*. But he retained his position of trust in
Nehru's cabinet, and continued his work for the ultimate transformation
of India into a Muslim State.

Maulana Azad's pleas for Hindu-Muslim co-operation had an esoteric
meaning, clear enough for Muslims but invisible for wilfully gullible
non-Muslims like his colleagues in the Congress leadership. Azad
declared that Hindu-Muslim co- operation was in complete conformity with
the Prophet's vision, for *"Mohammed had also made a treaty with the
Jews of Madina"*. He certainly had, but the practical impact of this
treaty was that within a few years, two of the three Jewish clans in
Medina had ben chased away, and the third clan had been massacred to the
last man (the second clan had only been saved by the intervention of
other Medinese leaders, for Mohammed had wanted to kill them too).
Maulana Azad could mention Mohammed's treaty with the Jews as a model
for Hindu-Muslim co-operation only because he was confident that few
Hindus were aware of the end of the story, and that better-informed
Hindus honoured a kind of taboo on criticism of Islam and its Prophet.

This parenthesis about Maulana Azad may help clear up some illusions
which Hindus and Westerners fondly entertain about the possibility of
Islamic moderacy. The Deoband school was as fundamentalist in its Azad
face as it was in its Maudoodi heart, and its spokesmen had no problems
with the horrors of Islamic history, nor did they make attempts to
rewrite it. That Muslims had persecuted and massacred Hindus, counted as
the fulfilment of Allah's salvation plan to transform the whole world
into a Dar-ul-Islam. As Mohammed Iqbal wrote: *"All land belongs to the
Muslims, because it belongs to their God."* (Iqbal would, however, end
up in the Aligarh camp, cfr. infra) Maulana Azad shared this view of
history. He condemned Moghul emperor Akbar's tolerant rule as the
near-suicide of Indian Islam, and praised fanatics like the theologian
Ahmad Sirhindi, who through his opposition to Akbar's tolerance had
brought the Moghul dynasty back on the right track of Hind-persecution.

Unlike the Deoband school, the Aligarh school tried to reconcile Islam
with modern culture. It understood the principles of democracy and
majority rule, and recognized that a modern democracy would be
incompatible with the transformation of India into an Islamic state as
long as Muslims only formed a minority. The tactical opposition against
the disadvantageous system of democracy was underpinned ideologically by
Mohammed Iqbal, who criticized it as a system in which *heads are
counted but not weighed*. But Iqbal understood that democracy was the
wave of the near future, and, together with more modern and sincerely
democracy-minded people in the Muslim intelligentsia, he faced the
logical consequence that the Muslims had to give up the ambition of
gaining control over all of India immediately. Instead they should
create a separate state out of the Muslim-majority areas of India:
Pakistan. The ideal of Pakistan was launched by Iqbal in 1930, and in
1940 it became the official political goal of the Muslim League. Aligarh
Muslim University has often been described as the *cradle of Pakistan*.

From their better knowledge of and appreciation for modern culture, the
Aligarh thinkers accepted the modern value of religious tolerance. Not
to the extent that they would be willing to co-exist with the Hindus in
a single post-colonial state, but at least to this extent that they
wanted to do something about the imge of intolerance which Islam had
come to carry. Around 1920 Aligarh historian Mohammed Habib launched a
grand project to rewrite the history of the Indian religious conflict.
The main points of his version of history are the following.

Firstly, it was not all that serious. One cannot fail to notice that the
Islamic chroniclers (including some rulers who wrote their own
chronicles, like Teimur and Babar) have described the slaughter of
Hindus, the abduction of their women and children, and the destruction
of their places of worship most gleefully. But, according to Habib,
these were merely exaggerations by court poets out to please their
patrons. One wonders what it says about Islamic rulers that they felt
flattered by the bloody details which the Muslims chroniclers of Hindu
persecutions have left us. At any rate, Habib has never managed to
underpin this convenient hypothesis with a single fact.

Secondly, that percentage of atrocities on Hindus which Habib was
prepared to admit as historical, is not to be attributed to the impact
of Islam, but to other factors. Sometimes Islam was used as a
justification post factum, but this was deceptive. In reality economic
motives were at work. The Hindus amassed all their wealth in temples and
therefore Muslim armies plundered these temples.

Thirdly, according to Habib there was also a racial factor: these
Muslims were mostly Turks, savage riders from the steppes who would need
several centuries before getting civilized by the wholesome influence of
Islam. Their inborn barbarity cannot be attributed to the doctrines of
Islam.

Finally, the violence of the Islamic warriors was of minor importance in
the establishment of Islam in India. What happened was not so much a
conquest, but a *shift in public opinion*: when the urban working-class
heard of Islam and realized it now had a choice between Hindu law
(smrti) and Muslim law (shariat), it chose the latter.

Mohammed Habib's excise in history-rewriting cannot stand the test of
historical criticism on any score. We can demonstrate this with the
example of Sultan Mahmud Ghaznavi (997-1030), already mentioned, who
carried out a number of devastating raids in Sindh, Gujrat and Punjab.
This Ghaznavi was a Turk, certainly, but in many respects he was not a
barbarian: he patronized arts and literature (including the great
Persian poet Firdausi, who would end up in trouble because his patron
suspected him of apostasy, and the Persian but Arabic-writing historian
Albiruni) and was a fine calligraphist himself. The undeniable barbarity
of his anti-Hindu campaigns cannot be attributed to his ethnic stock.
His massacres and acts of destruction were merely a replay of what the
Arab Mohammed bin Qasim had wrought in Sindh in 712-15. He didn't care
for material gain: he left rich mosques untouched, but poor Hindu
temples met the same fate at his hands as the richer temples. He turned
down a Hindu offer to give back a famous idol in exchange for a huge
ransom: *"I prefer to appear on Judgement Day as an idol-breaker rather
than an idol-seller."* The one explanation that covers all the relevant
facts, is that he was driven to his barbarous acts by his ideological
allegiance to Islam.

There is no record of his being welcomed by urban artisans as a
liberator from the oppressive Hindu social system. On the contrary, his
companion Albiruni testifies how all the Hindus had an inveterate
aversion for all Muslims.

Another ruler, Firuz Shah Tughlaq (1351-88), personally confirms that
the descruction of Pagan temples was done out of piety, not out of
greed: *"The Hindus had accepted the zimmi status and the concomitant
jizya tax in exchange for safety. But now they built idol temples in the
city, in defiance of the Prophet's law which forbids such temples. Under
divine leadership I destroyed these buildings, and killed the leaders of
idolatry, and the common followers received physical chastisement, until
this abomination had been banned completely."* When Firuz heard that a
Pagan festival was going on, he reacted forcefully: *"My religious
feelings exhorted me to finish off this scandal, this insult to Islam.
On the day of the festival I went there myself, I ordered the execution
of the leaders and practitioners of this abomination... I destroyed
their idol temples and built mosques in their places."*

The contention that *Hindus stored their riches in temples* is
completely plucked out of thin air (though some of the richer temples
contained golden statues, which were temple property): it is one among
many ad hoc hypotheses which make Habib's theory a methodologically
indefensible construction. In fact, Habib is proclaining a grand
conspiracy theory: all the hundreds of Islamic authors who declared
unanimously that what they reported was a war of Islam against
Infidelity, would all have co-ordinated one single fake scenario to
deceive us.

This is not to say that the entire report which the Muslim chroniclers
have left us, should be accepted at face value. For instance, writers
like Ghaznavi's contemporary Utbi give the impression that the raids on,
and ultimate conquest of Hindustan were a walk-over. Closer study of all
the source material shows that the Muslim armies had a very tough time
in India. From Muslim chronicles one only gets a faint glimpse of the
intensity with which the Hindus kept on offering resistance, and of the
precariousness of the Muslim grip on Hindistan through the *Muslim
period*. The Muslim chroniclers have not been caught in the act of lying
very often, but some of them distort the proportions of victory and
defeat a bit. This is quite common among partisan historians everywhere,
and a modern historian knows how to take such minor distortions into
account. The unanimous and entirely coherent testimony that the wars in
Hindustan were religious wars of Muslims against Kafirs is a different
matter altogether: denying this testimony is not a matter of small
adjustments, but of replacing the well-attested historical facts with
their diametrical opposite.

Habib tried to absolve the ideology (Islam) of the undeniable facts of
persecution and massacre of the Pagans by blaming individuals (the
Muslims). The sources however point to the opposite state of affairs:
Muslim fanatics were merely faithful executors of Quranic injunctions.
Not the Muslims are guilty, but Islam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.4 NEGATIONISM RAMPANT: THE MARXISTS

The Aligarh school has been emulated on a large scale. Soon its torch
was taken over by Marxist historians, who were building a reputation for
unscrupled history-rewriting in accordance with the party-line.

In this context, one should know that there is a strange alliance
between the Indian Communist parties and the Muslim fanatics. In the
forties the Communists gave intellectual muscle and political support to
the Muslim League's plan to partition India and create an Islamic state.
After independence, they successfully combined (with the tacit support
of Prime minister Nehru) to sabotage the implementation of the
constitutional provision that Hindi be adopted as national language, and
to force India into the Soviet-Arab front against Israel. Ever since,
this collaboration has continued to their mutual advantage as
exemplified by their common front to defend the Babri Masjid, that
symbol of Islamic fanaticism. Under Nehru's rule these Marxists acquired
control of most of the educational and research institutes and policies.

Moreover, they had an enormous mental impact on the Congress apparatus:
even those who formally rejected the Soviet system, thought completely
in Marxist categories. They accepted, for instance, that religious
conflicts can be reduced to economic and class contradictions. They also
adopted Marxist terminology, so that they always refer to conscious
Hindus as *the communal forces* or *elements* (Marxism dehumanizes
people to impersonal pawns, or *forces*, in the hands of god History).
The Marxist historians had the field all to themselves, and they set to
work to *decommunalize Indian history-writing*, i.e. to erase the
importance of Islam as a factor of conflict.

In *Communalism and the Writing of indian History*, Romila Thapar,
Harbans Mukhia and Bipan Chandra, professors at Jawaharlal Nehry
University (JNU, the Mecca of *secularism* and negationism) in Delhi,
write that the interpretation of medieval wars as religious conflicts is
in fact a back- projection of contemporary religious conflict
artificially created for political purposes. In Bipan Chandra's famous
formula, *communalism is not a dinosaur*, it is a strictly modern
phenomenon. They explicitly deny that before the modern period there
existed such a thing as Hindu identity or Muslim identity. Conflicts
could not have been between Hindus and Muslims, only between rulers or
classes who incidentally also belonged to one religious community or the
other. They point to the conflicts within the communities and to
alliances across community boundaries.

It is of course a fact that some Hindus collaborated with the Muslim
rulers, but that also counted for the British colonial rulers, who are
for that no less considered as foreign oppressors. For that matter, in
the Jewish ghetto in Warsaw the Nazis employed Jewish guards, in their
search for absconding Jews they employed Jewish informers, and in their
policy of deportation they even sought the co-operation of the Zionist
movement: none of this can disprove Nazi- Jewish enmity. It is also a
fact that the Muslim rulers sometimes made war among each other, but
that was equally true for Portuguese, French and British colonizers, who
fought some wars on Indian territory: they were just as much part of a
single colonial movement with a common colonial ideology, and all the
brands of colonialism were equally the enemies of the indian freedom
movement. Even in the history of the Crusades, that paradigm of
religious war, we hear a lot of battles between one Christian-Muslim
coalition and another: these do not falsify the over-all
characterization of the Crusades as a war between Christians and Muslims
(triggered by the destruction of Christian churches by Muslims).

After postulating that conflicts between Hindus and Muslims as such were
non-existent before the modern period, the negationists are faced with
the need to explain how this type of conflict was born after centuries
of a misunderstood non-existence. The Marxist explanation is a
conspiracy theory: the separate communal identity of Hindus and Muslims
is an invention of the sly British colonialists. They carried on a
*divide and rule* policy, and therefore they incited the communal
separateness. As the example par excellence, prof. R.S. Sharma mentions
the 19th -century 8-volume work by Elliott and Dowson, *The History of
India as Told by its own Historians*. This work does indeed paint a very
grim picture of Muslim hordes who attack the Pagans with merciless
cruelty. But this picture was not a concoction by the British
historians: as the title of their work says, they had it all from
indigenous historiographers, most of them Muslims.

Yet, the negationist belief that the British newly created the
Hindu-Muslim divide has become an article of faith with everyone in
India who calls himself a *secularist*. It became a central part of the
negationist argument in the debate over the Ram Janmabhoomi/Babri Masjid
issue. Time and again, the negationist historians (including Bipan
Chandra, K.N. Panikkar, S. Gopal, Romila Thapar, Harbans Mukhia, Irfan
Habib, R.S. Sharma, Gyanendra Pandey, Sushil Srivastava, Asghar Ali
Engineer, as well as the Islamic politician Syed Shahabuddin) have
asserted that the tradition according to which the Babri mosque forcibly
replaced a Hindu temple, is nothing but a myth purposely created in the
19th century. To explain the popularity of the myth even among local
Muslim writers in the 19th century, most of them say it was a deliberate
British concoction, spread in the interest of the *divide and rule*-
policy. They affirm this conspiracy scenario without anyhow citing, from
the copious archives which the British administration in India has left
behind, any kind of positive indication for their convenient hypothesis
- let alone the rigorous proof on which a serious historian would base
his assertions, especially in such controversial questions.

They have kept on taking this stand even after five documents by local
Muslims outside the British sphere in the 19th century, two documents by
Muslim officials from the early 18th century, and two documents by
European travellers from the 18th and 17th century, as well as the
extant revenue records, all confirming the temple destruction scenario,
were brought to the public's notice in 1990. In their pamphlets and
books, the negationists simply kept on ignoring most or all of this
evidence, defiantly disregarding historical fact as well as academic
deontology.

Concerning the Ayodhya debate, it is worth recalling that the
negationists have also resorted to another tactic so familiar to our
European negationists, and to all defenders of untenable positions:
personal attacks on their opponents, in order to pull the public's
attention away from the available evidence. In December 1990, the
leading JNU historians and several allied scholars, followed by the herd
of secularist penpushers in the Indian press, have tried to raise
suspicions against the professinal honesty of Prof. B.B. Lal and Dr.
S.P. Gupta, the archaeologists who have unearthed evidence for the
existence of a Hindu temple at the Babri Masjid site. Rebuttals by these
two and a number of other archaelogists hae received coverage in the
secularist press.

In February 1991, Irfan Habib give his infamous speech to the Aligarh
Muslim University historians, in which he made personal attacks on the
scholars who took part in the government-sponsored debate on Ayodhya in
defence of the Hindu claim, and on Prof. B.B. Lal. In this case, the
weekly Sunday did publish a lengthy reply by the deputy superintending
archaeologist of the Archaeological Survey of India, A.K. Sinha. The
contents of this reply are very relevant, but it is a bit technical
(i.e. not adapted to the medium of a weekly for the general public) and
written in clumsy English, which gives a poor over-all impression.

Actually, I speculate that the Sunday-editor may well have selected it
for publication precisely because of these flaws. The practice is
well-known in the treatment of *letters to the editor*: those defending
the *wrong* viewpoint only get published if they are somewhat funny or
otherwise harmless. I cannot be sure about this particular case, but it
is a general fact that from their power positions, the negationists use
every means at their disposal to create a negative image for the Hindu
opponents of Islamic imperialism, including the selective highlighting
of the most clumsy and least convincing formulations of the Hindu
viewpoint.

In his Babri Masjid Ram Janmabhoomi Controversy, the Islamic apologist
Ali Asghar Engineer has also selected a few incomplete and less
convincing statements of the Hindu position, in order to create a
semblance of willingness to hear the Hindu viewpoint while at the same
time denying the Hindu side any publicity for its strongest arguments.
He has kept the most decisive pieces of evidence entirely out of the
readers' view, but has covered this deliberate distortion of the picture
behind a semblance of even- handedness. In *Anatomy of a Confrontation*,
the JNU historians do not even mention the powerful argumentation by
Prof. A.R. Khan, while Prof. Harsh Narain and Mr. A.K. Chatterjee's
presentation authentic testimonies (in Indian Express, republished by
Voice of India in *Hindu Temples, What happened to Them* and in *History
vs. Casuistry*) are only mentioned but not detailed and discussed, let
alone refuted; but clumsy RSS pamphlets and improvised statements by BJP
orators are quoted and analyzed at length.

The concluding paragraph of A.K.Sinha's rebuttal to Irfan Habib's speech
points out the contradiction between the earlier work of even Marxist
historians about ancient India (in which they treat the epics as sources
of history, not mere fable) and their recent Babri-politicized stand:
*"Today, even taking the name of Mahabharata and Ramayana is considered
as anti-national and communal by the communist leaders, Babri Masjid
Action Committee historians and the pseudo-secularists. What do they
propose to do with all that has been published so far in \[this\]
context by the Marxists themselves, notably D.D. Kosambi, R.S. Sharma,
Romila Thapar, K.M. Shrimali, D.N. Jha and others? I have been thinking
about the behavious of our Marxist friends and historians, their
unprovoked slander campaign against many colleagues, hurling abuses and
convicting anyone and everyone even before the charges could be framed
and proved. Their latest target is \[so\] sobre and highly respected a
person as prof. B.B. Lal, who has all his life (now he is nearing 70)
never involved himself in petty politics or in the groupism \[which is\]
so favourite a sport among the so- called Marxist intellectuals of this
country. But then \[slander\] is a well-practised art among the
Marxists."*

Another trick which a student of Holocaust negationism will readily
recognize in the pro-Babri campaign of the Indian negationists, is that
truly daring form of amnipulation: selectively quoting an authority to
make him say the opposite of his own considered opinion. When the JNU
historians started slandering Prof. B.B. Lal as a turncoat hired by the
VHP, this was a panic reaction after their earlier tactic had been
exposed (though only in Indian Express, but the negationist front will
not tolerate even one hole in the cordon of information control). Until
then, they had been using B.B. Lal's fame to suport their own position
that the Babri Masjid had not replaced a temple.

In their pamphlet *The Political Abuse of History*, the JNU historians
had quoted from a brief summary, published by the Archaeological Survey
of India in 1980, of Prof. B.B. Lal's report on his excavations in
Ayodhya and other Ramayana sites. They knew this report perfectly well,
for they had gleefully quoted its finding that the excavations just near
the Babri Masjid had not yielded any remains pre- dating the 9th century
BC. But then they had gone on to state that there was no archeological
indication for a pre- Masjid temple on that controversial site at all,
even when the same report had cursorily mentioned the remains of a
building dated to the 11th century AD. Later on, they have quoted the
same summary as saying that *the later period was devoid of any
interest*, suggesting that nothing of any importance dating from the
medieval period had been found.

In fact, this remark only proves that the ASI summarizer saw no reason
to give (or saw reasons not to give) details about the *uninteresting*
but nonetheless existing medieval findings. But in autumn 1990, some of
these details have been made public and they turned out to be of
decisive importance in the Ram Janmabhoomi debate. Prof.K.N. Panikkar
(in *Anatomy of a Confrontation*) suggests that, if these relevant
details were not recently *thought up to suit the theories of the RSS*,
they must have been *deliberately concealed at that time* (late
seventies) by the ASI summarizer. The latter possibility means that
negationists are active in the ASI publishing section, *editing*
archaeological reports to suit the negationist campaign. The implied
allegation is so serious that K.N. Panikkar expects the reader to assume
the other alternative, viz. an RSS concoction. But he may well have hit
the nail on its head with his suggestion that negationists in the ASI
are doing exactly the same thing that they are doing in all Indian
institutions and media: misusing their positions to distort information.

At any rate, the details of the full report were given in articles by
Dr. S.P. Gupta and by Prof. B.B. Lal himself (and independently by other
archaeologists in talks and letters to Indian Express) in late 1990. The
pillar-bases of an 11th century building, aligned to the Babri Masjid
walls, were presented by Prof. B.B. Lal and Dr. S.P.Gupta in separate
filmed interviews with the BBC. There could be no doubt about it
anymore: Prof. B.B. Lal had arrived at a conclusion opposite to the one
ascribed to him by a number of Marxist historians (not only from JNU).

That is why is early December 1990 several of the most vocal Marxist
historians suddenly took to slander and accused Prof. B.B. Lal of having
changed his opinion in order to suit the VHP's political needs. Now that
they could no longer use Prof. Lal's reputation for their own ends, they
decided to try and destroy it. In the case of Dr. S.P. Gupta, they have
not taken back their ridiculous allegation that he had falsely claimed
participation in the Ramayana sites excavations. But with a big name
like B.B. Lal, an impeccable academic of world fame, they had to be
careful, because slander against him might somehow backfire. That is why
they have nor pressed the point, and why a number of Marxist historians
and other participants in the Ayodhya debate have quitely reverted to
the earlier tactic of selectively quoting from the ASI summary of Prof.
B.B. Lal's report, and acting as if the great archaeologist has
supported and even proven their own position. As the press had given
minimum coverage to B.B. Lal and S.P. Gupta's revelations, many people
would not suspect the truth.

Another trick from the negationists' book that has been very much in
evidence during the Ayodhya debate, consists in focusing all attention
on the pieces of evidence given by those who upheld the historical
truth,, and trying to find fault with them as valid evidence. Thus, at
the press conference (19 Dec. 1992) where Dr. S.P. Gupta and other
historians presented photographs of an inscription found during the
demolition of the Babri Masjid, which proved once more that a temple had
stood on the site, and that it was specifically a *birthplace* temple
for *"Vishnu Hari who defeated Bali and the ten-headed king
\[Ravana\]"*, some journalists heckled the speakers with remarks that
*"because of the demolition, the inscription was not in situ and
therefore not valid as evidence"*, and similar feats of petty
fault-finding.

A few days later, a group of 70 archaeologists and historians, mostly
names who had not taken a prominent role in this debate so far, brought
shame on themselves by pronouncing judgement on this piece of evidence
without even seeing, let alone studying it. They demanded not that the
government look into this new evidence, as would be proper for
representatives of the scientific spirit, but that it trace down from
which museum the *planted evidence* had been stolen and brought to
Ayodhya. In doing history falsification, it is best to remain on the
attack, and to put the bonafide historians on the defensive by accusing
them first.

After dozens of pieces of evidence for the *forcible replacement of
temple with mosque* scenario had been given, the Babri negationists had
never come up with a single piece of counter- evidence (i.e. positive
evidence for an alternative scenario); they could not do better than
keep silent over the most striking evidence, and otherwise scream at the
top of their voice that evidence A did not count, evidence B was not
valid, evidence C was flawed, evidence D was fabricated. In 1992 alone,
in the clearing operations near the Janmabhoomi site in June, during
several visits of experts, and during the demolition on 6 December, more
than 200 pieces of archaeological evidence for the pre-existent
Vaishnava temple had been found, but these 70 scholars preferred to
disregard all them. This time, the suggestion was that in the middle of
the kar seva, the inscription had been planted there. You could just as
well join the Holocaust negationists and say that the gas chambers found
in 1945 had been a Hollywood mise-en-scene. Picking at a single
testimony as if the whole case depends on it has been a favourite
technique of the negationists to distract attention from the larger
picture, to make people forget that even if this one piece of evidence
were flawed, this would not invalidate the general conclusions built on
a whole corpus of evidence.

A final point of similarity between the Marxist involvement in the Babri
Masjid case and the techniques of Holocaust negationism is the fact that
there was a Babri Masjid debate in the first place. Indeed, postulating
doubt and the need for a debate is the first step of denial. The
tradition that the Babri Masjid had forcibly replaced a temple was
firmly established ad supported by sources otherwise accepted as
authoritative; when it was challenged, this was not on the basis of
newfound material which justified a re-examination of the historical
position. The correct procedure would have been that the deniers of the
established view come up with some positive evidence for their
innovative position: until then, there was simply no reason for a
debate. Instead, they started demanding that the other side give proof
of what had been known all along, and forced a debate on something that
was really a matter of consensus. Subsequently, instead of entering the
ring, attacking or countering their opponents' case with positive
evidence of their own, the challengers set themselves up as judges of
the other side's argumentation. This is indeed reminiscent of the
negationist Institute for Historical Review announcing a prize for
whomever could prove that the Holocaust had taken place.

There is yet another trick from the negationist arsenal which has been
tried in India: find a witness from the victims' camp to testify to the
aggressor's innocence. Of course there are not witnesses around who
lived through Aurangzeb's terror, but there are many who lived through
the horrors of Partition. It is nobody's case that the killings wich
Jinnah considered a fair price for his Muslim state, never took place.
But the negationists have spent a lot of effort on proving the next best
thing: that the guilt was spread evently among Hindus and Muslims.

The Communist novelist Bhishma Sahni has used the novel Tamas to point
the Hindus as the villains in the Partition violence. The interesting
thing is that Bhishma Sahni's own family was among the Hindu refugees
hounded out or Pakistan. His anti-Hindu bias, coming from a man who
would have more reason for an anti-Muslim animus, is a gift from heaven
for the Hindu-baiters. Marxist Professor Bipan Chandra parades a similar
character in his paper: Communalism - the Way Out (published together
with two lectures by KJhushwant Singh as: Many Faces of Communalism).
One of his students had survived the terror of Partition in Rawalpindi,
losing 7 family members. Bud he did not have any animus against the
Muslims, for he said: *"Very early I realized that my parents had not
been killed by the Muslims, they had been kiled by communalism."* Coming
from a victim of Muslim violence, this is excellent material for those
who want to apportion equal blame to Hindus nd Muslims.

Of course, Bipan Chandra's student was right. The cause of Partition and
of its accompanying violence was not *the Muslims*, but *communalism*,
i.e. the belief that people with a common religion form a separate
social and political entity. This belief is not fostered by Hinduism,
but it is central to Islam ever since Mohammed founded his first Islamic
state in Medina. It is true that some Hindu groups (most conspicuously
the Sikhs) have recently adopted some Islamic elements, including the
*communalist* belief that a religious group forms a separate nation
entitled to a separate state. But the source of this *communalist*
poison in India is and remains Islam. Therefore, Bipan Chandra's student
has in fact said: *"My family was not killed by the Muslims, but by
Islam."*

It is a different matter that Muslims are the most likely carriers of
the Islamic disease called communalism, and that they had massively
voted for the commnalist project of creating a separate Muslim state.
The culprit was Islam, and concerning the positions of the Muslims in
the light of the fanatical nature of Islam, I would quote Bipan
Chandra's own simile for understanding the difference between
*communalism* and its adherents: when a patient suffers from a terrible
disease, you don't kill him, but cure him. The victims of Islamic
indoctrination should not be the target of Hindu revenge, as they were
in large numbers in 1947. Don't kill the patient, kill the disease.
Remove Islam from the Muslims' minds through education and India's
*communal* problem will be as good as solved.

At this point we may take a second look at the Marxist position,
mentioned above, that *the Hindu community* is a recent invention. The
observations which I just made concerning the Islamic provenance of
*communalism* might seem to confirm that there was no Hindu *communal
identity*. However, the authentic sources from the medieval period are
unanimous about the sharp realization of a separate communal identity as
Muslims and as Hindus, overwhelmingly on the Muslim side, but also on
the Hindu side. We know for instance that Shivaji, who turned the tide
of the Muslim offensive in the late 17th centure, was a conscious
partisan of an all-Hindu liberation war against Muslim rule (Hindu Pad
Padashahi). The same counts for Rana Pratap and many other Hindu
leaders, and there cannot be any doubt that the Vijayanagar empire was
conscious of its role as the last fortress of Hindu civilization.

It is true that some Hindu kings attacked neighbouring Hindu states in
the back when these were attacked by the Muslim invaders. They were at
first not aware that these Islamic newcomers were a common enemy,
motivated by hatred against all non-Muslims; but their lack of insight
into the character of Islam in no way disproves their awareness of a
common Hindu identity. The fact that they were acutely aware of their
internal political rivalries, does not exclude that they were aware of a
more fundamental common identity, which was not at stake in these
internecine feuds, but which they defended together once they realized
that it was the target of this new kind of ideologically motivated
aggressor, Islam. Brothers are aware that they have a lot in common, and
this is not disproven by the fact that, when left to themselves, they
also quarrel with each other.

If at all some Hindus had at first only been conscious of their own
caste or sect rather than of the Hindu commonwealth, the Muslim
persecutions of all Hindus without distinction certainly made them aware
of their common identity and interest. So, if the Marxists perforce want
to deny the common culture and value system underlying the diversity of
the Hindu commonwealth, then let them apply some of their own dialectics
instead. *"It is in their common struggle aginst the Islamic aggressors,
that the disparate sections of the native Indian society have forged
their common identity as Hindus"*: I do not agree with this statement
which posits a negative and reactive basis for a common Hindu identity,
but it must be accepted if one labours under the assumption that there
never had been a positive common identity before. It is unreasonable to
expect the Indian Pagans to be lumped together as *Hindus* for centuries
on end, to be uniformly made the target of one neverending aggression by
Islam, to be subjected to the same humiliations and the same jizya tax,
and yet not become conscious of a common interest. This common interest
would then give rise to unifying cultural superstructure. That is how
the sustained and uniform Islamic attack on all India Pagans would
inevitably have given rise to at least a measure of common Hindu
identity if this had not previously existed.

In his *Communal History and Rama's Ayodhya* (1990), the Marxist
Professor R.S. Sharma argues that the medieval Hindus did not see *the
Muslims* as a distinct religious entity, but as an ethnic group, *the
Turks*. His proof: the Gahadvala dynasty levied a tax called
Turushkadanda, *tax financing the war effort against the Turks*. But
this does not prove what Sharma thinks it proves.

The Muslims called the Pagans of India sometimes *Kafirs*, unbelievers,
i.e. a religious designation; but often they called them *Hindus*
inhabitants of Hindustan, i.e. an ethnic-geographical designation (from
Hind, the Persian equivalent of Sindh). And they gave religious contents
to this geographical term, which it has kept till today: so it is
correct that the *Hindus* never defined themselves as *Hindus*, as this
was the Persian and later the Muslim term for the Indian Pagans adhering
to Sanatana Dharma. But that was only a terminological matter, the
fundamental religious unity of the Sanatana Dharmis was just as much a
fact. Similarly, the Hindus called these newcomers Turks, but this does
not exclude recognition of their religious specificity. On the contrary,
even Teimur the Terrible, who made it absolutely clear in his memoirs
that he came to India to wage a religious war against the Pagans, and
who freed the Muslim captives from a conquered city before putting the
Hindu remainder to the sword, referred to his own forces as *the Turks*.
Conversely, the Hindus describe as the typical *Turkish* behavious
pattern that which is enjoined by Islam.

While it is true that the Hindus have been much too slow (till today) in
studying the religious foundation of the barbaric behavious which they
experienced at the hands of the *Turushkas*, at least they soon found
out that for these invaders religion was the professed motive of their
inhuman behavious. Prof. Sharma's piece of evidence, the institution of
a Turushkandana, does however prove very clearly that the Islamic threat
was extraordinary: the normal armed forces and war credits were not
sufficient to deal with this threat which was in a class by itself.

The original source material leaves us in no doubt that conflicts often
erupted on purely religious grounds, even against the political and
economical interests of the contending parties. The negationists' tactic
therefore consists in keeping this original testimony out of view. A
good example is Prof. Gyanendra Pandey's recent book, *The Construction
of Communalism in Colonial North India*. As the title clearly says,
Pandey asserts that *communalism* (the Hindu-Muslim conflict) had been
*constructed* by the British for colonial purposes anmd out of colonial
prejuidices, was later interiorized by Indians looking for new,
politically profitable forms of organization in modern colonial society.
This is like saying that anti-Judaism is a construction of modern
capitalists to divide the working class (the standard Marxist
explanation for all kinds of racism), while concealing the copious
medieval testimony of anti-Judaism on undeniably non-capitalist grounds.
Prof. Pandey effectively denies a millenniumful of testimonies to
Islamic persecution of the Indian (*Hindu*) Kafirs.

Another example is prof. K.N. Panikkar's work on the *Moplah
rebellion*,,, a pofgrom against the Hindus by the Malabar (Kerala)
Muslims in the margin of the khilafat movement in 1921 (official death
toll 2,339). Panikkar takes the orthodox Marxist position that this was
not a communal but a class conflict, not between Hindus and Muslims but
between workers who happened to be Muslims and landlords who happened to
be Hindus. In reality the communal character of the massacre was so
evident that even Mahatma Gandhi recognized it as terrible blow for his
ideal of Hindu-Muslim unity. It is quite possible that the occasion was
used to settle scores with landlords and money- lenders (that stereotype
of anti-Hindu as well as of anti- Jewish sloganeering), but the mullahs
exhorted their flock to attack all Hindus, and added in so many words
that not only the landlords but all the Hindus were their enemies. The
poison of Islamic fanaticism is such that it turns any kind of conflict
into an attack on the non-Muslims.

More Marxist wisdom we encounter in Romila Thapar's theory (in her
contribution to S. Gopal's book on the Ayodhya affair, Anatomy of a
Confrontation) that the current Hindu movement wants to unite all
Hindus, not because the Hindus feel besieged by hostile forces, not
because they have a memory of centuries of jihad, but because *"a
monolithic religion is more compatible with capitalism"* (to borrow the
formulation of a reviewer). She thinks that the political Hindu movement
is merely a concoction by Hindu capitalists, or in her own words *"part
of the attempt to redefine Hinduism as an ideology for modernization by
the middle class"*, in which *"modernization is seen as linked to the
growth of capitalism"*. She reads the mind behind the capitalist
conspiracy to reform Hinduism thus: *"Capitalism is often believed to
thrive among Semitic religions such as Christianity and Islam. The
argument would then run that if capitalism is to succeed in India, then
Hinduism would also have to be moulded in a Semitic form"*.

It is always interesting to see how Communists presuppose the
superiority of Hinduism by denouncing Hindu militancy as the
*semiticization* or *islamization* of Hinduism. But the point is that
the political mobilization of Hindu society under the increasing
pressure of hostile forces is explained away as merely a camouflage of
economic forces. One smiles about such simplistic subjection of
unwilling facts of Marxist dogma. Especially because such *analyses*
were still being made in 1991, and are still being made today: in India
it has not yet dawned on the dominant intelligentsia that Marxism has
failed not only as a political and economical system, but also as a
socialogical model of explanation. On the contrary, Indian Marxists even
manage to make foreign correspondents for non- Marxist media swallow
their analysis, e.g. after the Babri Masjid demolition, even the
conservative Frankfurter Allgemeine Seitung explained *Hindu
fundamentalism* in the same socio-economical terms, complete with *urban
traders* who are *looking for an identity* etc.

Incidentally, Romila Thapar is right in observing that certain Hindu
revivalists ae trying to *"find parallels with the Semitic religions as
if these parallels are necessary for the future of Hinduism"* (though
her attempt to force the Ram Janmabhoomi movement into this mould, with
Rama being turned into a *prophet* and the Ramayana into the sole
revealed Scripture etc., is completely unfounded and another pathetic
case of trying to force unwilling facts into a pre- conceived scheme).
She sounds like favouring a renewed emphasis on *"the fact that the
religious experience of Indian civilization and of religious sects which
are bunched together under the label of *Hindu* are distinctively
different from that of the Semitic"*.

It is true that some Hindu revivalist movements have tried to redefine
Hinduism in terms borrowed from monotheism, with rudiments of notions
like an infallible Scripture (*back to the Vedas*: the Arya Samaj),
iconoclastic monotheism (Arya Samaj, Akali neo-Sikhs), or a monolithic
hierarchic organization (the RSS). But the reason for this development
cannot with any stretch of the imagination be deduced from the
exigencies of capitalism. An honest analysis of this tendency in
Hinduism to imitate the Christian-Islamic model will demonstrate that a
psychology of tactical imitation as a way of self-defence against these
aggressive *Semitic* religions was at work. The tendency cannot possibly
be reduced to the socio- economical categories dear to Marxism, but
springs from the terror which Islam (not fedualism or capitalism, but
Islam) had struck in the Hindu mind, and which was subsequently
fortified with an intellectual dimension by the Christian missionary
propaganda against *primitive polytheism*. Those Hindus who were waging
the struggle for survival against the Islamic and Christian onslaught
have come to resemble their enemies a bit, and have interiorized a lot
of the aggressors' contempt for typical Hindu things, such as idol-
worship, doctrinal pluralism, social decentralization. It is for Hindu
society to reflect on whether this imitation was the right course, and
whether it has not been self- defeating in some respects.

At any rate, the very existence of this psychological need among some
militant Hindus to imitate the prophetic- monotheistic religions is a
symptom of an already old polarization between Hinduism and aggressive
monotheism, especially Islam. Bipan Chandra's chronology of
*communalism* as a 20th century phenomenon cannot explain the communal
polarization of which Sikhism and the Arya Samaj were manifestations.
These can only be understood from the centuries oif active hostility
between Islam and Hinduism. Shivaji was not a herald of capitalism, nor
a product of British *divide and rule* policy, but a participant in an
ongoing war between Hindu civilization and Islamic aggression.

Since the 1950s the history market is being flooded with publications
conveying the negationist version to a greater or lesser extent. The
public is fed negationist TV serials like *The Sword of Tipu Sultan*, an
exercise in whitewashing the arch-fanatic last Muslim ruler. Most
general readers and many serious students only get to know about Indian
history through negationist glasses. In India, the negationists have
managed what European negationists can only dream of: turn the tables on
honest historians and marginalize them. People who have specialized in
adapting history to the party-line, are lecturing others about the
*political abuse of history*. By contrast, geunine historians who have
refused to tamper with the record of Islam (like Jadunath Sarkar, R.C.
Majumdar, K.S. Lal) are held us as examples of *communalist
historywriting* in textbooks which are required reading in all history
departments in India.

But the negationists are not satisfied with seeing their own version of
the facts being repeated in more and more books and papers. They also
want to prevent other versions from reaching the public. Therefore, in
1982 the National Council of Educational Research and Training issued a
directive for the rewriting of schoolbooks. Among other things, it
stipulated that: *"Characterization of the medieval period as a time of
conflict between Hindus and Muslims is forbidden."* Under Marxist
pressure, negationism has become India's official policy.

Now that Marxism is no longer the fashion of the day, it is very easy to
expose the shameless dishonesty of many vocal Marxist intellectuals. It
is time to go through the record and see what they have said about the
*"economic successes"* of the Soviet Union, the *enthusiasm of the
Chinese people* for the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution,
about the Communist involvement in crimes like Katyn, and about the
*lies* put out by the *CIA-sponsored* dissidents and camp survivors.
Their Islam negationism is by far not their first systematic
falsification of a chapter of history.

When the Marxists start lecturing Hindus about tolerance and the respect
for Barbar's mosque, it is easy to put them on the defensive by asking
what happened to churches, mosques and temples when Mao took over.
Communist regimes' treatment of religion has been similar to Islam's
treatment of infidelity. Either religious people had the zimmi status,
i.e. they were suffered to exist but at the cost of career prospects,
benefit of social or material benefits, always under the watchful eye of
police informers, and of course without the right to convert or to
object to state atheism's conversion efforts (according to the chinese
Constitution, there is a *right to practise religion* and a *right to
practise and propagete atheism*); or they were simply persecuted, their
religious education forbidden (in the Soviet Union, many people have
spent years in jail for transporting Bibles or teaching Hebrew), their
places of worship demolished or expropriated for secular use. Communism
and Islam are truly comrades in intolerance.

Certainly some statements can be dug up of Indian Communists defending
the Cultural Revolution in which so many thousands of places of worship
were destroyed and their personnel brutalized or killed. When the Khumar
Rouge were in power, less that 1,000 of the 65,000 Buddhist monks
managed to survive : what did the Indian Marxists (card- carrying and
other) say then? The bigger part of the Marxists' success was in their
aggressiveness: as long as they remained on the offensive, everyone
tried to live up to the norms they prescribed. Now it is time to put
them to scrutiny.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.5 FOREIGN SUPPORT FOR INDIAN NEGATIONISM

Some foreign authors, influenced by Indian colleagues, have also added a
big dose of negationism to their work on Indian history. For instance,
Percival Spear, co-author (with Romila Thapar) of the *Penguin History
of India*, writes: *"Aurangzeb's supposed intolerance is little more
than a hostile legend based on isolated acts such as the erection of a
mosque on a temple site in Benares."*

This is a repetition of the thesis defended by Zahiruddin Faruki in his
*"Aurangzeb and his times"* (1935), recently taken up again by S.N.M.
Abdi in Illustrated Weekly of India (5/12/1992), who claims that
*Aurangzeb was not anti-Hindu*, and that the Ma'asir-i-Alamgiri (made
available to the public by the Royal Society of Bengal and translated by
Jadunath Sarkar), which lists Aurangzeb's temple- destroying activities
from day to day, is a forgery. Faruki and Abdi count on the public's
limited zeal for checking the sources, when they falsely claim that
*"apart from the Ma'asir-i-Alamgiri, there is no other reference to the
order for the destruction of temples"*, and that *we do not hear of any
protest* which large-scale temple destruction would have caused.

Abdi thinks he can get away with claiming as evidence a stone slab
allegedly seen by Faruki in the Gyanvapi mosque in Benares, mentioning a
date (1659) that does not tally with the traditional date (1669) of the
forcible replacement of the Kashi Vishvanath temple with this mosque;
even while admitting that *"the slab seen by Faruki has disappeared
mysteriously, along with another significant piece of evidence"*.
Without blinking, he then cites a theory that the Gyanvapi mosque
already existed under Akbar, i.e. a century before either of the two
dates. Further, he quotes as authority a local agitator who claims: *"My
research reveals that a Buddhist vihara was demolished to make way for a
temple, which was subsequently pulled down and the Gyanvapi mosque
constructed on its site."* The first claim, in spite of flaunting the
pretentious term *research*, in a plain lie; the second is of course
true but contradicts the case which Mr. Abdi is building up. Such is the
quality of the argument for Aurangzeb's tolerance and Hindu-
friendliness.

What are the facts? In Beneras (Varanasi), Aurangzeb (1658-1707) did not
just build an *isolated* mosque on *a* destroyed temple. He ordered all
temples destroyed, among them the Kashi Vishvanath, one of the most
sacred places of Hinduism, and had mosques built on a number of cleared
temple sites. All other Hindu sacred places within his reach equally
suffered destruction, with mosques built on them; among them, Krishna's
birth temple in Mathura, the rebuilt Somnath temple on the coast of
Gujrat, the Vishnu temple replaced with the Alamgir mosque now
overlooking Benares, the Treta-ka-Thakur temple in Ayodhya. The number
of temples destroyed by Aurangzeb is counted in 4, if not in 5 figures.
According to the official court chronicle, Aurangzeb *"ordered all
provincial governors to destroy all schools and temples of the Pagans
and to make a complete end to all Pagan teachings and practices"*. The
chronicle sums up the destructions like this: *"Hasan Ali Khan came and
said that 172 temples in the area had been destroyed... His majesty went
to Chittor, and 63 temples were destroyed... Abu Tarab, appointed to
destroy the idol-temples of Amber, reported that 66 temples had been
razed to the ground"*.

In quite a number of cases, inscriptions on mosques and local tradition
do confirm that Aurangzeb built them in forcible replacement of temples
(some of these inscriptions have been quoted in Sitaram Goel: Hindu
Temples, vol.2, along with a number of independent written accounts).
Aurangzeb's reign ws marked by never-ending unrest and rebellions,
caused by his anti-Hindu policies, which included the reimposition of
the jizya and other zimma rules, and indeed the demolition of temples.

Aurangzeb did not stop at razing temples: their users too were levelled.
There were not just the classical massacres of thousands of resisters,
Brahmins, Sikhs. What gives a more pointed proof of Aurangzeb's
fanaticism, is the execution of specific individuals for specific reason
of intolerance. To name the best-known ones: Aurangzeb's brother Dara
Shikoh was executed because of *apostasy* (i.e. taking an interest in
Hindu philosophy), and the Sikh guru Tegh Bahadur was beheaded because
of his objecting to Aurangzeb's policy of forcible conversions in
general, and in particular for refusing to become a Muslim himself.
Short, Percival Spear's statement that Aurangzeb's fanaticism is but a
hostile legend, is a most serious case of negationism.

An example of a less blatant (i.e. more subtle) form of negationism in
Western histories of India, is the India entry in the Encyclopaedia
Brittannica. Its chapter on the Sultanate period (which was much more
bloody than even the Moghul period) does not mention any persecutions
and massacres of Hindus by Muslims, except that Firuz Shah Tughlaq
*"made largely unsuccessful attempts to convert his Hindu subjects and
sometimes persecuted them"*. The article effectively obeys the
negationist directive that *"characterization of the medieval period as
a time of Hindu- Muslim conflict is forbidden"*.

It also contains blissful nonsense about communal amity in places where
the original sources only mention enmity. Thus, it says that Bahmani
sultan Tajuddin Firuz extracted tribute payments and the hand of the
king's daughter from the Hindu bastion Vijayanagar after two military
campaigns, and that this resulted in *"the establishment of an
apparently amicable relationship between the two rulers"*. Jawaharlal
Nehru considered the induction of Hindu women in Muslim harems as the
cradle of *composite culture* (his euphemism for Hindu humiliation), but
it is worse if even the venerable Encyclopedia considers the terms of
debate as a sign of friendship. At any rate, the article goes on to
observe naively that *peace* lasted only for ten years, when Vijaynagar
forces inflicted a crushing defeat on Firuz. In this case, the more
circumspect form of negationism is at work: keeping the inconvenient
facts out of the readers' view, and manipulating the terminology.

An American historian's book is introduced thus: *"In this book \[Public
Arenas and the Emergence of Communalism in North India\], Sandra Freitag
examines one of the central problems of modern Indian history, the
Hindu-Muslim conflict, with new and provocative insight. She challenges
long-standing interpretations by defining this conflict as a developing
social process groups, not simply **Hindu** or **Muslim**, in highly
specific local contexts bound together in a changing institutional
order."*

This sophisticated verbiage cannot conceal that the book's approach is
merely the standard secularist version propagated by Indian
establishment historians since decades. There is nothing *new and
provocative* about a book that claims to explain communalism without
touching on its single most important determinant, viz. the doctrine
laid down in Islamic scripture, and that blurs the clear-cut process of
India's communalization by Islam with the help of scapegoats like
*colonialism*.

It is not entirely clear to what extent such Western authors are
conscious accomplices in the intellectual crime of negationism, and to
what extent they are just gullible copiers of the version given to them
by English-speaking Indians. In the case of a historian invited by
Penguin to write a History of India, it is hard to believe that he
didn't know better.

Another case of malafide reporting is former Time correspondent Edward
Desmond's lengthy review of JNU Professof S. Gopal's *Anatomy of a
Confrontation* in the New York Review of Books. I know that Mr. Desmond
had gone through the books stating the Hindu case on Ayodhya; he had
talked to both Mr. Sitaram Goel and myself (by telephone); he knew about
hard evidence for the temple that was forcibly replaced by the Babri
Masjid, including Prof. B.B. Lal's filmed presentation of the
archarological evidence. And yet, like Prof. Gopal, he strictly keeps
the lid on the Hindu case, does not mention the extensive documentary
evidence, and curtly dismisses the archaeological evidence as *bogus*.
Here, the psychology at work is apparently that of status-consciousness:
you wouldn't expect a senior correspondent of a big American magazine to
prefer the company of marginal pro-Hindu writers to that of prestigious
Stalinist professors of India's Harvard, would you?

On the other hand, in the day-to-day reporting on the *communal*
situation in India, there is a lot of bonafide copying of the anti-Hindu
views dominant in the Indian English-language press. A typical mixed
case of some complicity and some gullibility was the TV documentary
about *Hindu fundamentalism* made by BBC correspondent Brian Barron, and
boradcase in the week of the first round of the Lok Sabha elections in
May 1991. Brian Barron is an otherwise meritorious journalist, witness
his revelations in October 1991 about the massacre of thousands of
Buddhist monks in the early years of communist rule in Mongolia. But his
programme about the Hindu movement was second-rate and biased. For a
start, it contained some factual mistakes (like a map meant to show the
trail of Hindu leader L.K. Advani's procession in support of the Ram
Janmabhoomi cause, which drew a line unrelated to the actual trail,
apart from placing Delhi on the Ganga river), exemplifying the
carelessness which Western correspondents can afford when it comes to
India reporting.

Barron said that India had already been partitioned because of
*religion*. In fact, India has been partitioned because of Islam,
against the will of other religions, and this seemingly small inaccuracy
is an old trick to distribute the guilt of Islam in partitioning India
over all religions equally. Barron made no attempt to seem impartial,
and introduced BJP leader L.K. Advani as *a demagogue*. He asked
Advani's declared enemy V.P. Singh whether Advani was not merely putting
a humane mask on *fanaticism*. Easy, that way V.P. Singh only had to say
yes. He failed to take the opportunity to question V.P. Singh about his
political marriage with the Muslim fundamentalist leader Imam Bukhari,
while that was a case of a *Hindu* promoting *fundamentalism* as well.
He let Swami Agnivesh, a Marxist in ochre robe, accuse the BJP of mixing
religion and politics, but neglected to inform the viewers that Swami
Agnivesh has himself combining monkhood with being a Janata Dal
candidate in the Lok Sabha elections.

When Barron asked Advani why he had allowed so much bloodshed on his
procession (the rathyatra of October 1990), whereas in fact there had
been no riots all along the path of his month-long journey, Advani
correctly said: *"You are taken in by a disinformation campaign."* A
serious journalist would have inquired deeper when his sources, with
which the quality of his work stands or falls, are questioned so
pointedly. When a sadhu said that Muslims refuse to respect Hindus and
that Hindus are legally discriminated against, Barron did not inquire
what these discriminations were. Like all western reporters, he has
reported on *Hindu fundamentalism* without asking even once why this
movement has emerged, instead relaying the Marxist line that it is all a
camouflage for class (c.q. caste) interests, an artificial creation for
petty political gain.

Barron interviewed prof. Romila Thapar, who accused the Hindu movement
of aiming at a system in which some communities would be second-class
citizens living in constant fear for their lives. From a spokeswoman of
Marxism, which has held entire populations in constant fear and
oppression, and which has killed numerous millions of
*"contrarevolutionary elements"* (to use the criminalizing, dehumanizing
Marxist term), the allegation sounds rather shameless. But the viewers
were not told where Romila Thapar stands, they were led to believe that
this was a neutral observer who had been asked for an objective
explanation. The same thing has happened a number of times in both Time
Magazine and Newsweek: Bipan Chandra, Romila Thapar and their comrades
get quoted as if they are non-partisan authorities. Though
anti-Communist in their general reporting, when it comes to India, these
papers (unknowingly?) present the Marxists' viewpoint as objective
in-depth background information.

Only ten years ago, the Left-oriented media in many Western countries
freely attacked the *really existing* capitalism and also conjured up
all kinds of fantastic CIA and neo-fascist conspiracies, but
scrupulously shielded the *really existing* socialism from criticism.
Similarly, Brian Barron gave Prof. Thapar the chance to say her thing
about unproven sinister plans imputed to the Hindu movement, but
scrupulously refrained from pointing out that Miss Thapar's picture of a
theocratic society in which minorities are second-class citizens living
in mortal fear, is already *reallly existing* in the neighbouring
Islamic republic of Pakistan and in many Muslim states (and, mutatis
mutandis in Communist countries).

These days, reporting on the *communal* in situation in India consists
in highlighting the splinter in the Hindu eye and concealing the beam in
the Muslim eye. At the time of the 1991 Lok Sabha elections, the German
left-leaning weekly Der Spiegel summarized the communal riots in
independent India as follows: *"Since 1947, Indian statisticians have
counted 11,000 riots with 12,000 Muslim victims."* Hindu victims are not
even mentioned, as if you were reading a fundamentalist paper like
Muslim India or Radiance.

The Ayodhya conflict offers a good examples of the absurd standards
applied by reporters. A Hindu sacred site, back in use as a Hindu temple
(since 1949 with, since 1986 without restrictions) after centuries of
Muslim occupation, is claimed by Muslim leaders, who also insist on
continuing the occupation of two other sacred sites in Mathura and Kashi
(and numerous other sites which the Hindu leaders are not even claiming
back). Claiming the right to occupy other communities' sacred sites: if
this is not fanatical, I don't know what is. Yet, the whole world press
is one the side of the Muslims, and decries a Hindu plan to build proper
temple architecture on the Ram Janmabhoomi site in Ayodhya as
*fanatical*. These are not just double standards, but inverted
standards.

The very fact that Muslims in India loudly complain about their
situation (e.g. about their low educational level, which is 100% the
fault of their own mullahs), proves that they are relatively well-off:
as I have had the occasion to observe, Hindu visitors or refugees from
Pakistan often do not dare to speak of the horrible conditions in which
they are forced to live under Muslim rule, because they fear for their
relatives, and because the constant terror has conditioned them never to
raise any objections against the Muslim master race. Inside these Muslim
states, the remaining Hindus are even more careful never to displease
the Muslim masters. For unthinking journalists, their silence is proof
that all is well for the minorities in Muslim states, and so they prefer
to listen to the vocal malcontents who air the Muslim *grievances* in
tolerant India. Whoever shouts loudest, will get our correspondents'
attention, if only because India reporting is mostly of a very low
professional quality.

An example of the slanted impression which the Nehruvian establishment
creates about Hindu-Muslim relations, concerns the internationally
highlighted martyrdom of the Flemish Jesuit Father Rasschaert, near
Ranchi in 1964. Father Rasschaert's sister was a friend of my mother's,
so as a child I have often heard the details of the story. The part
which everybody knows, is that Muslims had fled into a mosque, where
Hindus wanted to pursue them, when Father Rasschaert intervened to
pacify the crowd, but was killed by the Hindus who subsequently
massacred the Muslims.

But the start of the story, never highlighted and sometimes not even
mentioned in the contemporary newspaper reports (much less in later
references), was that the Hindus in the area had been angered by the
sight of mutilated Hindus who had been brought by train from East
Pakistan, where they had at least survived the massacres which many more
had not. As always, Hindu violence was a retaliation against Muslim
violence. No missionary has stepped in to defend the Hindus of Pakistan,
in fact no missionary was around, as missions have a vey hard time in
Pakistan. The missions in Islamic countries find their converts harassed
and even killed by their own families, their schools and churches
attacked on all kinds of pretexts, their graduates not given jobs. So,
the missionary centres prefer to direct their energies to more
hospitable countries like India. The fact that a missionary was killed
by a Hindu while defending the Muslims, and not the other way round,
proves in the first place that Catholic priests can function in India,
much more than in Pakistan. A closer scrutiny of this one incidence of
Hindu fanaticism reveals a background of much more systematic and
institutionalized Muslim fanaticism.

There is a third aspect to the story, which is never mentioned at all.
It is that the Hindus in Ranchi were desperate about their government's
unwillingness to defend the Hindus in Pakistan. One of the chief
culprits behind the massacre was Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, the
patron of *secularism*, who used Father Rasschaert's death as yet
another occasion to parade his concern for the minorities in India, and
to put Hindus in the dock. He himself (and the entire secularist
establishment till today) reneged on his duty to defend the Hindus
surviving in the Islamic state which he had helped to create. By
effectively condoning the persecution of Hindus in Pakistan, he was also
responsible for the retalitory Hindu violence. But the international
press has never thought the matter through, and confined its reporting
on Father Rasschaert's death to condemning the Hindu fanatics, weeping
for the Muslim victims, and praising Nehru as the voice of sanity amid
the religious madness.

The way our journalists are led by the nose towards reporting Muslim
grievances and ignoring grievances of Hindu minorities (and ridiculing
the very real grievances of even the Hindu majority in India), is
reminiscent of the sneaking bias in all non-rightist media in Western
Europe about the Left-right conflict before the Gorbachov era. They all
complied with Marxist-imposed terminology like *dictator Pinochet* but
*president Ceaucescu*, or *rightist rebels* but *leftist resistance*.
Criticism of the West was available in plenty, and given wide coverage,
but the muted populations of the Soviet bloc were not heard, and little
effort was made to go in and hear them. Those who supported the cause of
freedom in the Soviet bloc were riduclued. Worse, when in 1968 the
Russian physicist Sakharov had a report about massive human rights
violations in the USSR published, leading intellectuals actually denied
the existence of *"that so-called Russian physicist invented by the
reactionary forces to slander the glorious achievements of socialism in
the USSR"*. Yes, so noxious was the intellectual atmosphere in the
heyday of Marxism. In those days it was *"better to be wrong with
\[communist\] Sartre than to be right with \[anti-communist\] Aron"*.

When glasnost made clear just how strong the Soviet bloc populations'
disgust with communalism really was, Western intellectuals and socialist
parties seemed sincerely surprised. They themselves had so often pleaded
that life in the Soviet system was not really worse than in the *"so-
called free"* West. The press had never given us an adequate picture,
not by telling outright lies, but by ignoring the muted voices which the
communist dictators wanted us to ignore. At any rate, if there used to
be far more demonstrations in the streets of the West than in the Soviet
bloc, did it prove that there was less discontent in the latter? We now
know better: there was more protest in the West than in the Soviet bloc
because there was more freedom and less fear in the West, and in spite
of deeper discontent in the Soviet bloc. There is no excuse for making
the same mistake in our reporting on the situation of the minorities in
India and in Muslim countries.

Without really noticing, the Western press has become the mouth-piece of
the Marxist-Muslim alliance which dictates political parlance in India.
I assume only a few frontline journalists are conscious participants in
the ongoing disinformation campaign. Brian Barron, for one, has
demonstrated to what extent he has interiorized the anti- Hindu bias of
his Indian spokespersons, with a very little but truly unpardonable
piece of disinformation. Reporting on the million-strong demonstration
for the Ram Janmabhoomi temple (Delhi, 4 April 1991), he showed a monk
carrying a saffron- coloured flag with a white swstika. And for the less
perceptive viewers, he added in so many words that the Hindu movement
carried the swastika. Of course he knew these two things: (1) most
Western viewers know the swastika only as the symbol of Nazism; (2) most
Indians know the swastika only as their own age-old symbol of good
fortune (swasti = well-being). He must have known perfectly well that he
was making the Western viewers read a message which the Hindu
demonstrators never sent, viz. that the Hindu movement links up with
Nazism. Regardless of the moral quality of such distortive reporting, it
goes to show to what extent the negationist faction in the Indian media
has managed to picture the Hindus as the bad guys in the eyes of the
world.

A few more examples of how Western India-watchers swallow Indian
*secularist* disinformation. The pro-Ram Janmabhoomi demonstration in
Delhi on 4 April 1991 was not reported in 99% of the Western papers and
electronic news channels. I have inquired among journalists about what
they had received on their telexes concerning the largest-ever
demonstration in the biggest democracy in the world. It turned out that
these had mentioned 3 lakh demonstrators (when even the
government-controlled police had given the estimate of 8 lakh), and not
made the object of the demonstration clear at all. The Indian sources
had deliberately blurred and minimized the information, so that the
Western media had, in good faith, not deemed it worth mentioning. If six
weeks later Brian Barron reported the number as *more than a million*
demonstrators, it was not to correct this earlier lapse, but because of
a different psychology. His aim was not to deny the importance and
magnitude of the Hindu movement which he detests so much, but on the
contrary to make it into a titillatingly gruesome dinosaur: the TV
consumers have heard enough about Muslim fundamentalism, so if you want
to get them interested in a new brand of *fundamentalism*, you have to
make it extra big and colourful.

Another example is the news concerning the Indian attitude to the second
Gulf War in early 1991. The Delhi correspondent for the Flemish radio
station BRTN said that the Indian population was on the side of Saddam,
against the Anglo-American forces (and their Saudi employers). That is
just what the Times of india editorial had said a few days earlier. In
fact, the Indian people was not on Saddam's side at all. The Hindus had
always cheered for Israel in its wars with the Arabs, and now they were
all for the defeat of this Arab Hitler who had announced he would *"burn
half of Israel with chemical weapons"*. The Muslim support for Saddam's
jihad against the *Crusaders* was not exactly massive either. Firstly,
millions of Indian Muslims personally suffered when they or their
reltives lost their jobs in Iraq and Kuwait as a result of Saddam's
annexation of Kuwait. Secondly, most Muslim leaders are financed by the
Arab monarchies (including Kuwait), and they sided with their
paymasters, either openly or by their quiet refusal to support Saddam.
The only ones who supported Saddam were the hard core of the Nehruvian
establishment (who forced the Chandra Shekhar government to stop
allowing American war planes to land in Bombay), and the communists with
their visceral anti-Americanism. A strike imposed on the communists with
their visceral anti-Americanism. A strike imposed on the Calcutta
dockers by the Communist trade-union was about the only sign of Indian
support for Saddam, but our correspondent played it up as merely one
example of a nation-wide movement. I hope it was in good faith on his
part, but for the Times of India there cannot be such a benefit of the
doubt.

Foreign correspondents in Delhi should realize that the Indian media and
academia are entirely untrustworthy when it comes to reporting on the
Hindu-Muslim conflict. When you report the truth about the democratic
opposition in China or Tibet, you don't copy the People's Daily. When
you want to know the truth about the Kurdish freedom struggle, you don't
trust the Iraqi stae radio. So, when you want to understand the *Hindu
backlash*, you don't believe strictly partisan sources like the Times of
India, or party-line historians like those from JNU or AMU.

If a Mr. Vijay Singh writes in Le Monde Diplomatique an article full of
secularist invective titled: Hindu Fundamentalism, a Menace for India,
it is simply the reflection of a vested interest in blackening Hinduism,
though it is sold as an in-depth comment by a first-hand observer. It so
happens that the article is partly an unacknowledged quotation from the
introductory chapter of the book *"Understanding the Muslim Mind"* by
Rajmohan Gandhi, a party politician of Iman Bukhari's favourite Janata
Dal (nicknamed Jinnah Dal). If in another issue of the same prestigious
French monthly, Mrs. Francine R. Frankel mouths all the worn-out
secularist slogans against what she calls the *"Violent Offensive of
Hindu Extremists"*, it merely proves her incapability of reading her
Indian sources with the distance befitting partisan pamphlets. It is
quite a shameful matter that Western media have swallowed and reproduced
many similar motivated distortion.

The extreme ignorance and gullibility of the foreign press provides the
negationists with a strategic cover. Most English-knowing Indians
believe that the Western intelligentsia is more objective and competent,
and they keep on believing this even in domains where the West is
completely ignorant and incomponent. So the negationists feel supported
in the back by an outside world which they can manipulate but which many
in India still consider as a standard of truth. If the Hindu leadership
had taken the trouble of studying the mental determinants of India's
political configuration, it would have blown this cover away by
spreading first-hand information to the foreign media, and educating
them about the Stalinist-Islamic grip on the Indian establishment.

In Great Britain and the United States, the anti-Hindu and pro-Muslim
bias in India reporting can partly be explained by the political tilt
towards Pakistan (now waning because of Pakistan's nuclear ambitions).
Thus, the prestigious British weekly The Economist has, in a predictably
negative article about nationalism and separatism, held up the creation
of Pakistan as an undisputably justified case of separatism (small
wonder that British Muslims are imitating their Indian Muslim
grandfathers and demanding a separate *"non-territorial state of British
Muslims"*, justifiable on exactly the same grounds). A more universal
reason is that they never get to know the Hindu viewpoint from competent
and eloquent spokesmen: firstly, these have practically no access to the
national English-language press, which Western correspondents in Delhi
faithfully copy because they are too lazy to seek out news for
themselves; secondly, the Hindus themselves have not yet suifficiently
realized the importance of public relations.

The most important reason is probably the political atmosphere in Europe
which demands that for the sake of anti-racism and *multiculturalism*,
Islam as the most conspicuous and assertive guest culture in Europe gets
painted in rosy colours. The result of this imperative not to expose
Muslim fanaticism is that even avowedly Christian papers in the West
keep silent about the ongoing persecution of Christian papers and other
minorities in the Middle East. Christians cherish the illusion of a
*dialogue with Islam*, so they will not offend their Muslim partners by
raising incovenient issues like the status of religious minorities in
Muslim countries. Now, if the West does not stand up for its persecuted
Christian brethren, how much less will it be bothered about the
idolatrous Hindus.

And so, Western India-watchers go on licking the boots of the aggressor,
and keep on twisting contemporary news in the media, and to a lesser
extent even historical facts in academic publications, to the advantage
of the Muslim side. They have not invented the Indian brand of
negationism, but they are amplifying and fortifying it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.6 BANNING INCONVENIENT BOOKS

A consequence of the negationist orientation of the Indian state's
religious policy, is the readiness to ban books critical of Islam at the
slightest suggestion by some mullah or Muslim politician. It is
symptomatic that India was the first country to ban Salman Rushdie's The
Satanic Verses, at the insistence of Syed Shahabuddin, MP (in exchange,
with some other concessions, for his calling off a march on Ayodhya).
Among other banned books, we may mentioned pamphlet-like but nonetheless
truthful books like Colin Maine's *"The Dead hand of Islam"* or A.
Ghosh's *"The Koran and the Kafir"*, which list what the Quran has in
store for the unbelievers; but also more prestigious books like R.M.
Eaton's *"Sufis of Bijapur"*, which debunks the myth of the Sufis as
bringers of a tolerant Islam (in fact they were not only fanatical
preachers against *idolatry*, but also spies and sometimes mercenaries).

In March 1991, Ram Swarup's book *"Understanding Islam through Hadis"*
was banned, after the Hindi version had already been banned in 1990.
This happened after two committees set up by the Delhi administration
had screened the book and found it unobjectionable, and after the judge
had dismissed the plea for prosecution of its publisher, under the
pressure of Muslim demonstrations. This book is a faithful summary of
the Sahih al-Muslim, one of the two most authoritative Hadis collections
(acts of the Prophet). According to the fundamentalist party Jamaat-i
Islami the book contained *"distortion and slander"*, and as an example
of this slanderous distortion, it mentions this passage: *"Mohammed saw
Zaynab in half-naked condition, and he fell in love with her"*. With
this revelation, the fundamentalists managed to get some agitation
going, and the book was banned.

The interesting thing is that the quoted passage comes straight from the
original Hadis, and is not a slanderous distortion at all. The agitation
against the book reveals an important fact about the Muslim community:
the ordinary Muslim does not know the contents of Quran and Hadis, and
projects on Mohammed his own moral ideals, which he largely shares with
his non-Muslim fellow-men. Because of his attachment to the mental image
of a morally perfect Mohammed, he is shocked when he gets confronted
with the historical Mohammed. Among the many historical acts of Mohammed
is his arranging the hand-over to himself of Zaynab, the beautiful wife
of his sdopted son. The fact that a revelation from Allah came to
legitimize the marriage between Mohammed and Zaynab (which was a breach
of the tribal incest taboo), became the classic illustration of the view
that the Quran is nothing but the self-interested product of Mohammed's
own mind.

This ignorance about the historical Mohammed, both among the common
Muslims and among the Hindus, is precisely what the banned book wanted
to do something about, in keeping with the Indian Constitution's
injuction to *"develop the scientific temper"*. But the Nehruvian
establishment (which includes the Congress Party and its Janata Dal
offshoot) has no liking for free research into the contents of Islamic
doctrine and history, and in spite of loud slogans about *secularism*,
the administration gave in to the Muslim fanatics. None of the so-called
secularist intelectuals has bothered to protest against this
obscurantist act of censorship.

The official motivation for this banning of meritortious books is that
they have been written with the intention of insulting a religion or
inciting communal conflict (art. 153A amd art. 295A of the Indian Penal
Code). Under section 95 of the Criminal Procedure Code, the executive
power must take action against its initial users. For, according to
some, there is a bok which fulfils the description given in the Penal
Code, even to a far greater extent than the already banned book; but
which is recited and invested with supreme authority in state-subsidized
schools and in prayer- houses in every town and village of india. This
objectionable book is known as the Quran.

In 1984 a citizen of India, H.K. Chakraborty, filed a petition with the
West Bengal state government to ban the Quran. He added a list of 37
Quran verses which *"preach cruelty, incite violence and disturb public
peace"* (to use the terminology of the Penal Code), 17 verses which
*"promote, on grounds of religion, feelings of enmity, hatred and
ill-will between different communities in India"*, and 31 verses which
*"insult other religions as also the religious beliefs of other
communities"*. Indeed, even after subtracting some verses which could be
regarded as legitimate polemics (esp. against the Christian belief in
Incarnation), there are about 60 passages in the Quran that formulate a
doctrine of demonization of non-Muslims, and of hatred and war against
them. If the Indian laws prohibit communal hate propatganda, Mr.
Chakraborty was right in considering the Quran as an excellent candidate
for banning. But even after reminder-letters, the West Bengal
authorities gave no response.

At this stage, Mr. Chakraborty met Chandmal Chopra, an adherent of the
extremely non-violent Jain sect, who had taken up the study of the Quran
in order to understand the plight of the Hindus in Bangladesh, who are
gradually being chased from their ancestral homeland by the Muslims. In
1985 Chandmal Chopra filed a petition with the Calcutta high Court,
asking for a ban on the Quran. He added a list with reprehensible verses
from the Quran: 29 passages from the Quran (1 to 8 verses in length)
that incite violence against unbelievers, 15 which promote enmity, 26
which insult other religions.

Some typical examples are: *"Mohammed in Allah's apostle. Those who
follow him are merciless for the unbelievers but kind to each other."*
(Q.48:29) *"Make war on them until idolatry does not exist any longer
and Allah's religion reigns universally."* (Q.8:39, also 2:193) *"We
break with you; hatred and enmity will reign bnetween us until ye
believe in Allahh alone."* (Q. 60.4) *"The Jews and Christians and the
Pagans will burn forever in the fire of hell. They are the vilest of all
creatures."* (Q.98:51) There are dozens of Quran verses like this which
in their unanimity cannot be dismissed as *"isolated, mistranslated"*
little accidents *"quoted out of context"*.

Chandmal Chopra stated in his writ petition: *"The cited passages in the
Quran... arouse in Muslims the worst sectarian passions and religious
fanaticism, which has manifested itself in murders, massacres, plunder,
arson, rape and destruction or desecration of sacred places both in
historical and in the contemporary period, not only in India but in
large parts of the world."*

The petition created a lot of furore in Calcutta and abroad. Muslims
created street riots. The government intervened and put heavy pressure
on the judicial process. The secret service was put to work to find
possible objectionable biographical data of the petitioner. The court
used some dirty tricks to disturb the peritioner's case, like changing
dates and changing the object of a session to which the petitioner had
been summoned, during the same session itself, with apparent
foreknowldege of the government's counsel.

Both the authorities and the court violated the secular basis of the
Indian Constitution by using as justification for their policy c.q.
judgement a statement of religious belief. The Marxist West Bengal
government stated in its affidavit: *"The Quran contains the words of
God Almighty revealed to His last Prophet Mohammed... As the Holy Quran
is a Divine Book, no earthly power can sit in judgement on it, and no
court of law has jurisdiction to adjudicate it."*

The judge dismissed the petition on this ground: *"Banning or forfeiture
of the Quran... would amount to abolition of the Muslim religion
itself."* Indeed, the very text which preaches war against the
unbelievers is the core text of Islam, so abolition of Islamic hate
propaganda amounts to abolition of Islam itself. Islam without hatred is
not Islam. The judge further observed: *"This book is not prejudicial to
the maintenance of harmony between religions. Because of the Quran no
public tranquillity has been disturbed upto now..."* - a resounding
statement of negationism.

This verdict was only what the petitioner expected: because of political
pressure, an anti-Quran verdict was simply unthinkable, and moreover,
the Penal Code keeps scriptures and classics outside its own purview.
The petitioner has made it clear that he considers book-banning
counterproductive, and that the controversial petition was meant to
direct public attentiton towards the Quran's contents: people should
read it, because Indian citizens have a right to know why their country
is plagued with never-ending religious riots.

When Chandmal Chopra had the documents of the legal dispute published,
the administration decided to prosecute him and his publisher on the
basis of the very same Penal Code articles which he had invoked to
request a ban on the Quran. The case is still pending.

Beside H.K. Chakraborty's and Chandmal Chopra's petitions, a third text
which pointed at the Quran as a source of religious violence, was a
poster published in Delhi (1986) by I.S. Sharma and Rajkumar Arya,
prominent members of the Hindu Mahasabha, a small political party more
extreme than the BJP. The poster carried the title: *"Why do riots break
out in this country?"* It showed 24 Quran verses, such as: *"Fight the
unbelievers in your surroundings, and let them find harshness in you"*
(Q.9:123), and : *"Kill the unbelievers wherever ye find them,, capture
and besiege them and prepare them every kind of ambush"* (Q.9.5).

Both publishers were arrested on the basis of arts. 153A and 295A.
However, they were acquitted. The judged ruled that they had made a
*"fair criticism"*, for: *"With all due respect to the holy Quran, an
attentive perusal of the verses shows that these are indeed harmful and
preach violence and have the potential to cause conflicts between the
Muslims and the others."* An appeal against the court ruling is still
pending.

This criticism of the Quran pulls the carpet from under the
negationists' feet. The enmity between Muslims and Pagans is clearly not
a back-projection from contemporary artificially created
religio-political tensions. Neither is it a conflict which developed
historically long after Mohammed and which can be reduced to
socio-economical factors. This enmity is, on the contrary, present in
the very core of Islamic doctrine.

With this information about Quranic doctrine, we find that the
negationist thesis is not only contradicted by a massive body of
authentic evidence; it is also highly implausible in itself. For, the
thesis that Islam in India was not systematically (proportionately to
its possibilities in given situations) in conflict with other religions,
claims in fact that Islam in India deviated from its own principles, and
behaved completely uncharacteristically for centuries on end. It is
methodologically more usual to provisionally assume a consistent and
probable bahaviour (viz. that adherents of a God-given call to war
against the unbelievers effectively make war on the unbelievers, and
that a religion which persecuted other religions everywhere else, did
the same in India), and only give this up if positive evidence for a
less plausible and more inconsistent course has been found. But what
positive evidence there is, points in the opposite direction: a long
list of Muslim invaders and rulers faithfully put the Quranic injuctions
into practice.

The problem of book-banning and censorship on Islam criticism is
compounded by the related problem of self- censorship. Thus, when in
late 1992, the famous columnist Arun Shourie wanted to publish a
collection of his columns on Islamic fundamentalism, esp. the Rushdie
and Ayodhya affairs (Indian Controversies), the publisher withdrew at
the last moment, afraid of administrative or physical reprisals, and the
printer also backed out. Earlier, Shourie had been lucky to find one
paper willing to publish these columns, for most Indian newspapers
strictly keep the lid on Islam criticism. Hindu society is a terrorized
society.

A final aspect of the ban (sometimes legal, mostly imposed by secularist
convention) on criticism of Islam is that it is the re-institution of an
old Islamic rule. When the Christians in Syria in the first century of
Islam were forced to submit, they had to sign a long list of promises to
their Islamic overlords. These comprised the well-known conditions
imposed on the zimmis, but also some extra ones, including *"not to
teach our children the Quran"*. Like Mohammed, his successors found it
hard to counter the numerous objections to the contradictions and
unethical injuctions in the Quran, which perceptive infidels kept on
raising. It was logical that they prohibited the study of the Quran by
non-Muslims, in order to pre-emptively disarm future anti-Islamic
polemists. This ban by the theocratic caliphate on unfriendly inspection
of the Quran is now re- instituted in India in the name of secularism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.7 THE NEGATIONISTS' SECOND FRONT

Not satisfied with denying the crimes of Islam, the negationists have
recently made a big effort to spread the notion that Hinduism itself is
guilty of just the same things of which it accuses Islam. Remember,
Holocaust negationists always allege and highlight Israeli injustice
against the Palestinians: if you prove that the victim is not so
innocent, it will ultimately become questionable that he was a victim at
all. If ever the denial of Muslim fanaticism has to be given up, a
second line of defence (or counter-attack) will be ready: accusing
Hinduism of a similar fanaticism.

For example, in the Indian media you regularly come across the
contention that *"the Hindus destroyed Nalanda Buddhist university"*.
This is a plain lie: under several Hindu dynasties, Nalanda flourished
and was the biggest university in the world for centuries; it was
destroyed by the Muslim invader Bakhtiar Khilji in 1200. But if you
repeat a lie often enough, it gains currency, and now many Indians have
come to believe that Buddhism had been replaced by Hinduism as India's
chief religion in a most violent manner.

In reality, Buddhism had always been a minority religion in India,
confined to nobles and traders; before its disappearance around 1200 AD,
it had been partly reabsorbed by mainstream Hinduism; otherwise it
co-existed peacefully with other Hindu sects, often sharing the same
temple- complexes. The historical allegations of violent conflicts
between mainstream Hinduism and Buddhism can be counted on one hand. It
is not *Brahminical onslaught* but Islam that chased Buddhism from
India.

In Central Asia, Islam had wiped out Buddhism together with
Nestorianism, Zoroastrianism, Manicheism, and whatever other religion it
encountered. The Persian word for *idol* is but, from Buddha, because
the Buddhists with their Buddha-status were considered as the
idol-worshippers par excellence. The Buddhists drew the wrath of every
Muslim but-shikan (idol-breaker), even where they had not offered
resistance aganinst the Muslim armies because of their doctrine of
non-violence. As a reminder of the Buddhist past of Central Asia, the
city name Bukhara is nothing but a corruption of vihara, i.e. a Buddhist
monastery; other Indian names include Samarkhand and Takshakhand, i.e.
Tashkent. In India, Buddhism was a much easier target than other sects
and traditions, because it was completely centralized around the
monasteries. Once the monsteries destroyed and the monks killed, the
Buddhist community had lost its backbone and was helpless before the
pressure to convert to Islam (as happened on a large scale in East
Bengal).

A handful of negationist historians have tried to substantiate the
allegations against Hinduism and spared no effort to colect instances of
Hindus acts of persectution. We will take a look at them here. It would
take a whole volume to sum up Aurangzeb's career as an iconoclast and
persecutor, but the Hindu record of persecution will not take us more
than a few pages.

To my knowledge, all the alleged cases of intra-Hindu persecution have
been summed up in *"Communal History and Rama's Ayodhya by prof. R.S.
Sharma, the chapter in Communalism and the Writing of Indian History"*
contributed by prof. Harbans Mukhia, and most explicitly Cultural
Transactions and Early India by Prof. Romila Thapar. According to Romila
Thapar, *"the insistence on the tradition of religious tolerance and
non-violence as characteristic of Hinduism... is not borne out by
historical evidence"*. Given their strong motivation, we need not assume
that they have overlooked incidents that could be useful for the case
they are making.

The two best-known cases, involving Pushyamitra Shunga and Shashank,
cannot withstand historical criticism. The non-contemporary story (which
surfaces more than three centuries after the *facts*) about
Pushyamitra's offering money for the heads of monks is rendered
improbable by firm historical facts of his allowing and patronizing
monasteries and Buddhist universities in his domains. After Ashoka's
lavish sponsorship of Buddhism, it is perfectly possible that Buddhist
institutions fell on slightly harder times under the Shungas, but
persecution is still another matter. The famous historian of Buddhism
Etienne Lamotte has observed: *"To judge from the documents, Pushyamitra
must be acquitted through lack of proof."* The only reason to sustain
the suspicion against Pushyamitra, once it has been levelled, is that
*"where there is smoke, there must be fire"* - but that piece of
received wisdom is presupposed in every act of slander as well.

Hsuan Tsang's story from hearsay about Shashank's devastating a
monastery in Bihar, killing the monks and destroying Buddhist relics,
only a few years before Hsuan Tsang's own arrival, is contradicted by
other elements in his own report. Thus, according to the Chinese
pilgrim, Shashank threw a stone with the Buddha's footprint into the
river, but it was returned through a miracle; and he felled the bodhi
tree but a sapling from it was replanted which miraculously grew into a
big tree overnight. So, the fact of the matter was that the stone and
the tree were still there in full glory. In both cases, the presence of
the footprint-stone and the fully grown bodhi tree contradict Husan
Tsang's allegations, but he explains the contradiction away by
postulating miracles (which everywhere have a way of mushrooming around
relics, to add to their aura of divine power). If we do not accept
miracles, we conclude that the bodhi tree which Husan Tsang saw, and
which was too big to have been a recently replanted sapling, cannot have
been felled by Shashank.

Hsuan Tsang is notorious for his exaggerations and his insertions of
miracle stories, and he had to explain to China, where Buddhism was
readhing its peak, why it was declining in India. It seems safer to base
our judgement on the fact that in his description of Buddhist life in
the Ganga basin, nothing shows the effects of recent persecutions. In
fact, Hsuan Tsang himself gives a clue to the real reason of pre-Islamic
Buddhist decline, by describing how many Buddhist monasteries had fallen
into disuse, esp. in areas of lawlessness and weak government,
indicating that the strength of Buddhism was in direct proportion to
state protection and patronage. Unlike Brahminism, which could sustain
itself against heavy odds, the fortunates of Buddhist monasticism (even
more than those of the Christian abbeys in early medieval Europe) were
dependent upon royal favours, as under Ashoka, the Chinese early T'ang
dynasty, and the rulers of Tibet and several Southeast-Asian countries.

A third story, about a 12th century king Harsha of Kashmir, is
apparently true but has nothing to do with religious persecution: he
plundered Hindu temples of all sects including Buddhism, in his own
kingdom, without bothering to desecrate them or their keepers apart from
lucrative plunder. It is the one geunine case of a ruler plundering not
out of religious motives but for the gold. There is no known case of a
Muslim marauder who merely stole from temples without bothering to
explicity desecrate them, much less of a Muslim ruler who plundered the
sanctuaries of his own religion. Moreover, Kalhana's history book
Rajatarangini relates this story with the comment: *"Promoted by the
Turks in his employ, he behaved like a Turk."* This Harsha employed
Turkish mercenaries (which his successors would regret, for they spied
and ultimately grabbed power), and these Muslims already had a firm
reputation of plundering temples with a good conscience.

Number four is the attack by the Paramara king Subhataverman (1193-1210)
on Gujrat, in which *"a large number of Jain temples in Dabhoi and
Cambay"* were *plundered* (not *"destroyed"* or *"desecrated"*). Harbans
Mukhia cites this as proof that *"many Hindu rulers did the same \[as
the Muslims, i.e. destroy\] with temples in enemy- territory long before
the Muslims had emerged as a political challenge to these kingdoms."*
However, it is well-known that when Subhatavarman acceded to the throne,
the Muslims had more than emerged: North India was being ravaged by
Mohammed Ghori's decisive campaign of conquest. As a proof that Hindus
outside the Islamic sphere of influence practised persecution, this
incident will not do. On the contrary, if the report is correct, then
the background may well be similar to the attested case of Harsha of
Kashmir: inspired by the Turks, he behaved like a Turk.

Another case is the recurrent conflicts between the Shaiva and the
Vaishnava renunciates in Ayodhya. Prof. R.S. Sharma quotes a description
from 1804, which talks of *"soldiers taking pleasure in battle"*,
*"misery"*, *"great fear"* and *"shelter in secret places"*, but no
death toll is given, in fact no killing is mentioned in so many words.
But prof. Sharma concludes nonetheless: *"The passage given above is
sufficient to expose the myth of tolerance practised by medieval Hindu
religious leaders."*

Hindu tradition acknowledges that a rivalry between Shaivas and
Vaishnavas disturbed life in Ayodhya: it was the context in which
Tulsidas decided to write the Ramcharitmanas. In order to emphasize the
superficial and erroneous character of the conflict between the
followers of Shiva and those of Vishnu (and his incarnation Rama),
Tulsidas made Shiva the story-teller of his Rama biography. Shiva and
Vishnu are one, and devotees who don't understand this, well, they have
to learn it. There is no similar record of any Islamic authority who has
said that Shiva and Allah are one, nor Ram and Rahim, nor Kashi and
Kaaba. All this *"oneness of all religions"* rhetoric is a strictly
Hindu projection of the oneness of the different Hindu gods and
traditions on a juxtaposition of radically incompatible notions from
Islam and Hinduism. Whereas the opposition between Ram and Rahim,
between Kashi and Kaaba, led to endless persecutions and a Partition,
such things have not happened between Shaivas and Vaishnavas. All that
Prof. Sharma can show, is a riot which was not bigger than those which
take place between drunken football fans.

As we might expect from Marxists who seek to mould rather than inform
public opinion, this listing of evidence has been done with some
editing. Thus, Romila Thapar writes that *"the Shaivite saint Jnana
Sambandar is attributed with having converted the Pandya ruler from
Jainism to Shaivism, whereupon it is said that 8,000 Jainas were impaled
by the king"*. She omits that this king, Arikesari Parankusa Maravarman,
is also described as having first persecuted Shaivas; that Sambandar
vanquished the Jainas not in battle but in debate (upon which the king
converted from Jainism to Shaivism); and that he had escaped Jaina
attempts to kill him. Unlike the Muslim persecutions, this Shaiva-Jaina
conflict was clearly not a one-way affair. For the sake of blackening
Hinduism, the Buddhists and Jains had to be depicted as hapless victims,
and their share in the intra- Hindu violence had to be concealed.

It is even a matter of debate whether this persecution has occurred at
all: the Hindus were never careful historians, and like Hsuan Tsang they
mixed legend and historical fact, so that the modern historian can only
accept their testimony if he finds supportive outside (epigraphical and
archaeological) evidence. Unlike the conscientious Muslim chronicles or
Kalhana's Rajatarangini, this story about Sambandar comes in the form of
a local legend with at most a historical core. Nilkanth Shastri, in his
unchallenged History of South India, writes about it: *"This, however,
is little more than an unpleasant legend and cannot be treated as
history."* I admit that this sounds like Percival Spear's statement that
Aurangzeb's persecutions are *"little more than hostile legend"*.
However, Mr. Spear's contention is amply disproven by a lot of
contemporary documents including the royal orders to kill Pagans and
destroy Pagan institutions, as well as by eye-witness accounts; such
evidence has not been offered at all in the case of Jnana Sambandar.

Warned by this unmistakable case of distortion of evidence, we take the
rest of the list cum grano salis. But at least, the next incident is
reported by two seemingly independent sources: the persecution of
Buddhists by the Huna king Mihirakula in Kashmir. Romila Thapar herself
admits that Hsuan Tsang's account about *"the destruction of 1.600
Buddhist stupas and sangharamas and the killing of thousands of monks
and lay-followers"* sounds exaggerated, but she has faith in Kalhana's
more detailed version which mentions *"killing innocent people by the
hundreds"*.

But Hsuan Tsang gives an interesting detail which does not sound like a
fairy-tale and may well be historical. Mihirakula, *"wishing to apply
his leisure to the study of Buddhism"*, asked the Buddhist sangha to
appoint a teacher for him. But none of the more accomplished monks was
willing, so they appointed a monk who had the rank of a servant. The
king found this procedure insulting, and ordered the destruction of the
Buddhist church in his kingdom. This king was not anti-Buddhist, was
open-minded and took a sincere interest in Buddhism. But once a king's
ego is hurt, he can get violent, regardless of his religion. That is
regrettable, but it is something else than religious fanaticism.

When a commander in the service of the Buddhist emperor Ashoka was
angered by the Buddhist monks' refusal to let the king meddle in their
affairs, he had 500 of them killed. The massacre had nothing to do with
religious intolerance, merely with hurt pride, and the Marxist
historians have done well not to put it in their list. For the same
reason, Mihirakula's rage against the impolite monks cannot be equated
with the religiously motivated persecutions by the Muslim rulers. There
was never a Muslim king who invited Pagan scholars to instruct him in
the Pagan doctrines, the way Mihirakula asked for a Buddhist teacher.
The only exceptions to this rule were the apostate emperor Akbar, who
was vehemently criticized for it by the Muslim clergy, and Dara Shikoh,
who was executed for apostasy by his brother Aurangzeb.

Another incident of intra-Hindu persecution quoted from Kalhana's
Rajatarangini, is *"an earlier persecution of Buddhists in Kashmir and
the wilful destruction of a vihara, again by a Shaivite king"*. There is
an interesting little tailpiece to this incident: *"But on this occasion
the king repented and built a new monastery for the Buddhist monks"*.
This proves that a substantial number, if not all, of the monks had
survived the *persecution*. But more importantly, it highlights
something completely unknown in the long history of Islamic fanaticism:
remorse. This Shaivite king knew at heart that intolerance was wrong,
and when he had regained his self-control, he made up for his misdeed.
Such a thing has never been done by Mohammed, or by Ghaznavi or
Aurangzeb. If any proof was neded for the radical difference between the
systematic persecutions by the Muslims and the rare abberation into
isolated acts of intolerance by Hindus, Prof. Romila Thapar has just
given it.

The next case: *"The Jaina temples of Karnataka went through a traumatic
experience at the hands the Lingayats or Virashaivas in the early second
millennium AD"*. If all they suffered was *trauma* they were well-off in
comparison with the thousands of temples destroyed by the Muslims in the
same period. After a time of peaceful co-existence, which Romila Thapar
acknowledges, *"one of the temples was converted into a Shiva temple. At
Hubli, the temple of the five Jinas was converted into a
panchalingeshwara Shaivite temple, the five lingas replacing the five
Jinas in the sancta. Some other Jaina temples met the same fate."*

To be sure, conversions of the temples have indeed happened, and the
panchalingeshwara temple may well be a case in point. Yet, that does not
prove there was persecution. When rivalling sects entered public debate,
they often put in high wagers, esp. the promise to convert to be
winner's sect. In such a case, the temple or ashram was taken along into
the new sect. Here, it could well be such a case of peaceful handover:
after all, the temples were not destroyed. Against this, Prof. Thapar
informs us: *"An inscription at Ablur in Dharwar eulogizes attacks on
Jaina temples as retaliation for opposition to Shaivite worship."*

Here we may have another case of distoring evidence by means of
selective quoting. The inscription of which Prof. Thapar summarizes a
selected part, says first of all that the dispute arose because the
Jains tried to prevent a Shaiva from worshipping his own idol. It
further relates that the Jains also promised to throw out Jina and
worship Shiva if the Shiva devotee performed a miracle, but when the
miracle was produced, they did not fulfil their promise. In the ensuing
quarrel, the Jina idol was broken by the Shaivas. The most significant
element is that the Jain king Bijjala decided in favour of the Shaivas
when the matter was brought before him. He dismissed the Jains and
showered favours on the Shaivas.

Again, in this story the conflict is not a one-way affair at all. We
need not accept the story at face value, as it is one of those sectarian
miracle stories (with the message: *"My saint is holier than thy
saint"*) which abound in the traditions surrounding most places of
pilgrimage, be they Christian, Sufi or Hindu. Dr. Fleet, who has edited
and translated this inscription along with four others found at the same
place, gives summaries of two Lingayat Puranas and the Jain
Bijjalacharitra, and observes that the story in this inscription finds
no support in the literary traditions of the two sects. Bijjala's own
inscription dated 1162 AD discovered at Managoli also does not support
the story. The fact that the inscription under consideration does not
bear a date or a definite reference to the reign of a king, does not
help its credibility either. And do authentic inscriptions deal in
miracles?

It is obvious that an inscription of this quality, if it had been cited
in support of the Hindu claim to the Babri Masjid Ram Janmabhoomi site,
would have been dismissed by the Marxist historians as *ridiculous* and
*totally groundless*. They would not view it as a serious obstacle to
their foregone conclusion that there is absolutely definitely no
indication whatsover at all that a Hindu temple was forcibly replaced
with a mosque. But in this case, we are asked to see it as *evidence*
that Shaivas attacked Jain temples, and that *Hindu tolerance is a
myth*.

Unlike the party-line historians of JNU, I do not think that historians
working with conflicting testimonies are in a position to make apodictic
statements and definitive conclusions,, so I will not completely dismiss
this inscription as fantasy. It is possible that the Jainas had indeed
fallen on hard times, and I do not dispose of material that would refute
Prof. Thapar's contention that *"in the fourteenth century the
harassment of Jainas was so acute that they had to appeal for protection
to the ruling power at Vijayanagar"*. Still, in size, duration,
intensity and degree of ideological motivation, this conflict does not
at all compare with the terror wrought by Islam. Incidentally, the
ruling power at Vijayanagar, whose protection the Jains sought, was of
course a Hindu power.

From Dr. Fleet's study of these sources, it seems that the *Shaivas* who
were so hostile to the Jains, belonged to the Veerashaiva or Lingayat
sect. And indeed, Prof. Thapar's next piece of evidence is that
*"inscriptions of the sixteenth century from the Srisailam area of
Andhra Pradesh record the pride taken by Veerashaivas in beheading
Shvetambara Jains"*. Now, the Veerashaivas were an anti-caste and
anti-Brahminical sect. As these are considered good qualities,
negationists have tried to link them to the influence of Muslim
missionaries (*"bringing the message of equality and brotherhood"*), who
were indeed very acvtive on India's West coast, where and when the
Veerashaiva doctrine was developed. Let us assume there was indeed
Muslim influence on the Veerashaiva sect. In that case, the negationists
should acknowledge that the Veerashaivas' occasional acts of intolerance
may equally be due to the influence of Islam. At any rate *Brahminism*
cannot be held guilty of any misdeeds committed by this anti-Brahminical
sect.

Finally, *"in Gujrat, Jainism flourished during the reign of Kumarapala,
but his successor \[i.e. Ajayapala\] persecuted the Jainas and destroyed
their temples"*. In *"The History and Culture of the Indian People"*,
edited by R.C. Majumdar, we read about this: *"The Jain chronicles
allege that Ajayapala was a persecutor of the Jains, that he demolished
Jain temples, mercilessly executed the Jain scholar Ramachandra, and
killed Ambada, a minister of Kumarapala, in an encounter."* Here, the
alleged crime is related by the victims, not by the aggressors. It is
possible that they exaggerated, but I see no reason to believe that they
simply invented the story. So, let us agree that some temples were
destroyed and at least one prominent Jain killed by Hindu aggressors.
After all, the fanaticism displayed systematically by Islam has not come
falling out of the sky, it exists in human nature and may occasionally
pop up in contexts of tension; the difference is that Hindu acts of
fanaticism were occasional and took place in spite of the doctrine,
while Islamic fanaticism was systematic and merely an application of the
doctrine.

The Marxist scholars who have collected this material, have omitted from
their presentations the following cases of intra-Hindu persecution. The
Mahavamsha says that the Buddhist king Vattagamini (29-17 BC) destroyed
a Jain vihara on the same site. In the Shravana-Belagola epitaph of
Mallishena, the Jain teacher Aklanka says that after a successful debate
with Buddhists, he broke a Buddha statue with his own foot. There are
some more instances of Jain- Buddhist conflict, but suich material did
not fit in with the designs of the negationists. They have this pet
theory of Jainism and Buddhism as revolts against *Brahminical tyranny*,
subsequently crushed out by the *Brahminical reaction*. In fact, the
minor instances of intra-Hindu violence were distributed roughly
proportionately between Brahminical, Buddhist, Jaina and other sects.

Among the above-mentioned reports of conflict between the different
traditions within the Sanatana Dharma common wealth, several are
probably unfounded, and several exaggerated. But as we have no firm
evidence for this plausible hypothesis yet, let us assume for now that
all these reports are simply correct and accurate. Let us moreover
assume that a similar number of similar cases has gone unrecorded or
unnoticed by the Marxist historians. Then, as a sum total, we still do
not have the number of victims that Teimur made in a single day. Then we
still do not have the number of temple demolitions that Aurangzeb
wrought on his own. Then we still do not have the amount of
glorification of temple destruction that we find in any of the diaries
of Muslim conquerors like Babr or Firuz Shah Tughlaq or Teimur, or any
of their chroniclers. The fanaticism record of Hinduism throughout
millennia is dwarfed by the record of a single Ghaznavi, Ghori or
Aurangzeb and becomes completely negligeable when compared with the
total record of Islamic destruction and massacre in India. Moreover, a
proper comparison of the fanaticism record of Hindu civilization would
not be with Indian Islam, which represents a far smaller number of
people, but with the entire Muslim world from the Prophet (peace be upon
him) onwards.

Prof. Romila Thapar writes: *"The desire to portray tolerance and
non-violence as the eternal values of the Hindu tradition has led to the
pushing aside of such evidence."* What evidence? These few disputable
cases will not do to prove that *"Hindu tolerance is a myth"*. Hindus
can afford to face this evidence sqarely. A final judgement on whether
Hinduism is tolerant or not shujld not depend on a few instances
selected and edited to fit the proconceived picture, but on an over-view
of the whole of Hindu history. The larger patterns of Hindu history
leave no doubt that the impression cunningly created by the negationists
is false.

Many foreign groups of people persecuted for their religion came to seek
reguge in India. The Parsis have thrived. The heterodox Syrian
Christians have lived in peace until the Portuguese came to enlist them
in their effort to christianize India. The Jews have expressed their
gratitude when they left for Israel because India was the only country
where their memories were not of persecution but of friendly
co-existence. Even the Moplah Muslims were accepted without any
questions asked. All these groups were not merely tolerated, but
received land and material support for building places of worship.

What should really clinch the issue, is the tolerant treatment which the
Muslims received after their reign of terror had been overthrown and
replaced with Hindu rashtras like those of the Marathas, Sikhs, Rajputs
and Jats. The Hindus could have emulated the policy of the Spanish
Christians after the Reconquista, and given the Muslims the choice
between conversion and emigration. With the benefit of hindsight, we can
say that they would have saved many lives and India's unity by doing so,
but forcing people to convert was not in conformity with their
traditions.

When negationists are confronted with the evidence of persecutions by
Islam, they are sure to mention a few cases where Muslim rulers
patronized the building of Hindu temples. In some cases this is
deceitful: in the JNU historians' pamphlet *"The Political Abuse of
History"*, they mention three such cases, but on closer inspection two
of them do not concern Muslim rulers, but their Hindu ministers (in his
rebuttal, Prof. A.R. Khan called this *"not only concealment of evidence
but also distortion of evidence"*). But all right, a few Muslim rulers
have made gifts to Hindu institutions. The negationists insist that
these few gifts make up for the systematic Islamic persecutions. By
contrast, their blatantly unequal standards do not allow them to accept
the systematic patronage of the institutions of Buddhists and Jains by
Hindu kings through the ages as compensation for the few isolated and
aberrant cases of religious conflict.

In order to undersand the problem of religious intolerance, it is
necessary to distinguish between two types of conflict between
religions. The first one is the ordinary conflict between two groups of
people, who may derive their identity from their nationality, language
family stock, economic interests, social class, or allegiance to a
football team: any two people or groups of people can pick a quarrel.
Therefore, two religious communities can have a conflict of interest as
well, and behave just like any kind of group in conflict situation. By
definition, every community can run into this kind of conflict (though
some may remain non-violent throughout because of their doctrine). But
this kind of conflict is temporary, dependent on an accidental state of
affairs and always gravitates back to normal.

The second kind of religious conflict is not accidental, but is a
consequence of the doctrines to which the community adheres. This is the
case only with a handful of religions (including the Marxist
quasi-religion), distinguished by their exclusivism and their ambition
for conquest. Islam has been the most consistent in denying others the
right to exist or at least to freely practise their religion. Its
conflicts with other religions are merely the materialization of its
doctrines.

This discinction between religious conflict as an accident or
aberration, and religious conflict as the direct outcome of fanatical
doctrines inherent in a religion, is fundamental to an understanding of
the problem. In the first case, acts of fanaticism are committed in
spite of the doctrine. The Vedas say that *"the wise call the One by
many names"*, and exhort us to *"let good thoughts come to us from
everywhere"*; in the Bhagavad Gita Krishna assures the adherents of all
religions that *"those who pray with devotion to any god, it is to Me
that they pray"*. Differences in religion are considered superficial and
unimportant, therefore religious tolerance is the norm, and intolerance
cannot be more than an aberration. But in the second case, acts of
fanaticism are sanctioned by the doctrine, and are bound to happen on a
substantial scale as long as the doctrine is taken seroiously. *"Enmity
and hatred will reign between us until ye believe in Allah alone"* says
the Quran, and it is only logical that enmity and hatred have indeed
reigned between Muslims and non- Muslims.

Of course, those with a bad conscience go out of their way to blur this
distinction. Marxists insist on disregarding or blurring the distinction
either because they want to blacken all religion, or because they are in
league with Muslim fanatics.

Among those who like to say that *"all are equally guilty"*, we also
find the Christian missionaries. They too have a history of persecutions
and temple destructions to cover up, not only in Europe and America, but
in India as well. The Portuguese organized a branch of the Inquisition
in Goa, and they practised conversion by force on a large scale. The
French and British missionaries were less brutal, often resorting to
subversion tactics and inducement by means of material advantages for
converts, but they too have a record of temple destructions in India.
Hundreds of churches contain rubble of the Hindu temples which they
replaced. We may look a bit more closely into one case which sums it all
up: the Saint Thomas church on Mylapore beach in Madras.

According to Christian leaders in India, the apostle Thomas came to
India in 52 AD, founded the Syrian Christian church, and was killed by
the fanatical Brahmins in 72 AD. Near the site of his martyrdom, the
Saint Thomas church was built. In fact this apostle never came to India,
and the Christian community in South India was founded by a merchant
Thomas Cananeus in 345 AD ( a name which readily explains the Thomas
legend ). He led 400 refugees who fled persecution in Persia and were
given asylum by the Hindu authorities. In Catholic universities in
Europe, the myth of the apostle Thomas going to India is no longer
taught as history, but in India it is still considered useful. Even many
vocal *secularists* who attack the Hindus for *relying on myth* in the
Ayodhya affair, off-hand profess their belief in the Thomas myth. The
important point is that Thomas can be upheld as a martyr and the
Brahmins decried as fanatics.

In reality, the missionaries were very disgruntled that these damned
Hindus refused to give them martyrs (whose blood is welcomed as *the
seed of the faith*), so they had to invent one. Moreover, the church
which they claim commemorates Saint Thomas' martyrdom at the hands of
Hindu fanaticism, is in fact a monument of Hindu martyrdom at the hands
of Christian fanaticism: it is a forcible replacement of two important
Hindu temples (Jain and Shaiva), whose existence was insupportable to
Christian missionaries. No one knows how many priests and worshippers
were killed when the Christian soldiers came to remove the curse of
Paganism from Mylapore beach. Hinduism doesn't practise
martyr-mongering, but if at all we have to speak of martyrs in this
context, the title goes to these Shiva-worshippers and not to the
apostle Thomas.

So, applying the old maxim that *"attack is the best defence"*, the
spokesmen of intolerant creeds falsely accuse the tolerant Hindus of the
same intolerance. While nobody claims that Hinduism is without faults,
or that Hindu society has never brought forth fanatical individuals,it
is a plain lie that Hinduism has record of fanaticism similar (however
remotely) to that of the three world-conquerors: Christianity, Islam and
Mrxism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.8 GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF ISLAM NEGATIONISM

India has its own full-fledged brand of negationism: a movement to deny
the large-scale and long-term crimes against humanity committed by
Islam. This movement is led by Islamic apologists and Marxist academics,
and followed by all the politicians, journalists and intellectuals who
call themselves secularists. In contrast to the European negationism
regarding the Nazi acts of genocide, but similar to the Turkish
negationism regarding the Armenian genocide, the Indian negationism
regarding the terrible record of Islam is fully supported by the
establishment. It has nearly full control of the media and dictates all
state and government parlance concerning the *communal* problem (more
properly to be called the Islam problem).

Its techniques are essentially the same as those of negationists
elsewhere :

1.  *Head-on denial*: The crassest form of negationism is obviously the
    simple denial of the facts. This is mostly done in the form of
    general claims, such as: *"Islam is tolerant"*, *"Islamic Spain was
    a model of multicultural harmony"*, *"the anti-Jewish hatred was
    unknown among Muslims until Zionism and anti-Semitism together
    entered the Muslim world from Europe"*. Since it is rare that a
    specific crime of Islam is brought to the public's notice, there is
    little occasion to come out and deny specific crimes. Exceptions are
    the Armenian genocide, officially denied in Turkey and the entire
    Muslim world, and the temple destructions in India, which have been
    highlighted in the Ayodhya debate but flatly denied by Syed
    Shahanuddin, Sushil Srivastava and many other pro-Babri polemists.

    The Rushdie affair was the occasion for negationism on a grand
    scale. There happens to be an unambiguous answer to the question:
    *"Is it Islamic to kill those who voice criticism of the Prophet?"*
    According to the media and most *experts*, the answer was
    definitely: no. According to the basic traditions of Islam, it was:
    yes. Mohammed as well as his immediate successors have killed
    critics, both in formal executions and in night-time stabbings. In
    Islamic law, the Prophet's example is valid precedent. At most there
    could be some quarreling over the procedure: some jurists thought
    that Rushdie should first be kidnapped to an Islamic country and
    given a chance to recant before an Islamic court, though the
    ayatollahs have ruled that no amount of remorse can save Rushdie. If
    he stands by his book, even the so-called moderates think he must be
    killed. Islamic law punishes both apostasy and insults to the
    Prophet with the death penalty: twice there is no escape for
    Rushdie. In the Muslim world, several publications have restated the
    clear-cut Islamic provisions for cases like Rushdie's including
    Ahaanat-i Rasool ki Sazaa (*"Punishment for Insulting the Prophet"*)
    by JNU Prof. Maulana Mohsin Udmani Nadwi, and Muqaddas-i Ayat (*"The
    Sacred Verses"*) by Maulana Majid Ali Khan, both published by the
    Islamic Research Foundation, Delhi. Yet, the outside public was told
    by many *experts* that killing Rushdie is un-islamic.

    Flat denial will work very well if your grip on the press and
    education media is sufficient. Otherwise, there is a danger of being
    shown up as the negationist one really is. In that case, a number of
    softer techniques are available.

2.  *Ignoring the facts*: This passive negationism is certainly the
    safest and the most popular. The media and textbook-writers simply
    keep the vast corpus of inconvenient testimony out of the readers'
    view.

3.  *Minimizing the facts*: If the inconvenient fact is pointed out that
    numerous Muslim chroniclers have reported a given massacre of
    unbelievers themselves, one can posit a priori that they must have
    exaggerated to flatter their patron's martial vanity - as if it is
    not significant enough that Muslim rulers felt flattered by being
    described as mass-murderers of infidels.

    Apart from minimizing the absolute size of Islamic crimes, there is
    the popular technique of relative minimizing: make the facts look
    smaller by comparing them with other, carefully selected *facts*.
    Thus, one can say that *"all religions are intolerant"*, which
    sounds plausible to many though it is patently false: in the Roman
    Empire only those sects were persecuted which had political
    ambitions (Jews when they fought for independence, Christians
    because they sought to take over the Empire and outlaw all other
    religions, as they effectively did), while the others enjoyed the
    status of religio licita; similarly with the Persian Empire and many
    other states and cultures.

    An oft-invoked counterweight for the charge-sheet against Islam, is
    the fanaticism record of Christianity. it is indeed well-known that
    Christianity has been guilty of numerous temple destructions and
    persecutions. But the reason for this fanaticism is found in the
    common theological foundation of both religions: exclusivist
    prophetic monotheism. The case against Christianity is at once a
    case against Islam. Moreover, in spite of its theologically
    motivated tendency to intolerance, Christianity has had to go
    through the experience of *"live and let live"* because in its
    formative period, it was but one of the numerous sects in the
    pluralist Roman empire.

    Islam never had this experience, and in order to bring out its full
    potential of fanaticism, Christianity has needed the influence of
    Islam on a few occasions. Thus, it is no coincidence that
    Charlemagne, who defeated the Saxons by force, was the grandson of
    Charles Martel, who defeated the Islamic army in Poitiers; no
    coincidence either that the Teutonic knights who forcibly converted
    the Balts, were veterans of the Crusades, i.e. the campaign to
    liberate Palestine from Islam; nor is it a coincidence that the
    Spanish Inquisition emerged in a country that had needed centuries
    to shake off Islamic oppression. Finally, Christianity is, by and
    large, facing the facts of it own history, though its is still
    struggling with the need to own up the responsibility for these
    facts.

    An even more general way of drowning Islamic fanaticism in
    relativist comparisons, is to point out that after all, every
    imperialism has been less than gentle. That may well be true, but
    then, we are not setting up cults for the Genghis Khans of this
    world. A religion should contribute to man's transcending his
    natural defects like greed and cruelty, and not sanction and glorify
    them.

4.  *Whitewashing*: When one cannot conceal, deny or minimize the facts,
    one can still calim that on closer analysis,, they are not as bad as
    they seem. One can call right what is obviously wrong. This can go
    very far, e.g. in his biography of Mohammed, Maxime Rodinson
    declared unashamedly that the extermination of the Medinese Jews by
    Mohammed was *doubtlessly the best solution*. In numerous popular
    introductions to Islam, the fact that Islam imposes the death
    penalty on apostates (in modern terminology: that Islam opposes
    freedom of religion in the most radical manner) is acknowledged; but
    then it is explained that *"since Islam was at war with the
    polytheists, apostasy equalled treason and desertion, something
    which is still punished with death in our secular society"*. All
    right, but the point is precisely that Islam chose to be at war with
    the traditional religion of Arabia, as also with all other
    religions, and that it has made this state of war into a permanent
    feature of its law system.

5.  *Playing up unrepresentative facts*: A popular tactic in negationism
    consists in finding a positive but uncharacteristic event, and
    highlighting it while keeping the over-all picture out of the
    public's view. For instance, a document is found in which Christians
    whose son has forcibly been inducted in the Ottoman Janissary army,
    express pride because their son has made it made it to high office
    within this army. The fact that these people manage to see the
    bright side of their son's abduction, is then used to *prove* that
    non-muslims were quite happy under Muslim rule, and to conceal the
    fact that the devshirme, the forcible conversion and abduction of
    one fifth of the Christian children by the Ottoman authorities,
    constituted a constant and formidable terror bewailed in hundreds of
    heart-rending songs and stories.

    For another example, negationists always mentionn cases of
    collaboration by non-Muslims (Man Singh with the Moghuls,etc.) to
    suggest that these were treated as partners and equals and that
    Muslim rule was quite benevolent; when in fact every history of an
    occupation, even the most cruel one, is also the history of a
    collaboration. As has been pointed out, the Nazis employed Jewish
    guards in the Warsaw ghetto, disprove the Nazi oppression of the
    Jews.

6.  *Denying the motive*: Negationists sometimes accept the facts, but
    disclaim their hero's responsibility for them. Thus, Mohammed Habib
    tried to exonerate Islam by ascribing to the Islamic invaders
    alternative motives: Turkish barbarity, greed, the need to put down
    conspiracies brewing in temples. In reality, those rulers who had
    secular reasons to avoid an all-out confrontation with the
    unbelievers, were often reprimanded by their clerical courtiers for
    neglecting their Islamic duty. The same clerics were never unduly
    worried over possible secular motives in a ruler's mind as long as
    these prompted him to action against the unbelievers. At any rate,
    the fact that Islam could be used routinely to justify plunder and
    enslavement (unlike, say, Buddhism), is still significant enough.

7.  *Smokescreen*: Another common tactic consists in blurring the
    problem by questioning the very terms of the debate: *"Islam does
    not exist, for there are many Islams, with big differences between
    countries etc."* It would indeed be hard to criticize something that
    is so ill- defined. But the simple fact is that Islam does exist: it
    is the doctrine contained in the Quran, normative for all Muslims,
    and in the Hadis, normative at least for all Sunni Muslims. There
    are differences between the law schools concerning minor points, and
    of course there are considerable differences in the extent to which
    Muslims are effectively faithful to islamic doctrine, and
    correspondingly, the extent to which they mix it with un- islamic
    elements.

8.  *Blaming fringe phenomena*: When faced with hard facts of Islamic
    fanaticism, negationists often blame them on some fringe tendency,
    now popularly known as *fundamentalism*. This is said to be the
    product of post-colonial frustration, basically foreign to genuine
    Islam. In reality, *fundamentalists* like Maulana Maudoodi and
    Ayatollah Khomeini knew their Quran better than the self-deluding
    secularists who brand them as bad Muslims. What is called
    fundamentalism is in fact the original Islam, as is proven by the
    fact that *fundamentalists* have existed since long before
    colonialism, e.g. the 13th century theologian Ibn Taimiya, who is
    still a lighthouse for today's Maudoodis, Turabis, Madanis and
    Khomeinis. When Ayatollah Khomeini declared that the goal of Islam
    is the conquest of all non- Muslim countries, this was merely a
    reformulation of Mohammed's long-term strategy and of the Quranic
    assurance that God has promised the entire world to Islam. In the
    case of communism, one can shift the blame from Marx to Lenin and
    Stalin, but Islamic terrorism has started with Mohammed himself.

9.  *Arguments ad hominem*: If denying the evidence is not tenable, one
    can always distort it by means of selective quoting and imputing
    motives to the original authors of the source material; or
    manipulating quotations to make them say the opposite of the
    over-all picture which the original author has presented. Focus all
    attention on a few real or imagined flaws in a few selected pieces,
    and act as if the entire corpus of evidence has been rendered
    untrustworthy. To extend the alleged untrustworthiness of one piece
    of evidence to the entire corpus of evidence, it is necessary to
    create suspicion against those who present the evidence: the
    implication is that they have a plan of history falisification, that
    this plan has been exposed in the case of this one piece of
    evidence, but that it is only logical that such motivated history
    falsifiers are also behind the concoction of the rest of the alleged
    evidence.

    If the discussion of inconvenient evidence cannot be prevented,
    disperse it by raising other issues, such as the human imperfections
    which every victim of crimes against humanity inevitablly has
    (Jewish harshness against the Palestinians, Hindu untouchability);
    describe the demand for the truth as a ploy to justify and cover up
    these imperfections. If the facts have to be faced at all, then
    blame the victim. If people ignore or refute your distorted version
    of history, accuse them of distortion and political abuse of
    history. Slander scholars whose testimony is inconvenient; impute
    political or other motives to them in order to pull the attention
    away from the hard evidence they present.

10. *Slogans*: Finally, all discussion can be sabotaged with the simple
    technique of shouting slogans: *prejudice*, *myth*,
    *"racism/communalism"*. Take the struggle from the common
    battlefield of arguments into the opponent's camp: his self-esteem
    as a member of the civilized company that abhors ugly things like
    prejudice and communalism. After all, attack is the best defence.

After summing up the forms of negationism, we have to look into its
causes. The following factors come to mind:

1.  *Orientalism and Islamology*: After the medieval Christian pamphlets
    against *"Mohammed the impostor"*, not much has been published
    thematizing the ideological and factual crimes of Islam. Books on,
    say, *"slavery in Islam"* are extremely rare: the raw information
    that could fill such a publication will have to be found in more
    general publications, in which Islam is only referred to in passing,
    often without the author's realizing the implications for an
    evaluation of Islam. It is often said (when introducing
    *"refutations of prejudice"*) that people always associate Islam
    with intolerance; but finding a book specifically devoted to the
    subject of Islamic intolerance will be harder. How many millions
    have been killed by Islam simply because they were non-Muslims?
    Nobody has yet tabulated the figures available to prepare a general
    estimate. We can only notice that critical research of Islam is not
    exactly encouraged, and that there is an increasing tendency to
    self-censorship regarding Islam criticism. In part, this is due to
    muchdelayed reaction against the long-abandoned Christian polemical
    appraoch.

    Now that Islamic Studies departments in Europe are increasingly
    manned by Muslims and sponsored by Islamic foundations and states,
    as has been the case in India for long, the climate for critical
    studies of Islam is only worsening. When comparing the first
    (pre-World War 2) edition of the Encyclopaedia of Islam (Leiden,
    Netherlands) with the new edition, it is striking how critical
    observations have been ironed out. But even in the past, Islam has
    enjoyed a rather favourable treatment in academic circles. Thus,
    about Islamic slavery the prominent Dutch Islamologist C.
    Snouck-Hurgronje wrote in 1887 (i.e. thirty years after the
    Americans had waged a war to impose the abolition of slavery in
    their southern states, and some seventy years after its abolition in
    the colonies): *"For most slaves their abduction was a blessing...
    They themselves are convicted that it is their enslavement that has
    for the first time made them human."*

    The political context of the growth phase of Islamology provides a
    part of the explanation. Mature colonialism was not waging war
    against Islam, but sought the co-operation of the established social
    forces in the colonized populations. The British co-operation with
    the Indian Muslims is well- known; it is epitomized by the founding
    in 1906 of the Muslim League, which sought to *"inculcate loyalty to
    the British Empire in the Indian Muslims"*. In French West Africa,
    in the same period, Islam was accepted as a factor of social
    stability, and General Lyautey pursued a dream of a Franco-Islamic
    synthesis culture in Algeria. In the 1930s, in the last European
    attempt at fresh colonization, the Italian Fascists actively
    supported the spread of Islam in the Horn of Africa. But already
    since 1853 the colonial powers had been supporting the Caliphate
    against a Christian power, Czarist Russia, esp. in the Crimean War
    (a mistaken war if ever there was one), and this had strongly
    contributed to climate of benevolence towards the Muslim culture.

2.  *Church policy*: Christianity has for centuries waged a lively
    polemic against Islam, with Raimundus Lullus as probably the most
    remarkable exponent. Recently, this criticism has subsided. Worse,
    polemical works by clerics have been withdrawn or kept unpublished
    (such as, early this centure, Father Henri Lammens' paper arguing
    that Mohammed's revelations were a psychopathological phenomenon).
    One reason is that the Church is aware of the similarity between
    Jesus' and Mohammed's missions, so that a criticism of the
    foundations of Islam may backfire on Christianity. The second reason
    is the fear that Christians in the Muslim world would have to pay
    for even ideological attack on Islam (that is why Church polemists
    save their sharpest words for harmless religions like Hinduism).
    This fear also motivates other Church policies, such as the
    non-recognition of the state of Israel.

    Meanwhile, the face of the Church has changed. A small but
    significant event in the wake of the Second Vatican Council was the
    deletion from the Saints' calendar of Our Lady of the Redemption of
    Slaves, whose feast was on 24 September. In the Middle Ages, there
    was a special clerical order and a whole fund-raising network
    devoted to the redemption (*"buying back"*) of Christian slaves held
    in *Barbary*. Until the 19th century, coastal villages in Italy had
    watchtowers to alarm the people when a ship of the slave-catching
    Barbarese pirates was in sight. The terror of Islamic slavery was a
    permanent feature of Christian history from the 7th till the 19th
    century, but now the Church is working hard to erase this memory.

    Today, its pastors are the most fervent pleaders for the rights of
    Islam. Muslims in Europe are for them a substitute for the
    disappearing parish members. Separate Christian institutions, whose
    reson of existence is being questioned, find a new legitimacy in the
    fact that Islam in its turn is also opening separate schools,
    charities and even political parties. Islam has become a *sister
    religion* regularly praised as a *religion of peace*.

3.  *Anti-colonialism*: One of the ideological guidelines of
    anti-colonialism was: *"Of the (ex-)colonized, nothing but good must
    be said."* Therefore, mentioning the colonialism and mass slavery
    practised by the Muslims had become undesirable.

    Add to this general taboo the warning that Islam criticism
    effectively implies support to Israel, described by Maxime Rodinson
    as a *"colonial settler-state"*. If one acknowledges that Islam has
    always oppressed the Jews, one accepts that Israel was a necessary
    refuge for the Jews fleeing not only the European but also the
    Islamic variety of anti-Judaisms. Let us not forget that
    decolonization was followed immediately by renewed discrimination of
    and attacks on the Jewish and Christian minorities, and that those
    Jews who could get out have promptly fled to Israel (or France, in
    the case of Algeria). It is no coincidence that these Sephardic Jews
    are mostly supporters of the hard- liners in Israel.

4.  *The enemy's enemy is a friend*: Many people brought up as
    Christians, or as nominal Hindus, never outgrow their pubescent
    revolt against their parents' religion, and therefore automatically
    sympathize with every rival or opponent of the religion they have
    come to despise. Because Islam poses the most formidable threat,
    they like it a lot.

5.  *Leftism*: In this century, Islam has come to be advertised as a
    naturally leftist *"religion of equality"*. This line has been
    developed by Muslim apoligists such as Mohammed Habib, and they have
    even taken it as a rationalization of the irrational claim that
    Mohammed was the *"last Prophet"*: after all, as the *"prophet of
    equality"*, he had brought the ultimate message upon which no
    improvement is possible. Sir Mohammed Iqbal, one of the fathers of
    Pakistan, had claimed that *"Islam equals Communism plus Allah"*.
    The Iranian Ayatollahs, by contrast, and most of the vocal Muslims
    after the Soviet-Islamic war in Afghanistan, have restated the
    orthodox position that Communism is un-Islamic, not only because of
    its atheism but also because of its rejection of free entreprise;
    the current claim is that Islam provides a *"better form of
    equality"* than Communism.

    Even while Communists were slaughtered in Islamic Iran, and even
    while political analysts classify the Islamist movements as
    *"extreme rightist"*, most leftists have kept on cultivating some
    sympathy for Islam. During the Lebanese civil war, they fed us news
    stories about *"leftist Muslims, rightist Christians"*,
    *"Islamo-progressive, christiano- reactionnaire"*.

    Negationism in India is practised with the most prowess by
    historians and writers who are under the spell of Marxism. Lenin had
    wanted to use the Muslims against the French and British
    colonialists, but what was a tactical alliance for Lenin became a
    love-affair for the Indian Communists. However, it would be wrong to
    expect that the collapse of Soviet Communism and the inevitable
    decline of Communism in India will automatically lead to the
    dissolution of negationism. It has become a bias and a thought-habit
    for many people who have only vaguely been influenced by Marxism.
    Children mostly survive their parents, and certain forms of
    negationism may survive Indian Marxism for some time, unless a
    serious effort is made to expose it on a grand scale.

6.  *Rightist traditionalism*: There is also a rightist sympathy for
    Islam. An obvious point of agreement is of course anti-Judaism. A
    subtler basis for sympathy is the so-called traditionalist current,
    which was represented by the converts Rene Guenon and Frithjof
    Schuon, and still has a following: it has been idealizing Islam and
    esp. Sufism as the preserver of the age-old philosophia pernnis
    against modernity. In Russia, some *Slavophile* anti-Western groups
    now seek an alliance with Islam against the impending
    Americanization of their society. In the U.S., Christian
    fundamentalists and Islamic organizations are increasingly creating
    common platforms to speak out against trends of moral decay
    (abortion, pornography, etc.). Some of these phenomena of
    traditionalist alliance-building are quite respectable, but they are
    nevertheless conducive to Islam negationism.

7.  *Hindu cowardice*: Even among so-called militant Hindus, there is a
    shameful eagerness to praise Islam and deny its criminal record.
    E.g., during the Ayodhya movement, many Hindu leaders have been
    pleading that the Muslims should renounce the Ram Janmabhoomi site
    because *"geunine Islam is against temple demolition"*, so that a
    mosque standing on a demolished temple is not in conformity with
    Islamic law. This was, of course, blatantly untrue: Islamic
    scripture and history prove that destroying all expressions of
    unbelief and idolatry is a duty and an honour for Muslims. The
    doctrines that have led to the temple destructions including the one
    on Ram Janmabhoomi, are still being taught in all Islamic schools.

    Apart from being untruthful, this Hindu appeal to *"geunine Islam's
    tolerance"* was also bad debating tactics: if you say that temple
    demolition was standard Islamic practice, and that what had happened
    in Ayodhya was merely the local application of the general rule, the
    onus is on the Babri advocates to prove that the Babri Masjid was an
    exception; but if you say that the Babri Masjid was an exception to
    the rule of Islamic tolerance, the onus is on you to prove that in
    this case, an exceptional and uncharacteristic incident had taken
    place. It was also bad bargaining tactics: if you say that the Babri
    Masjid was merely one among thousands, then renouncing this one non-
    mosque would sound like a very low price for the Muslims to buy the
    Hindus' goodwill; but if you say that the Babri Masjid was an
    exceptional case, an insignificant incident amid the many big
    problems thrown up by history, you look petty by demanding the
    restoration of this one site. Short, Hindu leaders were damaging
    their own position by denying history and avoiding Islam criticism.

    One could understand people telling lies when it serves their own
    interest; but people who tell lies when it is the truth that would
    serve their interest, really deserve to be kicked around. This truly
    strange and masochistic behaviour can only be understood if we keep
    in mind that Hindu society is a terorized society. During the Muslim
    period, all those who stood up and spoke out against Islam were
    eliminated; and under Nehruvian rule, they were sidelined and
    abused. The oppressed Hindus started licking the boot that kicked
    them, and this has become a habit which in their slumber they have
    not yet identified and stopped.

8.  *Liberal Islam*: In the Islamic world, it is unwise to attack Islam
    head-on. Yet, sometimes people in those countries feel the need to
    oppose Islamic phenomena and campaigns, such as the witch-hunt on
    un-Islamic cultural remnants, violence on the non-Muslims, extreme
    forms of gender inequality. In order to have a chance, these people
    have to use Islamic language: *"Mohammed was actually against
    polygamy"*, *"violence against others is in conflict with the
    tolerance which Mohammed has taught us"*, *"respect for other
    cultures is part of Islamic tradition"*. In order to press their
    humanist point, they have to formally identify with Islam and lie
    about its contents.

    Many Muslims have started to believe their own rhetoric. If you
    point out to them that the Quran teaches intolerance and war against
    the unbelievers in the most explicit terms, many of them will
    sincerely protest, and not know what to say when you show them the
    Quranic passages concerned. There is no reason to doubt that the
    Moroccanm authoress Fatima Mernissi genuinely believes in her own
    argument that the Quranic instructions on how to organize your
    polygamous household are to be read as an abolition of polygamy
    (albeit in veiled terms, because Allah, the same Allah Almighty who
    went straight against the prevalent customs of idolatry and
    pluralism, had to be careful not to offend the spirit of the times).
    Many nominal Muslims have outgrown Islamic values and developed a
    commitment to modern values, but their sentimental attachment to the
    religion imbibed in their childhood prevents them from formally
    breaking with Islam and makes them paint a rosy picture of it.

    Among Muslim spokesmen, is is certainly not the fundamentalists who
    are the most active proponents of negationism. It is liberals like
    Asghar Ali Engineer who deny that Islam ordains war on the infidels.
    It is those who are acclaimed by Hindus as being good *"secular"*
    Muslims, like Saeed Naqvi, who go as far as to deny that the
    Partition of India was brought about by Muslims. An Islam that wants
    to be *secular*, cannot but be dishonest and untrue to itself.
    Unfortunately, a tolerant Islam is a contradiction, and a tolerant
    past for Islam to buttress the position of liberal Muslims, is a
    lie.

9.  *Muslims differing from Islam*: Many people have a Muslim neighbour
    who is a fine man, and from this empirical fact they conclude: Islam
    cannot be all that bad considering our friend Mustapha. This one
    empirical fact gives them a tremendous resistance against all
    information about Islamic intolerance. People usually reduce the
    world to their own sphere of experience, and general historical
    facts of Islamic fanaticism are not allowed to disturb the private
    experience of good neighbourly relations.

    Many nominal Muslims have retained from their Quran classes only
    some vague generalities about morality, and they normally go by
    their own conscience and sensibility without ever developing the
    doctrinally prescribed hostility towards non-Muslims. These good
    people but had Muslims can ignore but not change Islamic doctrine.
    They cannot prevent the Quranic message of hatred from infecting at
    least some of the more sesceptible among their brethren.

    There have certainly been situations where sane Muslims have calmed
    down their more riotous brethren, and such individuals do make a
    real difference. We should not make the Islamic mistake of judging
    people simply by their belonging or not belonging to the Muslim
    community, rather than by their human qualities. But the fact
    remains that the presence of a doctrine of intolerance as the
    official and identity-defining ideology of a community, exerts a
    constant pressure tending towards separatism and confrontation. The
    alleviating presence of the humanist factor even within the Muslim
    community should not be used to deny the ominous presence of Islamic
    factor.

*"Those who deny history are bound to repeat it"*: that is what many
critics of Holocaust negationism allege. This seems slightly
exaggerated, though it is of course the well- wishers of Nazism who
practise negationism. In the case of Islam, it is equally true that
negationism is practised by the well-wishers of that same doctrine which
has led to the crimes against humanity under consideration. While Nazism
is simply too stained to get a second chance, Islam is certainly in a
position to force unbelievers into the zimmi status (as is happening in
dozens of Muslim countries in varying degrees), and even to wage new
jihads, this time with weapons of mass-destruction. Those who are trying
to close people's eyes to this danger by distorting or concealing the
historical record of Islam are effective accomplices in the injustice
and destruction which Islam is sure to cause before the time of its
dissolution comes. Therefore, I consider it a duty of all intellectuals
to expose and denounce the phenomenon of negationism whenever it is
practised.

Negationism In India - Chapter Two - Negationism In India

# CHAPTER TWO - NEGATIONISM IN INDIA

The negationism regarding the Nazi crimes has been the object of much
public discussion. Turkish negationism about the Armenian genocide has
received some attention. Less well-known is that India has its own brand
of negationism.

Since about 1920 an effort has been going on in India to rewrite history
and to deny the millennium-long attack of Islam on Hinduism. Today, most
politicians and English- writing intellectuals in India will go out of
their way to condemn any public reference to this long and painful
conflict in the strongest terms. They will go to any length to create
the illusion of a history of *communal amity* between Hindus and
Muslims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.1 HINDU VS. MUSLIM

Making people believe in a history of Hindu-Muslim amity is not an easy
task: the number of victims of the persecutions of Hindus by Muslims is
easily of the same order of magnitude as that of the Nazi extermination
policy, though no one has yet made the effort of tabulating the reported
massacres and proposing a reasonable estimate of how many millions
exactly must have died in the course of the Islamic campaign against
Hinduism (such research is taboo). On top of these there is a similar
number of abductions and deportations to harems and slave-markets, as
well as centuries of political oppression and cultural destruction.

The American historian Will Durant summed it up like this:*"The Islamic
conquest of India is probably the bloodiest story in history. It is a
discouraging tale, for its evident moral is that civilization is a
precious good, whose delicate complex of order and freedom, culture and
peace, can at any moment be overthrown by barbarians invading from
without or multiplying within."*

Only off and on did this persecution have the intensity of a genocide,
but it was sustained much longer and spread out much wider
geographically than the Nazi massacre. Whereas the Germans including
most members of the Nazi party, were horrified at the Nazi crimes
against humanity within a few years, the Muslims, for whom *Gott mit
uns* (God with us) was not a slogan but a religious certainty, managed
to keep a good conscience for centuries. We will encounter similarities
as well as differences between Nazi and Islamic crimes against humanity,
but the most striking difference is definitely the persistence with
which Islamic persecutions have continued for 14 centuries. This is
because it had more spine, a more powerful psychological grip on its
adherents than Nazism.

The ideological foundation of the Islamic campaign was similar to the
Nazi ideology. The Muslium invaders (as we can read in numerous
documents which they left us, from the Quran and the Hadith onwards)
distinguished between three kinds of people: first of all the Muslims,
the Herrenvolk (master nation) to which Allah had promised the world;
secondly the Jews and Christians, who could live on under Muslim rule
but only as third-class citizens, just like the Slavic Untermenschen
(inferior people) in Hitler's planned new order, thirdly the species to
be eliminated, the real Pagans who had to disappear from the face of the
earth.

Different from Hitler's victims, the non-combatants among the
*unbelievers* often got a chance to opt for conversion rather than
death. What Mohammed (imitated by his successors) wanted, was his
recognition as God's final prophet, so he preferred people to live and
give him this recognition (by pronouncing the Islamic creed, i.e.
converting), and only those who refused him this recognition were to be
killed. Still, conversion often came too late to save defeated Pagans
from slavery. At this point, Mohammed deserves comparison with Stalin:
unlike Hitler, he killed people not for their race but for their
opinions. But one can hardly say that the one totalitarianism is better
than the other.

The Blitzkrieg of the Muslim armies in the first decades after the birth
of their religion had such enduring results precisely because the Pagan
populations in West- and Central-Asia had no choice (except death) but
to convert. Whatever the converts' own resentment, their children grew
up as Muslims and gradually identified with this religion. Within a few
generations the initial resistance against these forcible converions was
forgotten, and these areas became heidenfrei (free from Pagans, cfr.
judenfrei). In India it didn't go like that, because the Muslims needed
five centuries of attempts at invasion before they could catch hold of
large parts of India, and even then they encountered endless resistance,
so that they often had to settle for a compromise.

The Muslim conquests, down to the 16th century, were for the Hindus a
pure struggle of life and death. Entire cities were burnt down and the
populations massacred, with hundreds of thousands killed in every
campaign, and similar numbers deported as slaves. Every new invader made
(often literally) his hills of Hindus skulls. Thus, the conquest of
Afghanistan in the year 1000 was followed by the annihilation of the
Hindu population; the region is still called the Hindu Kush, i.e. *Hindu
slaughter*. The Bahmani sultans (1347-1480) in central India made it a
rule to kill 100,000 captives in a single day, and many more on other
occasions. The conquest of the Vijayanagar empire in 1564 left the
capital plus large areas of Karnataka depopulated. And so on.

As a contribution to research on the quantity of the Islamic crimes
against humanity, we may mention Prof. K.S.Lal's estimates about the
population figures in medieval India (Growth of Muslim Population in
India). According to his calculations, the Indian (subcontinent)
population decreased by 80 million between 1000 (conquest of
Afghanistan) and 1525 (end of Delhi Sultanate). More research is needed
before we can settle for a quantitatively accurate evaluation of Muslim
rule in India, but at least we know for sure that the term *crime
against humanity* is not exaggerated.

But the Indian Pagans were far too numerous and never fully surrendered.
What some call the *Muslim period* in Indian history, was in reality a
continuous war of occupiers against resisters, in which the Muslim
rulers were finally defeated in the 18th century. Against these
rebellious Pagans the Muslim rulers preferred to avoid total
confrontation, and to accept the compromise which the (in India
dominant) Hanifite school of Islamic law made possible. Alone among the
four Islamic law schools, the school of Hanifa gave Muslim rulers the
right not to offer the Pagans the sole choice between death and
conversion, but to allow them toleration as zimmis (protected ones)
living under 20 humiliating conditions, and to collect the jizya
(toleration tax) from them. Normally the zimmi status was only open to
Jews and Christians (and even that concession was condemned by jurists
of the Hanbalite school like lbn Taymiya), which explains why these
communities have survived in Muslim countries while most other religions
have not. On these conditions some of the higher Hindu castes could be
found willing to collaborate, so that a more or less stable polity could
be set up. Even then, the collaboration of the Rajputs with the Moghul
rulers, or of the Kayasthas with the Nawab dynasty, one became a smooth
arrangement when enlightened rulers like Akbar (whom orthodox Muslims
consider an apostate) cancelled these humiliating conditions and the
jizya tax.

It is because of Hanifite law that many Muslim rulers in India
considered themselves exempted from the duty to continue the genocide on
the Hindus (self-exemption for which they were persistently reprimanded
by their mullahs). Moreover, the Turkish and Afghan invaders also fought
each other, so they often had to ally themselves with accursed
unbelievers against fellow Muslims. After the conquests, Islamic
occupation gradually lost its character of a total campaign to destroy
the Pagans. Many Muslim rulers preferred to enjoy the revenue from
stable and prosperous kingdoms, and were content to extract the jizya
tax, and to limit their conversion effort to material incentives and
support to the missionary campaigns of sufis and mullahs (in fact, for
less zealous rulers, the jizya was an incentive to discourage
conversions, as these would mean a loss of revenue). The Moghul dynasty
(from 1526 onwards) in effect limited its ambition to enjoying the zimma
system, similar to the treatment of Jews and Christians in the Ottoman
empire. Muslim violence would thenceforth be limited to some
slave-taking, crushing the numerous rebellions, destruction of temples
and killing or humiliation of Brahmins, and occasional acts of terror by
small bands of raiders. A left-over from this period is the North-Indian
custom of celebrating weddings at midnight: this was a safety measure
against the Islamic sport of bride-catching.

The last jihad against the Hindus before the full establishment of
British rule was waged by Tipu Sultan at the end of the 18th century. In
the rebellion of 1857, the near-defunct Muslim dynasties (Moghuls,
Nawabs) tried to curry favour with their Hindu subjects and neighbours,
in order to launch a joint effort to re-establish their rule. For
instance, the Nawab promised to give the Hindus the Ram
Janmabhoomi/Babri Masjid site back, in an effort to quench their
anti-Muslim animosity and redirect their attention towards the new
common enemy from Britain. This is the only instance in modern history
when Muslims offered concessions to the Hindus; after that, all the
concessions made for the sake of communal harmony were a one-way traffic
from Hindu to Muslim.

After the British had crushed the rebellion of 1857, the Indian Muslims
fell into a state of depression, increasing backwardness due to their
refusal of British education, and nostalgia for the past. While the
Hindu elites took to Western notions like secular nationalism, the
Muslims remained locked up in their communal separateness. As soon as
the British drew them into the political process (founding of Muslim
League in 1906) in order to use them as a counter-weight against the
Indian National Congress, they immediately made heavy and hurtful
demands on the Hindus, such as the unlimited right to slaughter cows,
and they started working for political separation. First they obtained
separate electorates where Muslim candidates would only have to please
Muslim voters, and later they would succeed in separating a Muslim state
from India.

By the twenties, they took to the unscrupled use of muscle power in a
big way, creating street riots and outright pogroms. If Hindus
retaliated in kind, it was a welcome help in instilling the separate
communal identity into the ordinary Muslim, who would have preferred to
coexist with his Hindu neighbours in peace. By creating riots and
provoking relatiatory violence, the Muslim League managed to swing the
vast majority of the Muslim electorate towards supporting its demand for
the partition of India. The roughly 600,000 victims of the violence
accompanying the Partition were the price which the Muslim League was
willing to pay for its Islamic state of Pakistan. While every Hindu and
Muslim who took part in the violence is responsible for his own
excesses, the over-all responsibility for this mass- slaughter lies
squarely with the Muslim leadership.

After independence, the Islamic persecution of Hindus has continued in
different degrees of intensity, in Pakistan, Bangla Desh and Kashmir (as
well as heavy discrimination in Malaysia). This is not the place for
detailing these facts, which the international media have been ignoring
completely. What may cut short all denials of this continued pestering
of Hindus in Muslim states, are the resulting migration figures: in
1948, Hindus formed 23% of the population of Bangla Desh (then East
Pakistan), in 1971 the figure was down to 15%, and today it stands at
about 8%. No journalist or human rights body goes in to ask the minority
Hindus for their opinion about the treatment they get from the Muslim
authorities and populations; but they vote with their feet.

In the first months of 1990, the entire Hindu population (about 2 lakhs)
was forcibly driven from the Kashmir Valley, which used to be advertised
as a showpiece of communal harmony. Muslim newspapers and mosque
loudspeakers had warned the Hindus to leave the valley or face bullets.
After the Islamic conquest of Kabul in April 1992, 50,000 Hindus had to
flee Afghanistan (with the Indian government unwilling to extend help,
and Inder Kumar Gujral denying that the expulsion of *Indians* had a
communal motive). The pogroms in Pakistan and Bangladesh after the
demolition of the Babri Masjid left 50,000 Hindus homeless in Bangladesh
and triggered another wave of refugees from both countries towards
India. In Pakistan, 245 Hindu temples were demolished, in Bangladesh a
similar number was attacked, and even in England some temples were set
on fire by Muslim mobs. And then we haven't even mentioned the recurrent
attacks on Hindu processions and on police stations.

It will now be evident that the Hindu psyche has very little sympathy
for Islam. Doing something about this was the chief motive for
negationism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.2 NEGATIONISM AND THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS

The political context of the frist attempts at negationism was chiefly
the attempt of the independence movement, led by the Indian National
Congress, to eliminate all factors of disunity between Hindus and
Muslims. It was the time of the Khilafat movement (1919-23), the
agitation of Indian Muslims against the British take-over of the Islamic
sacred places from the deceased Ottoman empire. The khilafatists
demanded the restoration of the Ottoman caliph's authority over the
sacred places. Congress saw in this the occasion to enlist the Muslims
in the national freedom struggle against the same British imperialists.

This was a miscalculation: the khilafat movement intensified the Islamic
sense of communal identity (therefore the rejection of Indian
nationalism), and added considerably to Muslim separatism and the
Pakistan ideology. But before 1923, when the Turks themselves abolished
the caliphate so that the movement lost its raison d'etre (and got
transmuted into pogroms against the Hindus), there was great expectation
in Congress circles. Therefore, Congress people were willing to go to
any length to iron out the differences between Hindus and Muslims,
including the invention of *centuries of communal amity*.

At that time, the Congress leders were not yet actively involved in the
rewriting of history. They were satisfied to quietly ignore the true
history of Hindu-Muslim relations. After the communal riots of Kanpur in
1931, a Congress report advised the elimination of the mutual enemy-
image by changing the contents of the history-books.

The next generation of political leaders, especially the left-wing that
was to gain control of Congress in the thirties, and complete control in
the fifties, would profess negationism very explicitly. The *radical
humanist* (i.e. bourgeois Marxist) M.N. Roy wrote that Islam had
fulfilled a historic mission of equality and abolition of
discrimination, and that for this, Islam had been welcomed into India by
the lower castes. If at all any violence had occurred, it was as a
matter of justified class struggle by the *progressive forces* against
the *reactionary forces*, meaning the *fedual* Hindu upper castes.

This is a modern myth springing from an incorrect and much too grim
picture of the caste system, a back-projection of modern ideas of class
struggle, and an uncritical swallowing of contemporary Islamic
apologetics, which has incorporated some voguish socialist values. There
is no record anywhere of low-caste people *welcoming the Muslims as
liberators*. Just like in their homeland, the Muslim generals had
nothing but contempt for the common people, and all the more so because
these were idolaters. They made no distinction between rich Pagans and
poor Pagans: in the Quran, Allah had promised the same fate to all
idolaters.

By contrast, there is plenty of testimony that these common people rose
in revolt, not against their high-caste co-religionists, but against the
Muslim rulers. And not only against heavy new taxes (50% of the land
revenue for Alauddin Khilji, whom the negationists hail as the
*precursor of socialism*) and land expropriations, but especially
against the rape and abduction of women and children and the destruction
of their idols, acts which have been recorded with so much glee by the
Muslim chroniclers, without anywhere mentioning a separate treatment of
Hindu rich and Hindu poor, upper-caste Kafir or low-caste Kafir. Even
when some of the high-caste people started collaborating, the common
people gave the invaders no rest, attacking them from hiding-places in
the forests. The conversion of low-caste people only began when Muslim
rulers were safely in power and in a position to reward and encourage
conversion by means of tax discrimination, legal discrimination (win the
dispute with your neighbour if you convert), handing out posts to
converts, and simple coercion. Nevertheless, the myth which M.N. Roy
spread, has gained wide currency.

The best-known propounder of negationism was certainly Jawarharlal
Nehru. He was rather illiterate concerning Indian culture and history,
so his admirers may invoke for him the benefit of doubt. At any rate,
his writings contain some crude cases of glorification of Muslim tyrants
and concealment or denial of their crimes. Witness his assessment of
Mahmud Ghaznavi, who, according to his chronicler Utbi, sang the praise
of the temple complex at Mathura and then immediately proceeded to
destroy it. Nehru writes: *"Building interested Mahmud, and he was much
impressed by the city of Mathura near Delhi"*. About this he wrote:
*"There are here a thousand edifices as firm as the faith of the
faithful; nor is it likely that this city has attained its present
condition but at the expense of many millions of dinars, nor could such
another be constructed under a period of 200 years."* And that is all:
Nehru described the destroyer of Mathura as an admirer of Mathura,
apparently without noticing the gory sarcasm in Ghaznavi's eulogy.

Moreover, Nehru denied that Mahmud had committed his acts of destruction
out of any religious motive: *"Mahmud was not a religious man. He was a
Mohammedan, but that was just by the way. He was in the first place a
soldier, and a brilliant soldier."* That Mahmud was definitely a
religious man, and that he had religious motives for his campaigns
against the Hindus, is quite clear from Utbi's contemporary chronicle.
Every night Mahmud copied from the Quran *for the benefit of his soul*.
He risked his life several times for the sake of destroying and
desecrating temples in which there was nothing to plunder, just to
terrorize and humiliate the Pagans. In his campaigns, he never neglected
to invoke the appropriate Quran verses. In venerating Mahmud as a pious
hero of Islam, Indian Muslims are quite faithful to history: unlike
Nehru, the ordinary Muslim refuses to practise negationism.

With Nehru, negationmism became the official line of the Indian National
Congress, and after Independence also of the Indian state and
government.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.3 THE ALIGARH SCHOOL

A second factor in the genesis of negationism was the penetration of
Western ideas among a part of the Muslim elite, and especially the (in
Europe newly emerged) positive valuation of tolerance. The Islamic elite
was concentrated around two educational institutes, spearheads of the
traditional and of the (superficially) westernizing trends among Indian
Muslims. One was the theological academy at Deoband, the other the
British-oriented Aligarh Muslim university.

The Deoband school was (and is) orthodox-Islamic, and rejected modern
values like nationalism and democracy. It simply observed that India had
once been a Dar-ul-Islam (house of Islam), and that therefore it had to
be brought back under Muslim control. The fact that the majority of the
population consisted of non-Muslims was not important: in the medieval
Muslim empires the Muslims had not been in a majority either, and
moreover, demography and conversion could yet transform the Muslim
minority into a majority.

Among the scions of the Deoband school we find Maulana Maudoodi, the
chief ideologue of modern fundamentalism. He opposed the Pakistan scheme
and demanded the Islamization of all of British India. After
independence, he settled in Pakistan and agitated for the full
Islamization of the (still too British) polity. Shortly before his death
in 1979, his demands were largely met when general Zia launched his
Islamization policy.

Outsiders will be surprised to find that the same school of which
Maudoodi was a faithful spokesman, also brought forth Maulana Abul Kalam
Azad, who was Congress president for several terms and who was to become
minister of Education in free India. Understandably but unjustifiably,
Azad has often been described as as *moderate* and *nationalist* Muslim:
he rejected the Partition of India and the foundation of Pakistan, not
because he rejected the idea of a Muslim state, but because he wanted
all of India to become a Muslim state in time.

When in the forties the Partition seemed unavoidable, Azad patronized
proposals to preserve India's unity, stipulating that half of all
members of parliament and of the government had to be Muslims (then 24%
of the population), with the other half to be divided between Hindus,
Ambedkarites, Christians, and the rest. Short, a state in which Muslims
would rule and non-Muslims would be second-class citizens electorally
and politically. The Cabinet Mission Plan, proposed by the British as
the ultimate sop for the Muslim League, equally promised an effective
parity between Muslims and non-Muslims at the Central Government level
and a veto right for the Muslim minority. Without Gandhiji's and other
Congress leaders' knowing, Congress president Azad assured the British
negotiators that he would get the plan accepted by the Congress. When he
was caught in the act of lying to the Mahatma about the plan and his
assurance, he lost some credit even among the naive Hindus who
considered him a *moderate*. But he retained his position of trust in
Nehru's cabinet, and continued his work for the ultimate transformation
of India into a Muslim State.

Maulana Azad's pleas for Hindu-Muslim co-operation had an esoteric
meaning, clear enough for Muslims but invisible for wilfully gullible
non-Muslims like his colleagues in the Congress leadership. Azad
declared that Hindu-Muslim co- operation was in complete conformity with
the Prophet's vision, for *"Mohammed had also made a treaty with the
Jews of Madina"*. He certainly had, but the practical impact of this
treaty was that within a few years, two of the three Jewish clans in
Medina had ben chased away, and the third clan had been massacred to the
last man (the second clan had only been saved by the intervention of
other Medinese leaders, for Mohammed had wanted to kill them too).
Maulana Azad could mention Mohammed's treaty with the Jews as a model
for Hindu-Muslim co-operation only because he was confident that few
Hindus were aware of the end of the story, and that better-informed
Hindus honoured a kind of taboo on criticism of Islam and its Prophet.

This parenthesis about Maulana Azad may help clear up some illusions
which Hindus and Westerners fondly entertain about the possibility of
Islamic moderacy. The Deoband school was as fundamentalist in its Azad
face as it was in its Maudoodi heart, and its spokesmen had no problems
with the horrors of Islamic history, nor did they make attempts to
rewrite it. That Muslims had persecuted and massacred Hindus, counted as
the fulfilment of Allah's salvation plan to transform the whole world
into a Dar-ul-Islam. As Mohammed Iqbal wrote: *"All land belongs to the
Muslims, because it belongs to their God."* (Iqbal would, however, end
up in the Aligarh camp, cfr. infra) Maulana Azad shared this view of
history. He condemned Moghul emperor Akbar's tolerant rule as the
near-suicide of Indian Islam, and praised fanatics like the theologian
Ahmad Sirhindi, who through his opposition to Akbar's tolerance had
brought the Moghul dynasty back on the right track of Hind-persecution.

Unlike the Deoband school, the Aligarh school tried to reconcile Islam
with modern culture. It understood the principles of democracy and
majority rule, and recognized that a modern democracy would be
incompatible with the transformation of India into an Islamic state as
long as Muslims only formed a minority. The tactical opposition against
the disadvantageous system of democracy was underpinned ideologically by
Mohammed Iqbal, who criticized it as a system in which *heads are
counted but not weighed*. But Iqbal understood that democracy was the
wave of the near future, and, together with more modern and sincerely
democracy-minded people in the Muslim intelligentsia, he faced the
logical consequence that the Muslims had to give up the ambition of
gaining control over all of India immediately. Instead they should
create a separate state out of the Muslim-majority areas of India:
Pakistan. The ideal of Pakistan was launched by Iqbal in 1930, and in
1940 it became the official political goal of the Muslim League. Aligarh
Muslim University has often been described as the *cradle of Pakistan*.

From their better knowledge of and appreciation for modern culture, the
Aligarh thinkers accepted the modern value of religious tolerance. Not
to the extent that they would be willing to co-exist with the Hindus in
a single post-colonial state, but at least to this extent that they
wanted to do something about the imge of intolerance which Islam had
come to carry. Around 1920 Aligarh historian Mohammed Habib launched a
grand project to rewrite the history of the Indian religious conflict.
The main points of his version of history are the following.

Firstly, it was not all that serious. One cannot fail to notice that the
Islamic chroniclers (including some rulers who wrote their own
chronicles, like Teimur and Babar) have described the slaughter of
Hindus, the abduction of their women and children, and the destruction
of their places of worship most gleefully. But, according to Habib,
these were merely exaggerations by court poets out to please their
patrons. One wonders what it says about Islamic rulers that they felt
flattered by the bloody details which the Muslims chroniclers of Hindu
persecutions have left us. At any rate, Habib has never managed to
underpin this convenient hypothesis with a single fact.

Secondly, that percentage of atrocities on Hindus which Habib was
prepared to admit as historical, is not to be attributed to the impact
of Islam, but to other factors. Sometimes Islam was used as a
justification post factum, but this was deceptive. In reality economic
motives were at work. The Hindus amassed all their wealth in temples and
therefore Muslim armies plundered these temples.

Thirdly, according to Habib there was also a racial factor: these
Muslims were mostly Turks, savage riders from the steppes who would need
several centuries before getting civilized by the wholesome influence of
Islam. Their inborn barbarity cannot be attributed to the doctrines of
Islam.

Finally, the violence of the Islamic warriors was of minor importance in
the establishment of Islam in India. What happened was not so much a
conquest, but a *shift in public opinion*: when the urban working-class
heard of Islam and realized it now had a choice between Hindu law
(smrti) and Muslim law (shariat), it chose the latter.

Mohammed Habib's excise in history-rewriting cannot stand the test of
historical criticism on any score. We can demonstrate this with the
example of Sultan Mahmud Ghaznavi (997-1030), already mentioned, who
carried out a number of devastating raids in Sindh, Gujrat and Punjab.
This Ghaznavi was a Turk, certainly, but in many respects he was not a
barbarian: he patronized arts and literature (including the great
Persian poet Firdausi, who would end up in trouble because his patron
suspected him of apostasy, and the Persian but Arabic-writing historian
Albiruni) and was a fine calligraphist himself. The undeniable barbarity
of his anti-Hindu campaigns cannot be attributed to his ethnic stock.
His massacres and acts of destruction were merely a replay of what the
Arab Mohammed bin Qasim had wrought in Sindh in 712-15. He didn't care
for material gain: he left rich mosques untouched, but poor Hindu
temples met the same fate at his hands as the richer temples. He turned
down a Hindu offer to give back a famous idol in exchange for a huge
ransom: *"I prefer to appear on Judgement Day as an idol-breaker rather
than an idol-seller."* The one explanation that covers all the relevant
facts, is that he was driven to his barbarous acts by his ideological
allegiance to Islam.

There is no record of his being welcomed by urban artisans as a
liberator from the oppressive Hindu social system. On the contrary, his
companion Albiruni testifies how all the Hindus had an inveterate
aversion for all Muslims.

Another ruler, Firuz Shah Tughlaq (1351-88), personally confirms that
the descruction of Pagan temples was done out of piety, not out of
greed: *"The Hindus had accepted the zimmi status and the concomitant
jizya tax in exchange for safety. But now they built idol temples in the
city, in defiance of the Prophet's law which forbids such temples. Under
divine leadership I destroyed these buildings, and killed the leaders of
idolatry, and the common followers received physical chastisement, until
this abomination had been banned completely."* When Firuz heard that a
Pagan festival was going on, he reacted forcefully: *"My religious
feelings exhorted me to finish off this scandal, this insult to Islam.
On the day of the festival I went there myself, I ordered the execution
of the leaders and practitioners of this abomination... I destroyed
their idol temples and built mosques in their places."*

The contention that *Hindus stored their riches in temples* is
completely plucked out of thin air (though some of the richer temples
contained golden statues, which were temple property): it is one among
many ad hoc hypotheses which make Habib's theory a methodologically
indefensible construction. In fact, Habib is proclaining a grand
conspiracy theory: all the hundreds of Islamic authors who declared
unanimously that what they reported was a war of Islam against
Infidelity, would all have co-ordinated one single fake scenario to
deceive us.

This is not to say that the entire report which the Muslim chroniclers
have left us, should be accepted at face value. For instance, writers
like Ghaznavi's contemporary Utbi give the impression that the raids on,
and ultimate conquest of Hindustan were a walk-over. Closer study of all
the source material shows that the Muslim armies had a very tough time
in India. From Muslim chronicles one only gets a faint glimpse of the
intensity with which the Hindus kept on offering resistance, and of the
precariousness of the Muslim grip on Hindistan through the *Muslim
period*. The Muslim chroniclers have not been caught in the act of lying
very often, but some of them distort the proportions of victory and
defeat a bit. This is quite common among partisan historians everywhere,
and a modern historian knows how to take such minor distortions into
account. The unanimous and entirely coherent testimony that the wars in
Hindustan were religious wars of Muslims against Kafirs is a different
matter altogether: denying this testimony is not a matter of small
adjustments, but of replacing the well-attested historical facts with
their diametrical opposite.

Habib tried to absolve the ideology (Islam) of the undeniable facts of
persecution and massacre of the Pagans by blaming individuals (the
Muslims). The sources however point to the opposite state of affairs:
Muslim fanatics were merely faithful executors of Quranic injunctions.
Not the Muslims are guilty, but Islam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.4 NEGATIONISM RAMPANT: THE MARXISTS

The Aligarh school has been emulated on a large scale. Soon its torch
was taken over by Marxist historians, who were building a reputation for
unscrupled history-rewriting in accordance with the party-line.

In this context, one should know that there is a strange alliance
between the Indian Communist parties and the Muslim fanatics. In the
forties the Communists gave intellectual muscle and political support to
the Muslim League's plan to partition India and create an Islamic state.
After independence, they successfully combined (with the tacit support
of Prime minister Nehru) to sabotage the implementation of the
constitutional provision that Hindi be adopted as national language, and
to force India into the Soviet-Arab front against Israel. Ever since,
this collaboration has continued to their mutual advantage as
exemplified by their common front to defend the Babri Masjid, that
symbol of Islamic fanaticism. Under Nehru's rule these Marxists acquired
control of most of the educational and research institutes and policies.

Moreover, they had an enormous mental impact on the Congress apparatus:
even those who formally rejected the Soviet system, thought completely
in Marxist categories. They accepted, for instance, that religious
conflicts can be reduced to economic and class contradictions. They also
adopted Marxist terminology, so that they always refer to conscious
Hindus as *the communal forces* or *elements* (Marxism dehumanizes
people to impersonal pawns, or *forces*, in the hands of god History).
The Marxist historians had the field all to themselves, and they set to
work to *decommunalize Indian history-writing*, i.e. to erase the
importance of Islam as a factor of conflict.

In *Communalism and the Writing of indian History*, Romila Thapar,
Harbans Mukhia and Bipan Chandra, professors at Jawaharlal Nehry
University (JNU, the Mecca of *secularism* and negationism) in Delhi,
write that the interpretation of medieval wars as religious conflicts is
in fact a back- projection of contemporary religious conflict
artificially created for political purposes. In Bipan Chandra's famous
formula, *communalism is not a dinosaur*, it is a strictly modern
phenomenon. They explicitly deny that before the modern period there
existed such a thing as Hindu identity or Muslim identity. Conflicts
could not have been between Hindus and Muslims, only between rulers or
classes who incidentally also belonged to one religious community or the
other. They point to the conflicts within the communities and to
alliances across community boundaries.

It is of course a fact that some Hindus collaborated with the Muslim
rulers, but that also counted for the British colonial rulers, who are
for that no less considered as foreign oppressors. For that matter, in
the Jewish ghetto in Warsaw the Nazis employed Jewish guards, in their
search for absconding Jews they employed Jewish informers, and in their
policy of deportation they even sought the co-operation of the Zionist
movement: none of this can disprove Nazi- Jewish enmity. It is also a
fact that the Muslim rulers sometimes made war among each other, but
that was equally true for Portuguese, French and British colonizers, who
fought some wars on Indian territory: they were just as much part of a
single colonial movement with a common colonial ideology, and all the
brands of colonialism were equally the enemies of the indian freedom
movement. Even in the history of the Crusades, that paradigm of
religious war, we hear a lot of battles between one Christian-Muslim
coalition and another: these do not falsify the over-all
characterization of the Crusades as a war between Christians and Muslims
(triggered by the destruction of Christian churches by Muslims).

After postulating that conflicts between Hindus and Muslims as such were
non-existent before the modern period, the negationists are faced with
the need to explain how this type of conflict was born after centuries
of a misunderstood non-existence. The Marxist explanation is a
conspiracy theory: the separate communal identity of Hindus and Muslims
is an invention of the sly British colonialists. They carried on a
*divide and rule* policy, and therefore they incited the communal
separateness. As the example par excellence, prof. R.S. Sharma mentions
the 19th -century 8-volume work by Elliott and Dowson, *The History of
India as Told by its own Historians*. This work does indeed paint a very
grim picture of Muslim hordes who attack the Pagans with merciless
cruelty. But this picture was not a concoction by the British
historians: as the title of their work says, they had it all from
indigenous historiographers, most of them Muslims.

Yet, the negationist belief that the British newly created the
Hindu-Muslim divide has become an article of faith with everyone in
India who calls himself a *secularist*. It became a central part of the
negationist argument in the debate over the Ram Janmabhoomi/Babri Masjid
issue. Time and again, the negationist historians (including Bipan
Chandra, K.N. Panikkar, S. Gopal, Romila Thapar, Harbans Mukhia, Irfan
Habib, R.S. Sharma, Gyanendra Pandey, Sushil Srivastava, Asghar Ali
Engineer, as well as the Islamic politician Syed Shahabuddin) have
asserted that the tradition according to which the Babri mosque forcibly
replaced a Hindu temple, is nothing but a myth purposely created in the
19th century. To explain the popularity of the myth even among local
Muslim writers in the 19th century, most of them say it was a deliberate
British concoction, spread in the interest of the *divide and rule*-
policy. They affirm this conspiracy scenario without anyhow citing, from
the copious archives which the British administration in India has left
behind, any kind of positive indication for their convenient hypothesis
- let alone the rigorous proof on which a serious historian would base
his assertions, especially in such controversial questions.

They have kept on taking this stand even after five documents by local
Muslims outside the British sphere in the 19th century, two documents by
Muslim officials from the early 18th century, and two documents by
European travellers from the 18th and 17th century, as well as the
extant revenue records, all confirming the temple destruction scenario,
were brought to the public's notice in 1990. In their pamphlets and
books, the negationists simply kept on ignoring most or all of this
evidence, defiantly disregarding historical fact as well as academic
deontology.

Concerning the Ayodhya debate, it is worth recalling that the
negationists have also resorted to another tactic so familiar to our
European negationists, and to all defenders of untenable positions:
personal attacks on their opponents, in order to pull the public's
attention away from the available evidence. In December 1990, the
leading JNU historians and several allied scholars, followed by the herd
of secularist penpushers in the Indian press, have tried to raise
suspicions against the professinal honesty of Prof. B.B. Lal and Dr.
S.P. Gupta, the archaeologists who have unearthed evidence for the
existence of a Hindu temple at the Babri Masjid site. Rebuttals by these
two and a number of other archaelogists hae received coverage in the
secularist press.

In February 1991, Irfan Habib give his infamous speech to the Aligarh
Muslim University historians, in which he made personal attacks on the
scholars who took part in the government-sponsored debate on Ayodhya in
defence of the Hindu claim, and on Prof. B.B. Lal. In this case, the
weekly Sunday did publish a lengthy reply by the deputy superintending
archaeologist of the Archaeological Survey of India, A.K. Sinha. The
contents of this reply are very relevant, but it is a bit technical
(i.e. not adapted to the medium of a weekly for the general public) and
written in clumsy English, which gives a poor over-all impression.

Actually, I speculate that the Sunday-editor may well have selected it
for publication precisely because of these flaws. The practice is
well-known in the treatment of *letters to the editor*: those defending
the *wrong* viewpoint only get published if they are somewhat funny or
otherwise harmless. I cannot be sure about this particular case, but it
is a general fact that from their power positions, the negationists use
every means at their disposal to create a negative image for the Hindu
opponents of Islamic imperialism, including the selective highlighting
of the most clumsy and least convincing formulations of the Hindu
viewpoint.

In his Babri Masjid Ram Janmabhoomi Controversy, the Islamic apologist
Ali Asghar Engineer has also selected a few incomplete and less
convincing statements of the Hindu position, in order to create a
semblance of willingness to hear the Hindu viewpoint while at the same
time denying the Hindu side any publicity for its strongest arguments.
He has kept the most decisive pieces of evidence entirely out of the
readers' view, but has covered this deliberate distortion of the picture
behind a semblance of even- handedness. In *Anatomy of a Confrontation*,
the JNU historians do not even mention the powerful argumentation by
Prof. A.R. Khan, while Prof. Harsh Narain and Mr. A.K. Chatterjee's
presentation authentic testimonies (in Indian Express, republished by
Voice of India in *Hindu Temples, What happened to Them* and in *History
vs. Casuistry*) are only mentioned but not detailed and discussed, let
alone refuted; but clumsy RSS pamphlets and improvised statements by BJP
orators are quoted and analyzed at length.

The concluding paragraph of A.K.Sinha's rebuttal to Irfan Habib's speech
points out the contradiction between the earlier work of even Marxist
historians about ancient India (in which they treat the epics as sources
of history, not mere fable) and their recent Babri-politicized stand:
*"Today, even taking the name of Mahabharata and Ramayana is considered
as anti-national and communal by the communist leaders, Babri Masjid
Action Committee historians and the pseudo-secularists. What do they
propose to do with all that has been published so far in \[this\]
context by the Marxists themselves, notably D.D. Kosambi, R.S. Sharma,
Romila Thapar, K.M. Shrimali, D.N. Jha and others? I have been thinking
about the behavious of our Marxist friends and historians, their
unprovoked slander campaign against many colleagues, hurling abuses and
convicting anyone and everyone even before the charges could be framed
and proved. Their latest target is \[so\] sobre and highly respected a
person as prof. B.B. Lal, who has all his life (now he is nearing 70)
never involved himself in petty politics or in the groupism \[which is\]
so favourite a sport among the so- called Marxist intellectuals of this
country. But then \[slander\] is a well-practised art among the
Marxists."*

Another trick which a student of Holocaust negationism will readily
recognize in the pro-Babri campaign of the Indian negationists, is that
truly daring form of amnipulation: selectively quoting an authority to
make him say the opposite of his own considered opinion. When the JNU
historians started slandering Prof. B.B. Lal as a turncoat hired by the
VHP, this was a panic reaction after their earlier tactic had been
exposed (though only in Indian Express, but the negationist front will
not tolerate even one hole in the cordon of information control). Until
then, they had been using B.B. Lal's fame to suport their own position
that the Babri Masjid had not replaced a temple.

In their pamphlet *The Political Abuse of History*, the JNU historians
had quoted from a brief summary, published by the Archaeological Survey
of India in 1980, of Prof. B.B. Lal's report on his excavations in
Ayodhya and other Ramayana sites. They knew this report perfectly well,
for they had gleefully quoted its finding that the excavations just near
the Babri Masjid had not yielded any remains pre- dating the 9th century
BC. But then they had gone on to state that there was no archeological
indication for a pre- Masjid temple on that controversial site at all,
even when the same report had cursorily mentioned the remains of a
building dated to the 11th century AD. Later on, they have quoted the
same summary as saying that *the later period was devoid of any
interest*, suggesting that nothing of any importance dating from the
medieval period had been found.

In fact, this remark only proves that the ASI summarizer saw no reason
to give (or saw reasons not to give) details about the *uninteresting*
but nonetheless existing medieval findings. But in autumn 1990, some of
these details have been made public and they turned out to be of
decisive importance in the Ram Janmabhoomi debate. Prof.K.N. Panikkar
(in *Anatomy of a Confrontation*) suggests that, if these relevant
details were not recently *thought up to suit the theories of the RSS*,
they must have been *deliberately concealed at that time* (late
seventies) by the ASI summarizer. The latter possibility means that
negationists are active in the ASI publishing section, *editing*
archaeological reports to suit the negationist campaign. The implied
allegation is so serious that K.N. Panikkar expects the reader to assume
the other alternative, viz. an RSS concoction. But he may well have hit
the nail on its head with his suggestion that negationists in the ASI
are doing exactly the same thing that they are doing in all Indian
institutions and media: misusing their positions to distort information.

At any rate, the details of the full report were given in articles by
Dr. S.P. Gupta and by Prof. B.B. Lal himself (and independently by other
archaeologists in talks and letters to Indian Express) in late 1990. The
pillar-bases of an 11th century building, aligned to the Babri Masjid
walls, were presented by Prof. B.B. Lal and Dr. S.P.Gupta in separate
filmed interviews with the BBC. There could be no doubt about it
anymore: Prof. B.B. Lal had arrived at a conclusion opposite to the one
ascribed to him by a number of Marxist historians (not only from JNU).

That is why is early December 1990 several of the most vocal Marxist
historians suddenly took to slander and accused Prof. B.B. Lal of having
changed his opinion in order to suit the VHP's political needs. Now that
they could no longer use Prof. Lal's reputation for their own ends, they
decided to try and destroy it. In the case of Dr. S.P. Gupta, they have
not taken back their ridiculous allegation that he had falsely claimed
participation in the Ramayana sites excavations. But with a big name
like B.B. Lal, an impeccable academic of world fame, they had to be
careful, because slander against him might somehow backfire. That is why
they have nor pressed the point, and why a number of Marxist historians
and other participants in the Ayodhya debate have quitely reverted to
the earlier tactic of selectively quoting from the ASI summary of Prof.
B.B. Lal's report, and acting as if the great archaeologist has
supported and even proven their own position. As the press had given
minimum coverage to B.B. Lal and S.P. Gupta's revelations, many people
would not suspect the truth.

Another trick from the negationists' book that has been very much in
evidence during the Ayodhya debate, consists in focusing all attention
on the pieces of evidence given by those who upheld the historical
truth,, and trying to find fault with them as valid evidence. Thus, at
the press conference (19 Dec. 1992) where Dr. S.P. Gupta and other
historians presented photographs of an inscription found during the
demolition of the Babri Masjid, which proved once more that a temple had
stood on the site, and that it was specifically a *birthplace* temple
for *"Vishnu Hari who defeated Bali and the ten-headed king
\[Ravana\]"*, some journalists heckled the speakers with remarks that
*"because of the demolition, the inscription was not in situ and
therefore not valid as evidence"*, and similar feats of petty
fault-finding.

A few days later, a group of 70 archaeologists and historians, mostly
names who had not taken a prominent role in this debate so far, brought
shame on themselves by pronouncing judgement on this piece of evidence
without even seeing, let alone studying it. They demanded not that the
government look into this new evidence, as would be proper for
representatives of the scientific spirit, but that it trace down from
which museum the *planted evidence* had been stolen and brought to
Ayodhya. In doing history falsification, it is best to remain on the
attack, and to put the bonafide historians on the defensive by accusing
them first.

After dozens of pieces of evidence for the *forcible replacement of
temple with mosque* scenario had been given, the Babri negationists had
never come up with a single piece of counter- evidence (i.e. positive
evidence for an alternative scenario); they could not do better than
keep silent over the most striking evidence, and otherwise scream at the
top of their voice that evidence A did not count, evidence B was not
valid, evidence C was flawed, evidence D was fabricated. In 1992 alone,
in the clearing operations near the Janmabhoomi site in June, during
several visits of experts, and during the demolition on 6 December, more
than 200 pieces of archaeological evidence for the pre-existent
Vaishnava temple had been found, but these 70 scholars preferred to
disregard all them. This time, the suggestion was that in the middle of
the kar seva, the inscription had been planted there. You could just as
well join the Holocaust negationists and say that the gas chambers found
in 1945 had been a Hollywood mise-en-scene. Picking at a single
testimony as if the whole case depends on it has been a favourite
technique of the negationists to distract attention from the larger
picture, to make people forget that even if this one piece of evidence
were flawed, this would not invalidate the general conclusions built on
a whole corpus of evidence.

A final point of similarity between the Marxist involvement in the Babri
Masjid case and the techniques of Holocaust negationism is the fact that
there was a Babri Masjid debate in the first place. Indeed, postulating
doubt and the need for a debate is the first step of denial. The
tradition that the Babri Masjid had forcibly replaced a temple was
firmly established ad supported by sources otherwise accepted as
authoritative; when it was challenged, this was not on the basis of
newfound material which justified a re-examination of the historical
position. The correct procedure would have been that the deniers of the
established view come up with some positive evidence for their
innovative position: until then, there was simply no reason for a
debate. Instead, they started demanding that the other side give proof
of what had been known all along, and forced a debate on something that
was really a matter of consensus. Subsequently, instead of entering the
ring, attacking or countering their opponents' case with positive
evidence of their own, the challengers set themselves up as judges of
the other side's argumentation. This is indeed reminiscent of the
negationist Institute for Historical Review announcing a prize for
whomever could prove that the Holocaust had taken place.

There is yet another trick from the negationist arsenal which has been
tried in India: find a witness from the victims' camp to testify to the
aggressor's innocence. Of course there are not witnesses around who
lived through Aurangzeb's terror, but there are many who lived through
the horrors of Partition. It is nobody's case that the killings wich
Jinnah considered a fair price for his Muslim state, never took place.
But the negationists have spent a lot of effort on proving the next best
thing: that the guilt was spread evently among Hindus and Muslims.

The Communist novelist Bhishma Sahni has used the novel Tamas to point
the Hindus as the villains in the Partition violence. The interesting
thing is that Bhishma Sahni's own family was among the Hindu refugees
hounded out or Pakistan. His anti-Hindu bias, coming from a man who
would have more reason for an anti-Muslim animus, is a gift from heaven
for the Hindu-baiters. Marxist Professor Bipan Chandra parades a similar
character in his paper: Communalism - the Way Out (published together
with two lectures by KJhushwant Singh as: Many Faces of Communalism).
One of his students had survived the terror of Partition in Rawalpindi,
losing 7 family members. Bud he did not have any animus against the
Muslims, for he said: *"Very early I realized that my parents had not
been killed by the Muslims, they had been kiled by communalism."* Coming
from a victim of Muslim violence, this is excellent material for those
who want to apportion equal blame to Hindus nd Muslims.

Of course, Bipan Chandra's student was right. The cause of Partition and
of its accompanying violence was not *the Muslims*, but *communalism*,
i.e. the belief that people with a common religion form a separate
social and political entity. This belief is not fostered by Hinduism,
but it is central to Islam ever since Mohammed founded his first Islamic
state in Medina. It is true that some Hindu groups (most conspicuously
the Sikhs) have recently adopted some Islamic elements, including the
*communalist* belief that a religious group forms a separate nation
entitled to a separate state. But the source of this *communalist*
poison in India is and remains Islam. Therefore, Bipan Chandra's student
has in fact said: *"My family was not killed by the Muslims, but by
Islam."*

It is a different matter that Muslims are the most likely carriers of
the Islamic disease called communalism, and that they had massively
voted for the commnalist project of creating a separate Muslim state.
The culprit was Islam, and concerning the positions of the Muslims in
the light of the fanatical nature of Islam, I would quote Bipan
Chandra's own simile for understanding the difference between
*communalism* and its adherents: when a patient suffers from a terrible
disease, you don't kill him, but cure him. The victims of Islamic
indoctrination should not be the target of Hindu revenge, as they were
in large numbers in 1947. Don't kill the patient, kill the disease.
Remove Islam from the Muslims' minds through education and India's
*communal* problem will be as good as solved.

At this point we may take a second look at the Marxist position,
mentioned above, that *the Hindu community* is a recent invention. The
observations which I just made concerning the Islamic provenance of
*communalism* might seem to confirm that there was no Hindu *communal
identity*. However, the authentic sources from the medieval period are
unanimous about the sharp realization of a separate communal identity as
Muslims and as Hindus, overwhelmingly on the Muslim side, but also on
the Hindu side. We know for instance that Shivaji, who turned the tide
of the Muslim offensive in the late 17th centure, was a conscious
partisan of an all-Hindu liberation war against Muslim rule (Hindu Pad
Padashahi). The same counts for Rana Pratap and many other Hindu
leaders, and there cannot be any doubt that the Vijayanagar empire was
conscious of its role as the last fortress of Hindu civilization.

It is true that some Hindu kings attacked neighbouring Hindu states in
the back when these were attacked by the Muslim invaders. They were at
first not aware that these Islamic newcomers were a common enemy,
motivated by hatred against all non-Muslims; but their lack of insight
into the character of Islam in no way disproves their awareness of a
common Hindu identity. The fact that they were acutely aware of their
internal political rivalries, does not exclude that they were aware of a
more fundamental common identity, which was not at stake in these
internecine feuds, but which they defended together once they realized
that it was the target of this new kind of ideologically motivated
aggressor, Islam. Brothers are aware that they have a lot in common, and
this is not disproven by the fact that, when left to themselves, they
also quarrel with each other.

If at all some Hindus had at first only been conscious of their own
caste or sect rather than of the Hindu commonwealth, the Muslim
persecutions of all Hindus without distinction certainly made them aware
of their common identity and interest. So, if the Marxists perforce want
to deny the common culture and value system underlying the diversity of
the Hindu commonwealth, then let them apply some of their own dialectics
instead. *"It is in their common struggle aginst the Islamic aggressors,
that the disparate sections of the native Indian society have forged
their common identity as Hindus"*: I do not agree with this statement
which posits a negative and reactive basis for a common Hindu identity,
but it must be accepted if one labours under the assumption that there
never had been a positive common identity before. It is unreasonable to
expect the Indian Pagans to be lumped together as *Hindus* for centuries
on end, to be uniformly made the target of one neverending aggression by
Islam, to be subjected to the same humiliations and the same jizya tax,
and yet not become conscious of a common interest. This common interest
would then give rise to unifying cultural superstructure. That is how
the sustained and uniform Islamic attack on all India Pagans would
inevitably have given rise to at least a measure of common Hindu
identity if this had not previously existed.

In his *Communal History and Rama's Ayodhya* (1990), the Marxist
Professor R.S. Sharma argues that the medieval Hindus did not see *the
Muslims* as a distinct religious entity, but as an ethnic group, *the
Turks*. His proof: the Gahadvala dynasty levied a tax called
Turushkadanda, *tax financing the war effort against the Turks*. But
this does not prove what Sharma thinks it proves.

The Muslims called the Pagans of India sometimes *Kafirs*, unbelievers,
i.e. a religious designation; but often they called them *Hindus*
inhabitants of Hindustan, i.e. an ethnic-geographical designation (from
Hind, the Persian equivalent of Sindh). And they gave religious contents
to this geographical term, which it has kept till today: so it is
correct that the *Hindus* never defined themselves as *Hindus*, as this
was the Persian and later the Muslim term for the Indian Pagans adhering
to Sanatana Dharma. But that was only a terminological matter, the
fundamental religious unity of the Sanatana Dharmis was just as much a
fact. Similarly, the Hindus called these newcomers Turks, but this does
not exclude recognition of their religious specificity. On the contrary,
even Teimur the Terrible, who made it absolutely clear in his memoirs
that he came to India to wage a religious war against the Pagans, and
who freed the Muslim captives from a conquered city before putting the
Hindu remainder to the sword, referred to his own forces as *the Turks*.
Conversely, the Hindus describe as the typical *Turkish* behavious
pattern that which is enjoined by Islam.

While it is true that the Hindus have been much too slow (till today) in
studying the religious foundation of the barbaric behavious which they
experienced at the hands of the *Turushkas*, at least they soon found
out that for these invaders religion was the professed motive of their
inhuman behavious. Prof. Sharma's piece of evidence, the institution of
a Turushkandana, does however prove very clearly that the Islamic threat
was extraordinary: the normal armed forces and war credits were not
sufficient to deal with this threat which was in a class by itself.

The original source material leaves us in no doubt that conflicts often
erupted on purely religious grounds, even against the political and
economical interests of the contending parties. The negationists' tactic
therefore consists in keeping this original testimony out of view. A
good example is Prof. Gyanendra Pandey's recent book, *The Construction
of Communalism in Colonial North India*. As the title clearly says,
Pandey asserts that *communalism* (the Hindu-Muslim conflict) had been
*constructed* by the British for colonial purposes anmd out of colonial
prejuidices, was later interiorized by Indians looking for new,
politically profitable forms of organization in modern colonial society.
This is like saying that anti-Judaism is a construction of modern
capitalists to divide the working class (the standard Marxist
explanation for all kinds of racism), while concealing the copious
medieval testimony of anti-Judaism on undeniably non-capitalist grounds.
Prof. Pandey effectively denies a millenniumful of testimonies to
Islamic persecution of the Indian (*Hindu*) Kafirs.

Another example is prof. K.N. Panikkar's work on the *Moplah
rebellion*,,, a pofgrom against the Hindus by the Malabar (Kerala)
Muslims in the margin of the khilafat movement in 1921 (official death
toll 2,339). Panikkar takes the orthodox Marxist position that this was
not a communal but a class conflict, not between Hindus and Muslims but
between workers who happened to be Muslims and landlords who happened to
be Hindus. In reality the communal character of the massacre was so
evident that even Mahatma Gandhi recognized it as terrible blow for his
ideal of Hindu-Muslim unity. It is quite possible that the occasion was
used to settle scores with landlords and money- lenders (that stereotype
of anti-Hindu as well as of anti- Jewish sloganeering), but the mullahs
exhorted their flock to attack all Hindus, and added in so many words
that not only the landlords but all the Hindus were their enemies. The
poison of Islamic fanaticism is such that it turns any kind of conflict
into an attack on the non-Muslims.

More Marxist wisdom we encounter in Romila Thapar's theory (in her
contribution to S. Gopal's book on the Ayodhya affair, Anatomy of a
Confrontation) that the current Hindu movement wants to unite all
Hindus, not because the Hindus feel besieged by hostile forces, not
because they have a memory of centuries of jihad, but because *"a
monolithic religion is more compatible with capitalism"* (to borrow the
formulation of a reviewer). She thinks that the political Hindu movement
is merely a concoction by Hindu capitalists, or in her own words *"part
of the attempt to redefine Hinduism as an ideology for modernization by
the middle class"*, in which *"modernization is seen as linked to the
growth of capitalism"*. She reads the mind behind the capitalist
conspiracy to reform Hinduism thus: *"Capitalism is often believed to
thrive among Semitic religions such as Christianity and Islam. The
argument would then run that if capitalism is to succeed in India, then
Hinduism would also have to be moulded in a Semitic form"*.

It is always interesting to see how Communists presuppose the
superiority of Hinduism by denouncing Hindu militancy as the
*semiticization* or *islamization* of Hinduism. But the point is that
the political mobilization of Hindu society under the increasing
pressure of hostile forces is explained away as merely a camouflage of
economic forces. One smiles about such simplistic subjection of
unwilling facts of Marxist dogma. Especially because such *analyses*
were still being made in 1991, and are still being made today: in India
it has not yet dawned on the dominant intelligentsia that Marxism has
failed not only as a political and economical system, but also as a
socialogical model of explanation. On the contrary, Indian Marxists even
manage to make foreign correspondents for non- Marxist media swallow
their analysis, e.g. after the Babri Masjid demolition, even the
conservative Frankfurter Allgemeine Seitung explained *Hindu
fundamentalism* in the same socio-economical terms, complete with *urban
traders* who are *looking for an identity* etc.

Incidentally, Romila Thapar is right in observing that certain Hindu
revivalists ae trying to *"find parallels with the Semitic religions as
if these parallels are necessary for the future of Hinduism"* (though
her attempt to force the Ram Janmabhoomi movement into this mould, with
Rama being turned into a *prophet* and the Ramayana into the sole
revealed Scripture etc., is completely unfounded and another pathetic
case of trying to force unwilling facts into a pre- conceived scheme).
She sounds like favouring a renewed emphasis on *"the fact that the
religious experience of Indian civilization and of religious sects which
are bunched together under the label of *Hindu* are distinctively
different from that of the Semitic"*.

It is true that some Hindu revivalist movements have tried to redefine
Hinduism in terms borrowed from monotheism, with rudiments of notions
like an infallible Scripture (*back to the Vedas*: the Arya Samaj),
iconoclastic monotheism (Arya Samaj, Akali neo-Sikhs), or a monolithic
hierarchic organization (the RSS). But the reason for this development
cannot with any stretch of the imagination be deduced from the
exigencies of capitalism. An honest analysis of this tendency in
Hinduism to imitate the Christian-Islamic model will demonstrate that a
psychology of tactical imitation as a way of self-defence against these
aggressive *Semitic* religions was at work. The tendency cannot possibly
be reduced to the socio- economical categories dear to Marxism, but
springs from the terror which Islam (not fedualism or capitalism, but
Islam) had struck in the Hindu mind, and which was subsequently
fortified with an intellectual dimension by the Christian missionary
propaganda against *primitive polytheism*. Those Hindus who were waging
the struggle for survival against the Islamic and Christian onslaught
have come to resemble their enemies a bit, and have interiorized a lot
of the aggressors' contempt for typical Hindu things, such as idol-
worship, doctrinal pluralism, social decentralization. It is for Hindu
society to reflect on whether this imitation was the right course, and
whether it has not been self- defeating in some respects.

At any rate, the very existence of this psychological need among some
militant Hindus to imitate the prophetic- monotheistic religions is a
symptom of an already old polarization between Hinduism and aggressive
monotheism, especially Islam. Bipan Chandra's chronology of
*communalism* as a 20th century phenomenon cannot explain the communal
polarization of which Sikhism and the Arya Samaj were manifestations.
These can only be understood from the centuries oif active hostility
between Islam and Hinduism. Shivaji was not a herald of capitalism, nor
a product of British *divide and rule* policy, but a participant in an
ongoing war between Hindu civilization and Islamic aggression.

Since the 1950s the history market is being flooded with publications
conveying the negationist version to a greater or lesser extent. The
public is fed negationist TV serials like *The Sword of Tipu Sultan*, an
exercise in whitewashing the arch-fanatic last Muslim ruler. Most
general readers and many serious students only get to know about Indian
history through negationist glasses. In India, the negationists have
managed what European negationists can only dream of: turn the tables on
honest historians and marginalize them. People who have specialized in
adapting history to the party-line, are lecturing others about the
*political abuse of history*. By contrast, geunine historians who have
refused to tamper with the record of Islam (like Jadunath Sarkar, R.C.
Majumdar, K.S. Lal) are held us as examples of *communalist
historywriting* in textbooks which are required reading in all history
departments in India.

But the negationists are not satisfied with seeing their own version of
the facts being repeated in more and more books and papers. They also
want to prevent other versions from reaching the public. Therefore, in
1982 the National Council of Educational Research and Training issued a
directive for the rewriting of schoolbooks. Among other things, it
stipulated that: *"Characterization of the medieval period as a time of
conflict between Hindus and Muslims is forbidden."* Under Marxist
pressure, negationism has become India's official policy.

Now that Marxism is no longer the fashion of the day, it is very easy to
expose the shameless dishonesty of many vocal Marxist intellectuals. It
is time to go through the record and see what they have said about the
*"economic successes"* of the Soviet Union, the *enthusiasm of the
Chinese people* for the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution,
about the Communist involvement in crimes like Katyn, and about the
*lies* put out by the *CIA-sponsored* dissidents and camp survivors.
Their Islam negationism is by far not their first systematic
falsification of a chapter of history.

When the Marxists start lecturing Hindus about tolerance and the respect
for Barbar's mosque, it is easy to put them on the defensive by asking
what happened to churches, mosques and temples when Mao took over.
Communist regimes' treatment of religion has been similar to Islam's
treatment of infidelity. Either religious people had the zimmi status,
i.e. they were suffered to exist but at the cost of career prospects,
benefit of social or material benefits, always under the watchful eye of
police informers, and of course without the right to convert or to
object to state atheism's conversion efforts (according to the chinese
Constitution, there is a *right to practise religion* and a *right to
practise and propagete atheism*); or they were simply persecuted, their
religious education forbidden (in the Soviet Union, many people have
spent years in jail for transporting Bibles or teaching Hebrew), their
places of worship demolished or expropriated for secular use. Communism
and Islam are truly comrades in intolerance.

Certainly some statements can be dug up of Indian Communists defending
the Cultural Revolution in which so many thousands of places of worship
were destroyed and their personnel brutalized or killed. When the Khumar
Rouge were in power, less that 1,000 of the 65,000 Buddhist monks
managed to survive : what did the Indian Marxists (card- carrying and
other) say then? The bigger part of the Marxists' success was in their
aggressiveness: as long as they remained on the offensive, everyone
tried to live up to the norms they prescribed. Now it is time to put
them to scrutiny.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.5 FOREIGN SUPPORT FOR INDIAN NEGATIONISM

Some foreign authors, influenced by Indian colleagues, have also added a
big dose of negationism to their work on Indian history. For instance,
Percival Spear, co-author (with Romila Thapar) of the *Penguin History
of India*, writes: *"Aurangzeb's supposed intolerance is little more
than a hostile legend based on isolated acts such as the erection of a
mosque on a temple site in Benares."*

This is a repetition of the thesis defended by Zahiruddin Faruki in his
*"Aurangzeb and his times"* (1935), recently taken up again by S.N.M.
Abdi in Illustrated Weekly of India (5/12/1992), who claims that
*Aurangzeb was not anti-Hindu*, and that the Ma'asir-i-Alamgiri (made
available to the public by the Royal Society of Bengal and translated by
Jadunath Sarkar), which lists Aurangzeb's temple- destroying activities
from day to day, is a forgery. Faruki and Abdi count on the public's
limited zeal for checking the sources, when they falsely claim that
*"apart from the Ma'asir-i-Alamgiri, there is no other reference to the
order for the destruction of temples"*, and that *we do not hear of any
protest* which large-scale temple destruction would have caused.

Abdi thinks he can get away with claiming as evidence a stone slab
allegedly seen by Faruki in the Gyanvapi mosque in Benares, mentioning a
date (1659) that does not tally with the traditional date (1669) of the
forcible replacement of the Kashi Vishvanath temple with this mosque;
even while admitting that *"the slab seen by Faruki has disappeared
mysteriously, along with another significant piece of evidence"*.
Without blinking, he then cites a theory that the Gyanvapi mosque
already existed under Akbar, i.e. a century before either of the two
dates. Further, he quotes as authority a local agitator who claims: *"My
research reveals that a Buddhist vihara was demolished to make way for a
temple, which was subsequently pulled down and the Gyanvapi mosque
constructed on its site."* The first claim, in spite of flaunting the
pretentious term *research*, in a plain lie; the second is of course
true but contradicts the case which Mr. Abdi is building up. Such is the
quality of the argument for Aurangzeb's tolerance and Hindu-
friendliness.

What are the facts? In Beneras (Varanasi), Aurangzeb (1658-1707) did not
just build an *isolated* mosque on *a* destroyed temple. He ordered all
temples destroyed, among them the Kashi Vishvanath, one of the most
sacred places of Hinduism, and had mosques built on a number of cleared
temple sites. All other Hindu sacred places within his reach equally
suffered destruction, with mosques built on them; among them, Krishna's
birth temple in Mathura, the rebuilt Somnath temple on the coast of
Gujrat, the Vishnu temple replaced with the Alamgir mosque now
overlooking Benares, the Treta-ka-Thakur temple in Ayodhya. The number
of temples destroyed by Aurangzeb is counted in 4, if not in 5 figures.
According to the official court chronicle, Aurangzeb *"ordered all
provincial governors to destroy all schools and temples of the Pagans
and to make a complete end to all Pagan teachings and practices"*. The
chronicle sums up the destructions like this: *"Hasan Ali Khan came and
said that 172 temples in the area had been destroyed... His majesty went
to Chittor, and 63 temples were destroyed... Abu Tarab, appointed to
destroy the idol-temples of Amber, reported that 66 temples had been
razed to the ground"*.

In quite a number of cases, inscriptions on mosques and local tradition
do confirm that Aurangzeb built them in forcible replacement of temples
(some of these inscriptions have been quoted in Sitaram Goel: Hindu
Temples, vol.2, along with a number of independent written accounts).
Aurangzeb's reign ws marked by never-ending unrest and rebellions,
caused by his anti-Hindu policies, which included the reimposition of
the jizya and other zimma rules, and indeed the demolition of temples.

Aurangzeb did not stop at razing temples: their users too were levelled.
There were not just the classical massacres of thousands of resisters,
Brahmins, Sikhs. What gives a more pointed proof of Aurangzeb's
fanaticism, is the execution of specific individuals for specific reason
of intolerance. To name the best-known ones: Aurangzeb's brother Dara
Shikoh was executed because of *apostasy* (i.e. taking an interest in
Hindu philosophy), and the Sikh guru Tegh Bahadur was beheaded because
of his objecting to Aurangzeb's policy of forcible conversions in
general, and in particular for refusing to become a Muslim himself.
Short, Percival Spear's statement that Aurangzeb's fanaticism is but a
hostile legend, is a most serious case of negationism.

An example of a less blatant (i.e. more subtle) form of negationism in
Western histories of India, is the India entry in the Encyclopaedia
Brittannica. Its chapter on the Sultanate period (which was much more
bloody than even the Moghul period) does not mention any persecutions
and massacres of Hindus by Muslims, except that Firuz Shah Tughlaq
*"made largely unsuccessful attempts to convert his Hindu subjects and
sometimes persecuted them"*. The article effectively obeys the
negationist directive that *"characterization of the medieval period as
a time of Hindu- Muslim conflict is forbidden"*.

It also contains blissful nonsense about communal amity in places where
the original sources only mention enmity. Thus, it says that Bahmani
sultan Tajuddin Firuz extracted tribute payments and the hand of the
king's daughter from the Hindu bastion Vijayanagar after two military
campaigns, and that this resulted in *"the establishment of an
apparently amicable relationship between the two rulers"*. Jawaharlal
Nehru considered the induction of Hindu women in Muslim harems as the
cradle of *composite culture* (his euphemism for Hindu humiliation), but
it is worse if even the venerable Encyclopedia considers the terms of
debate as a sign of friendship. At any rate, the article goes on to
observe naively that *peace* lasted only for ten years, when Vijaynagar
forces inflicted a crushing defeat on Firuz. In this case, the more
circumspect form of negationism is at work: keeping the inconvenient
facts out of the readers' view, and manipulating the terminology.

An American historian's book is introduced thus: *"In this book \[Public
Arenas and the Emergence of Communalism in North India\], Sandra Freitag
examines one of the central problems of modern Indian history, the
Hindu-Muslim conflict, with new and provocative insight. She challenges
long-standing interpretations by defining this conflict as a developing
social process groups, not simply **Hindu** or **Muslim**, in highly
specific local contexts bound together in a changing institutional
order."*

This sophisticated verbiage cannot conceal that the book's approach is
merely the standard secularist version propagated by Indian
establishment historians since decades. There is nothing *new and
provocative* about a book that claims to explain communalism without
touching on its single most important determinant, viz. the doctrine
laid down in Islamic scripture, and that blurs the clear-cut process of
India's communalization by Islam with the help of scapegoats like
*colonialism*.

It is not entirely clear to what extent such Western authors are
conscious accomplices in the intellectual crime of negationism, and to
what extent they are just gullible copiers of the version given to them
by English-speaking Indians. In the case of a historian invited by
Penguin to write a History of India, it is hard to believe that he
didn't know better.

Another case of malafide reporting is former Time correspondent Edward
Desmond's lengthy review of JNU Professof S. Gopal's *Anatomy of a
Confrontation* in the New York Review of Books. I know that Mr. Desmond
had gone through the books stating the Hindu case on Ayodhya; he had
talked to both Mr. Sitaram Goel and myself (by telephone); he knew about
hard evidence for the temple that was forcibly replaced by the Babri
Masjid, including Prof. B.B. Lal's filmed presentation of the
archarological evidence. And yet, like Prof. Gopal, he strictly keeps
the lid on the Hindu case, does not mention the extensive documentary
evidence, and curtly dismisses the archaeological evidence as *bogus*.
Here, the psychology at work is apparently that of status-consciousness:
you wouldn't expect a senior correspondent of a big American magazine to
prefer the company of marginal pro-Hindu writers to that of prestigious
Stalinist professors of India's Harvard, would you?

On the other hand, in the day-to-day reporting on the *communal*
situation in India, there is a lot of bonafide copying of the anti-Hindu
views dominant in the Indian English-language press. A typical mixed
case of some complicity and some gullibility was the TV documentary
about *Hindu fundamentalism* made by BBC correspondent Brian Barron, and
boradcase in the week of the first round of the Lok Sabha elections in
May 1991. Brian Barron is an otherwise meritorious journalist, witness
his revelations in October 1991 about the massacre of thousands of
Buddhist monks in the early years of communist rule in Mongolia. But his
programme about the Hindu movement was second-rate and biased. For a
start, it contained some factual mistakes (like a map meant to show the
trail of Hindu leader L.K. Advani's procession in support of the Ram
Janmabhoomi cause, which drew a line unrelated to the actual trail,
apart from placing Delhi on the Ganga river), exemplifying the
carelessness which Western correspondents can afford when it comes to
India reporting.

Barron said that India had already been partitioned because of
*religion*. In fact, India has been partitioned because of Islam,
against the will of other religions, and this seemingly small inaccuracy
is an old trick to distribute the guilt of Islam in partitioning India
over all religions equally. Barron made no attempt to seem impartial,
and introduced BJP leader L.K. Advani as *a demagogue*. He asked
Advani's declared enemy V.P. Singh whether Advani was not merely putting
a humane mask on *fanaticism*. Easy, that way V.P. Singh only had to say
yes. He failed to take the opportunity to question V.P. Singh about his
political marriage with the Muslim fundamentalist leader Imam Bukhari,
while that was a case of a *Hindu* promoting *fundamentalism* as well.
He let Swami Agnivesh, a Marxist in ochre robe, accuse the BJP of mixing
religion and politics, but neglected to inform the viewers that Swami
Agnivesh has himself combining monkhood with being a Janata Dal
candidate in the Lok Sabha elections.

When Barron asked Advani why he had allowed so much bloodshed on his
procession (the rathyatra of October 1990), whereas in fact there had
been no riots all along the path of his month-long journey, Advani
correctly said: *"You are taken in by a disinformation campaign."* A
serious journalist would have inquired deeper when his sources, with
which the quality of his work stands or falls, are questioned so
pointedly. When a sadhu said that Muslims refuse to respect Hindus and
that Hindus are legally discriminated against, Barron did not inquire
what these discriminations were. Like all western reporters, he has
reported on *Hindu fundamentalism* without asking even once why this
movement has emerged, instead relaying the Marxist line that it is all a
camouflage for class (c.q. caste) interests, an artificial creation for
petty political gain.

Barron interviewed prof. Romila Thapar, who accused the Hindu movement
of aiming at a system in which some communities would be second-class
citizens living in constant fear for their lives. From a spokeswoman of
Marxism, which has held entire populations in constant fear and
oppression, and which has killed numerous millions of
*"contrarevolutionary elements"* (to use the criminalizing, dehumanizing
Marxist term), the allegation sounds rather shameless. But the viewers
were not told where Romila Thapar stands, they were led to believe that
this was a neutral observer who had been asked for an objective
explanation. The same thing has happened a number of times in both Time
Magazine and Newsweek: Bipan Chandra, Romila Thapar and their comrades
get quoted as if they are non-partisan authorities. Though
anti-Communist in their general reporting, when it comes to India, these
papers (unknowingly?) present the Marxists' viewpoint as objective
in-depth background information.

Only ten years ago, the Left-oriented media in many Western countries
freely attacked the *really existing* capitalism and also conjured up
all kinds of fantastic CIA and neo-fascist conspiracies, but
scrupulously shielded the *really existing* socialism from criticism.
Similarly, Brian Barron gave Prof. Thapar the chance to say her thing
about unproven sinister plans imputed to the Hindu movement, but
scrupulously refrained from pointing out that Miss Thapar's picture of a
theocratic society in which minorities are second-class citizens living
in mortal fear, is already *reallly existing* in the neighbouring
Islamic republic of Pakistan and in many Muslim states (and, mutatis
mutandis in Communist countries).

These days, reporting on the *communal* in situation in India consists
in highlighting the splinter in the Hindu eye and concealing the beam in
the Muslim eye. At the time of the 1991 Lok Sabha elections, the German
left-leaning weekly Der Spiegel summarized the communal riots in
independent India as follows: *"Since 1947, Indian statisticians have
counted 11,000 riots with 12,000 Muslim victims."* Hindu victims are not
even mentioned, as if you were reading a fundamentalist paper like
Muslim India or Radiance.

The Ayodhya conflict offers a good examples of the absurd standards
applied by reporters. A Hindu sacred site, back in use as a Hindu temple
(since 1949 with, since 1986 without restrictions) after centuries of
Muslim occupation, is claimed by Muslim leaders, who also insist on
continuing the occupation of two other sacred sites in Mathura and Kashi
(and numerous other sites which the Hindu leaders are not even claiming
back). Claiming the right to occupy other communities' sacred sites: if
this is not fanatical, I don't know what is. Yet, the whole world press
is one the side of the Muslims, and decries a Hindu plan to build proper
temple architecture on the Ram Janmabhoomi site in Ayodhya as
*fanatical*. These are not just double standards, but inverted
standards.

The very fact that Muslims in India loudly complain about their
situation (e.g. about their low educational level, which is 100% the
fault of their own mullahs), proves that they are relatively well-off:
as I have had the occasion to observe, Hindu visitors or refugees from
Pakistan often do not dare to speak of the horrible conditions in which
they are forced to live under Muslim rule, because they fear for their
relatives, and because the constant terror has conditioned them never to
raise any objections against the Muslim master race. Inside these Muslim
states, the remaining Hindus are even more careful never to displease
the Muslim masters. For unthinking journalists, their silence is proof
that all is well for the minorities in Muslim states, and so they prefer
to listen to the vocal malcontents who air the Muslim *grievances* in
tolerant India. Whoever shouts loudest, will get our correspondents'
attention, if only because India reporting is mostly of a very low
professional quality.

An example of the slanted impression which the Nehruvian establishment
creates about Hindu-Muslim relations, concerns the internationally
highlighted martyrdom of the Flemish Jesuit Father Rasschaert, near
Ranchi in 1964. Father Rasschaert's sister was a friend of my mother's,
so as a child I have often heard the details of the story. The part
which everybody knows, is that Muslims had fled into a mosque, where
Hindus wanted to pursue them, when Father Rasschaert intervened to
pacify the crowd, but was killed by the Hindus who subsequently
massacred the Muslims.

But the start of the story, never highlighted and sometimes not even
mentioned in the contemporary newspaper reports (much less in later
references), was that the Hindus in the area had been angered by the
sight of mutilated Hindus who had been brought by train from East
Pakistan, where they had at least survived the massacres which many more
had not. As always, Hindu violence was a retaliation against Muslim
violence. No missionary has stepped in to defend the Hindus of Pakistan,
in fact no missionary was around, as missions have a vey hard time in
Pakistan. The missions in Islamic countries find their converts harassed
and even killed by their own families, their schools and churches
attacked on all kinds of pretexts, their graduates not given jobs. So,
the missionary centres prefer to direct their energies to more
hospitable countries like India. The fact that a missionary was killed
by a Hindu while defending the Muslims, and not the other way round,
proves in the first place that Catholic priests can function in India,
much more than in Pakistan. A closer scrutiny of this one incidence of
Hindu fanaticism reveals a background of much more systematic and
institutionalized Muslim fanaticism.

There is a third aspect to the story, which is never mentioned at all.
It is that the Hindus in Ranchi were desperate about their government's
unwillingness to defend the Hindus in Pakistan. One of the chief
culprits behind the massacre was Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, the
patron of *secularism*, who used Father Rasschaert's death as yet
another occasion to parade his concern for the minorities in India, and
to put Hindus in the dock. He himself (and the entire secularist
establishment till today) reneged on his duty to defend the Hindus
surviving in the Islamic state which he had helped to create. By
effectively condoning the persecution of Hindus in Pakistan, he was also
responsible for the retalitory Hindu violence. But the international
press has never thought the matter through, and confined its reporting
on Father Rasschaert's death to condemning the Hindu fanatics, weeping
for the Muslim victims, and praising Nehru as the voice of sanity amid
the religious madness.

The way our journalists are led by the nose towards reporting Muslim
grievances and ignoring grievances of Hindu minorities (and ridiculing
the very real grievances of even the Hindu majority in India), is
reminiscent of the sneaking bias in all non-rightist media in Western
Europe about the Left-right conflict before the Gorbachov era. They all
complied with Marxist-imposed terminology like *dictator Pinochet* but
*president Ceaucescu*, or *rightist rebels* but *leftist resistance*.
Criticism of the West was available in plenty, and given wide coverage,
but the muted populations of the Soviet bloc were not heard, and little
effort was made to go in and hear them. Those who supported the cause of
freedom in the Soviet bloc were riduclued. Worse, when in 1968 the
Russian physicist Sakharov had a report about massive human rights
violations in the USSR published, leading intellectuals actually denied
the existence of *"that so-called Russian physicist invented by the
reactionary forces to slander the glorious achievements of socialism in
the USSR"*. Yes, so noxious was the intellectual atmosphere in the
heyday of Marxism. In those days it was *"better to be wrong with
\[communist\] Sartre than to be right with \[anti-communist\] Aron"*.

When glasnost made clear just how strong the Soviet bloc populations'
disgust with communalism really was, Western intellectuals and socialist
parties seemed sincerely surprised. They themselves had so often pleaded
that life in the Soviet system was not really worse than in the *"so-
called free"* West. The press had never given us an adequate picture,
not by telling outright lies, but by ignoring the muted voices which the
communist dictators wanted us to ignore. At any rate, if there used to
be far more demonstrations in the streets of the West than in the Soviet
bloc, did it prove that there was less discontent in the latter? We now
know better: there was more protest in the West than in the Soviet bloc
because there was more freedom and less fear in the West, and in spite
of deeper discontent in the Soviet bloc. There is no excuse for making
the same mistake in our reporting on the situation of the minorities in
India and in Muslim countries.

Without really noticing, the Western press has become the mouth-piece of
the Marxist-Muslim alliance which dictates political parlance in India.
I assume only a few frontline journalists are conscious participants in
the ongoing disinformation campaign. Brian Barron, for one, has
demonstrated to what extent he has interiorized the anti- Hindu bias of
his Indian spokespersons, with a very little but truly unpardonable
piece of disinformation. Reporting on the million-strong demonstration
for the Ram Janmabhoomi temple (Delhi, 4 April 1991), he showed a monk
carrying a saffron- coloured flag with a white swstika. And for the less
perceptive viewers, he added in so many words that the Hindu movement
carried the swastika. Of course he knew these two things: (1) most
Western viewers know the swastika only as the symbol of Nazism; (2) most
Indians know the swastika only as their own age-old symbol of good
fortune (swasti = well-being). He must have known perfectly well that he
was making the Western viewers read a message which the Hindu
demonstrators never sent, viz. that the Hindu movement links up with
Nazism. Regardless of the moral quality of such distortive reporting, it
goes to show to what extent the negationist faction in the Indian media
has managed to picture the Hindus as the bad guys in the eyes of the
world.

A few more examples of how Western India-watchers swallow Indian
*secularist* disinformation. The pro-Ram Janmabhoomi demonstration in
Delhi on 4 April 1991 was not reported in 99% of the Western papers and
electronic news channels. I have inquired among journalists about what
they had received on their telexes concerning the largest-ever
demonstration in the biggest democracy in the world. It turned out that
these had mentioned 3 lakh demonstrators (when even the
government-controlled police had given the estimate of 8 lakh), and not
made the object of the demonstration clear at all. The Indian sources
had deliberately blurred and minimized the information, so that the
Western media had, in good faith, not deemed it worth mentioning. If six
weeks later Brian Barron reported the number as *more than a million*
demonstrators, it was not to correct this earlier lapse, but because of
a different psychology. His aim was not to deny the importance and
magnitude of the Hindu movement which he detests so much, but on the
contrary to make it into a titillatingly gruesome dinosaur: the TV
consumers have heard enough about Muslim fundamentalism, so if you want
to get them interested in a new brand of *fundamentalism*, you have to
make it extra big and colourful.

Another example is the news concerning the Indian attitude to the second
Gulf War in early 1991. The Delhi correspondent for the Flemish radio
station BRTN said that the Indian population was on the side of Saddam,
against the Anglo-American forces (and their Saudi employers). That is
just what the Times of india editorial had said a few days earlier. In
fact, the Indian people was not on Saddam's side at all. The Hindus had
always cheered for Israel in its wars with the Arabs, and now they were
all for the defeat of this Arab Hitler who had announced he would *"burn
half of Israel with chemical weapons"*. The Muslim support for Saddam's
jihad against the *Crusaders* was not exactly massive either. Firstly,
millions of Indian Muslims personally suffered when they or their
reltives lost their jobs in Iraq and Kuwait as a result of Saddam's
annexation of Kuwait. Secondly, most Muslim leaders are financed by the
Arab monarchies (including Kuwait), and they sided with their
paymasters, either openly or by their quiet refusal to support Saddam.
The only ones who supported Saddam were the hard core of the Nehruvian
establishment (who forced the Chandra Shekhar government to stop
allowing American war planes to land in Bombay), and the communists with
their visceral anti-Americanism. A strike imposed on the communists with
their visceral anti-Americanism. A strike imposed on the Calcutta
dockers by the Communist trade-union was about the only sign of Indian
support for Saddam, but our correspondent played it up as merely one
example of a nation-wide movement. I hope it was in good faith on his
part, but for the Times of India there cannot be such a benefit of the
doubt.

Foreign correspondents in Delhi should realize that the Indian media and
academia are entirely untrustworthy when it comes to reporting on the
Hindu-Muslim conflict. When you report the truth about the democratic
opposition in China or Tibet, you don't copy the People's Daily. When
you want to know the truth about the Kurdish freedom struggle, you don't
trust the Iraqi stae radio. So, when you want to understand the *Hindu
backlash*, you don't believe strictly partisan sources like the Times of
India, or party-line historians like those from JNU or AMU.

If a Mr. Vijay Singh writes in Le Monde Diplomatique an article full of
secularist invective titled: Hindu Fundamentalism, a Menace for India,
it is simply the reflection of a vested interest in blackening Hinduism,
though it is sold as an in-depth comment by a first-hand observer. It so
happens that the article is partly an unacknowledged quotation from the
introductory chapter of the book *"Understanding the Muslim Mind"* by
Rajmohan Gandhi, a party politician of Iman Bukhari's favourite Janata
Dal (nicknamed Jinnah Dal). If in another issue of the same prestigious
French monthly, Mrs. Francine R. Frankel mouths all the worn-out
secularist slogans against what she calls the *"Violent Offensive of
Hindu Extremists"*, it merely proves her incapability of reading her
Indian sources with the distance befitting partisan pamphlets. It is
quite a shameful matter that Western media have swallowed and reproduced
many similar motivated distortion.

The extreme ignorance and gullibility of the foreign press provides the
negationists with a strategic cover. Most English-knowing Indians
believe that the Western intelligentsia is more objective and competent,
and they keep on believing this even in domains where the West is
completely ignorant and incomponent. So the negationists feel supported
in the back by an outside world which they can manipulate but which many
in India still consider as a standard of truth. If the Hindu leadership
had taken the trouble of studying the mental determinants of India's
political configuration, it would have blown this cover away by
spreading first-hand information to the foreign media, and educating
them about the Stalinist-Islamic grip on the Indian establishment.

In Great Britain and the United States, the anti-Hindu and pro-Muslim
bias in India reporting can partly be explained by the political tilt
towards Pakistan (now waning because of Pakistan's nuclear ambitions).
Thus, the prestigious British weekly The Economist has, in a predictably
negative article about nationalism and separatism, held up the creation
of Pakistan as an undisputably justified case of separatism (small
wonder that British Muslims are imitating their Indian Muslim
grandfathers and demanding a separate *"non-territorial state of British
Muslims"*, justifiable on exactly the same grounds). A more universal
reason is that they never get to know the Hindu viewpoint from competent
and eloquent spokesmen: firstly, these have practically no access to the
national English-language press, which Western correspondents in Delhi
faithfully copy because they are too lazy to seek out news for
themselves; secondly, the Hindus themselves have not yet suifficiently
realized the importance of public relations.

The most important reason is probably the political atmosphere in Europe
which demands that for the sake of anti-racism and *multiculturalism*,
Islam as the most conspicuous and assertive guest culture in Europe gets
painted in rosy colours. The result of this imperative not to expose
Muslim fanaticism is that even avowedly Christian papers in the West
keep silent about the ongoing persecution of Christian papers and other
minorities in the Middle East. Christians cherish the illusion of a
*dialogue with Islam*, so they will not offend their Muslim partners by
raising incovenient issues like the status of religious minorities in
Muslim countries. Now, if the West does not stand up for its persecuted
Christian brethren, how much less will it be bothered about the
idolatrous Hindus.

And so, Western India-watchers go on licking the boots of the aggressor,
and keep on twisting contemporary news in the media, and to a lesser
extent even historical facts in academic publications, to the advantage
of the Muslim side. They have not invented the Indian brand of
negationism, but they are amplifying and fortifying it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.6 BANNING INCONVENIENT BOOKS

A consequence of the negationist orientation of the Indian state's
religious policy, is the readiness to ban books critical of Islam at the
slightest suggestion by some mullah or Muslim politician. It is
symptomatic that India was the first country to ban Salman Rushdie's The
Satanic Verses, at the insistence of Syed Shahabuddin, MP (in exchange,
with some other concessions, for his calling off a march on Ayodhya).
Among other banned books, we may mentioned pamphlet-like but nonetheless
truthful books like Colin Maine's *"The Dead hand of Islam"* or A.
Ghosh's *"The Koran and the Kafir"*, which list what the Quran has in
store for the unbelievers; but also more prestigious books like R.M.
Eaton's *"Sufis of Bijapur"*, which debunks the myth of the Sufis as
bringers of a tolerant Islam (in fact they were not only fanatical
preachers against *idolatry*, but also spies and sometimes mercenaries).

In March 1991, Ram Swarup's book *"Understanding Islam through Hadis"*
was banned, after the Hindi version had already been banned in 1990.
This happened after two committees set up by the Delhi administration
had screened the book and found it unobjectionable, and after the judge
had dismissed the plea for prosecution of its publisher, under the
pressure of Muslim demonstrations. This book is a faithful summary of
the Sahih al-Muslim, one of the two most authoritative Hadis collections
(acts of the Prophet). According to the fundamentalist party Jamaat-i
Islami the book contained *"distortion and slander"*, and as an example
of this slanderous distortion, it mentions this passage: *"Mohammed saw
Zaynab in half-naked condition, and he fell in love with her"*. With
this revelation, the fundamentalists managed to get some agitation
going, and the book was banned.

The interesting thing is that the quoted passage comes straight from the
original Hadis, and is not a slanderous distortion at all. The agitation
against the book reveals an important fact about the Muslim community:
the ordinary Muslim does not know the contents of Quran and Hadis, and
projects on Mohammed his own moral ideals, which he largely shares with
his non-Muslim fellow-men. Because of his attachment to the mental image
of a morally perfect Mohammed, he is shocked when he gets confronted
with the historical Mohammed. Among the many historical acts of Mohammed
is his arranging the hand-over to himself of Zaynab, the beautiful wife
of his sdopted son. The fact that a revelation from Allah came to
legitimize the marriage between Mohammed and Zaynab (which was a breach
of the tribal incest taboo), became the classic illustration of the view
that the Quran is nothing but the self-interested product of Mohammed's
own mind.

This ignorance about the historical Mohammed, both among the common
Muslims and among the Hindus, is precisely what the banned book wanted
to do something about, in keeping with the Indian Constitution's
injuction to *"develop the scientific temper"*. But the Nehruvian
establishment (which includes the Congress Party and its Janata Dal
offshoot) has no liking for free research into the contents of Islamic
doctrine and history, and in spite of loud slogans about *secularism*,
the administration gave in to the Muslim fanatics. None of the so-called
secularist intelectuals has bothered to protest against this
obscurantist act of censorship.

The official motivation for this banning of meritortious books is that
they have been written with the intention of insulting a religion or
inciting communal conflict (art. 153A amd art. 295A of the Indian Penal
Code). Under section 95 of the Criminal Procedure Code, the executive
power must take action against its initial users. For, according to
some, there is a bok which fulfils the description given in the Penal
Code, even to a far greater extent than the already banned book; but
which is recited and invested with supreme authority in state-subsidized
schools and in prayer- houses in every town and village of india. This
objectionable book is known as the Quran.

In 1984 a citizen of India, H.K. Chakraborty, filed a petition with the
West Bengal state government to ban the Quran. He added a list of 37
Quran verses which *"preach cruelty, incite violence and disturb public
peace"* (to use the terminology of the Penal Code), 17 verses which
*"promote, on grounds of religion, feelings of enmity, hatred and
ill-will between different communities in India"*, and 31 verses which
*"insult other religions as also the religious beliefs of other
communities"*. Indeed, even after subtracting some verses which could be
regarded as legitimate polemics (esp. against the Christian belief in
Incarnation), there are about 60 passages in the Quran that formulate a
doctrine of demonization of non-Muslims, and of hatred and war against
them. If the Indian laws prohibit communal hate propatganda, Mr.
Chakraborty was right in considering the Quran as an excellent candidate
for banning. But even after reminder-letters, the West Bengal
authorities gave no response.

At this stage, Mr. Chakraborty met Chandmal Chopra, an adherent of the
extremely non-violent Jain sect, who had taken up the study of the Quran
in order to understand the plight of the Hindus in Bangladesh, who are
gradually being chased from their ancestral homeland by the Muslims. In
1985 Chandmal Chopra filed a petition with the Calcutta high Court,
asking for a ban on the Quran. He added a list with reprehensible verses
from the Quran: 29 passages from the Quran (1 to 8 verses in length)
that incite violence against unbelievers, 15 which promote enmity, 26
which insult other religions.

Some typical examples are: *"Mohammed in Allah's apostle. Those who
follow him are merciless for the unbelievers but kind to each other."*
(Q.48:29) *"Make war on them until idolatry does not exist any longer
and Allah's religion reigns universally."* (Q.8:39, also 2:193) *"We
break with you; hatred and enmity will reign bnetween us until ye
believe in Allahh alone."* (Q. 60.4) *"The Jews and Christians and the
Pagans will burn forever in the fire of hell. They are the vilest of all
creatures."* (Q.98:51) There are dozens of Quran verses like this which
in their unanimity cannot be dismissed as *"isolated, mistranslated"*
little accidents *"quoted out of context"*.

Chandmal Chopra stated in his writ petition: *"The cited passages in the
Quran... arouse in Muslims the worst sectarian passions and religious
fanaticism, which has manifested itself in murders, massacres, plunder,
arson, rape and destruction or desecration of sacred places both in
historical and in the contemporary period, not only in India but in
large parts of the world."*

The petition created a lot of furore in Calcutta and abroad. Muslims
created street riots. The government intervened and put heavy pressure
on the judicial process. The secret service was put to work to find
possible objectionable biographical data of the petitioner. The court
used some dirty tricks to disturb the peritioner's case, like changing
dates and changing the object of a session to which the petitioner had
been summoned, during the same session itself, with apparent
foreknowldege of the government's counsel.

Both the authorities and the court violated the secular basis of the
Indian Constitution by using as justification for their policy c.q.
judgement a statement of religious belief. The Marxist West Bengal
government stated in its affidavit: *"The Quran contains the words of
God Almighty revealed to His last Prophet Mohammed... As the Holy Quran
is a Divine Book, no earthly power can sit in judgement on it, and no
court of law has jurisdiction to adjudicate it."*

The judge dismissed the petition on this ground: *"Banning or forfeiture
of the Quran... would amount to abolition of the Muslim religion
itself."* Indeed, the very text which preaches war against the
unbelievers is the core text of Islam, so abolition of Islamic hate
propaganda amounts to abolition of Islam itself. Islam without hatred is
not Islam. The judge further observed: *"This book is not prejudicial to
the maintenance of harmony between religions. Because of the Quran no
public tranquillity has been disturbed upto now..."* - a resounding
statement of negationism.

This verdict was only what the petitioner expected: because of political
pressure, an anti-Quran verdict was simply unthinkable, and moreover,
the Penal Code keeps scriptures and classics outside its own purview.
The petitioner has made it clear that he considers book-banning
counterproductive, and that the controversial petition was meant to
direct public attentiton towards the Quran's contents: people should
read it, because Indian citizens have a right to know why their country
is plagued with never-ending religious riots.

When Chandmal Chopra had the documents of the legal dispute published,
the administration decided to prosecute him and his publisher on the
basis of the very same Penal Code articles which he had invoked to
request a ban on the Quran. The case is still pending.

Beside H.K. Chakraborty's and Chandmal Chopra's petitions, a third text
which pointed at the Quran as a source of religious violence, was a
poster published in Delhi (1986) by I.S. Sharma and Rajkumar Arya,
prominent members of the Hindu Mahasabha, a small political party more
extreme than the BJP. The poster carried the title: *"Why do riots break
out in this country?"* It showed 24 Quran verses, such as: *"Fight the
unbelievers in your surroundings, and let them find harshness in you"*
(Q.9:123), and : *"Kill the unbelievers wherever ye find them,, capture
and besiege them and prepare them every kind of ambush"* (Q.9.5).

Both publishers were arrested on the basis of arts. 153A and 295A.
However, they were acquitted. The judged ruled that they had made a
*"fair criticism"*, for: *"With all due respect to the holy Quran, an
attentive perusal of the verses shows that these are indeed harmful and
preach violence and have the potential to cause conflicts between the
Muslims and the others."* An appeal against the court ruling is still
pending.

This criticism of the Quran pulls the carpet from under the
negationists' feet. The enmity between Muslims and Pagans is clearly not
a back-projection from contemporary artificially created
religio-political tensions. Neither is it a conflict which developed
historically long after Mohammed and which can be reduced to
socio-economical factors. This enmity is, on the contrary, present in
the very core of Islamic doctrine.

With this information about Quranic doctrine, we find that the
negationist thesis is not only contradicted by a massive body of
authentic evidence; it is also highly implausible in itself. For, the
thesis that Islam in India was not systematically (proportionately to
its possibilities in given situations) in conflict with other religions,
claims in fact that Islam in India deviated from its own principles, and
behaved completely uncharacteristically for centuries on end. It is
methodologically more usual to provisionally assume a consistent and
probable bahaviour (viz. that adherents of a God-given call to war
against the unbelievers effectively make war on the unbelievers, and
that a religion which persecuted other religions everywhere else, did
the same in India), and only give this up if positive evidence for a
less plausible and more inconsistent course has been found. But what
positive evidence there is, points in the opposite direction: a long
list of Muslim invaders and rulers faithfully put the Quranic injuctions
into practice.

The problem of book-banning and censorship on Islam criticism is
compounded by the related problem of self- censorship. Thus, when in
late 1992, the famous columnist Arun Shourie wanted to publish a
collection of his columns on Islamic fundamentalism, esp. the Rushdie
and Ayodhya affairs (Indian Controversies), the publisher withdrew at
the last moment, afraid of administrative or physical reprisals, and the
printer also backed out. Earlier, Shourie had been lucky to find one
paper willing to publish these columns, for most Indian newspapers
strictly keep the lid on Islam criticism. Hindu society is a terrorized
society.

A final aspect of the ban (sometimes legal, mostly imposed by secularist
convention) on criticism of Islam is that it is the re-institution of an
old Islamic rule. When the Christians in Syria in the first century of
Islam were forced to submit, they had to sign a long list of promises to
their Islamic overlords. These comprised the well-known conditions
imposed on the zimmis, but also some extra ones, including *"not to
teach our children the Quran"*. Like Mohammed, his successors found it
hard to counter the numerous objections to the contradictions and
unethical injuctions in the Quran, which perceptive infidels kept on
raising. It was logical that they prohibited the study of the Quran by
non-Muslims, in order to pre-emptively disarm future anti-Islamic
polemists. This ban by the theocratic caliphate on unfriendly inspection
of the Quran is now re- instituted in India in the name of secularism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.7 THE NEGATIONISTS' SECOND FRONT

Not satisfied with denying the crimes of Islam, the negationists have
recently made a big effort to spread the notion that Hinduism itself is
guilty of just the same things of which it accuses Islam. Remember,
Holocaust negationists always allege and highlight Israeli injustice
against the Palestinians: if you prove that the victim is not so
innocent, it will ultimately become questionable that he was a victim at
all. If ever the denial of Muslim fanaticism has to be given up, a
second line of defence (or counter-attack) will be ready: accusing
Hinduism of a similar fanaticism.

For example, in the Indian media you regularly come across the
contention that *"the Hindus destroyed Nalanda Buddhist university"*.
This is a plain lie: under several Hindu dynasties, Nalanda flourished
and was the biggest university in the world for centuries; it was
destroyed by the Muslim invader Bakhtiar Khilji in 1200. But if you
repeat a lie often enough, it gains currency, and now many Indians have
come to believe that Buddhism had been replaced by Hinduism as India's
chief religion in a most violent manner.

In reality, Buddhism had always been a minority religion in India,
confined to nobles and traders; before its disappearance around 1200 AD,
it had been partly reabsorbed by mainstream Hinduism; otherwise it
co-existed peacefully with other Hindu sects, often sharing the same
temple- complexes. The historical allegations of violent conflicts
between mainstream Hinduism and Buddhism can be counted on one hand. It
is not *Brahminical onslaught* but Islam that chased Buddhism from
India.

In Central Asia, Islam had wiped out Buddhism together with
Nestorianism, Zoroastrianism, Manicheism, and whatever other religion it
encountered. The Persian word for *idol* is but, from Buddha, because
the Buddhists with their Buddha-status were considered as the
idol-worshippers par excellence. The Buddhists drew the wrath of every
Muslim but-shikan (idol-breaker), even where they had not offered
resistance aganinst the Muslim armies because of their doctrine of
non-violence. As a reminder of the Buddhist past of Central Asia, the
city name Bukhara is nothing but a corruption of vihara, i.e. a Buddhist
monastery; other Indian names include Samarkhand and Takshakhand, i.e.
Tashkent. In India, Buddhism was a much easier target than other sects
and traditions, because it was completely centralized around the
monasteries. Once the monsteries destroyed and the monks killed, the
Buddhist community had lost its backbone and was helpless before the
pressure to convert to Islam (as happened on a large scale in East
Bengal).

A handful of negationist historians have tried to substantiate the
allegations against Hinduism and spared no effort to colect instances of
Hindus acts of persectution. We will take a look at them here. It would
take a whole volume to sum up Aurangzeb's career as an iconoclast and
persecutor, but the Hindu record of persecution will not take us more
than a few pages.

To my knowledge, all the alleged cases of intra-Hindu persecution have
been summed up in *"Communal History and Rama's Ayodhya by prof. R.S.
Sharma, the chapter in Communalism and the Writing of Indian History"*
contributed by prof. Harbans Mukhia, and most explicitly Cultural
Transactions and Early India by Prof. Romila Thapar. According to Romila
Thapar, *"the insistence on the tradition of religious tolerance and
non-violence as characteristic of Hinduism... is not borne out by
historical evidence"*. Given their strong motivation, we need not assume
that they have overlooked incidents that could be useful for the case
they are making.

The two best-known cases, involving Pushyamitra Shunga and Shashank,
cannot withstand historical criticism. The non-contemporary story (which
surfaces more than three centuries after the *facts*) about
Pushyamitra's offering money for the heads of monks is rendered
improbable by firm historical facts of his allowing and patronizing
monasteries and Buddhist universities in his domains. After Ashoka's
lavish sponsorship of Buddhism, it is perfectly possible that Buddhist
institutions fell on slightly harder times under the Shungas, but
persecution is still another matter. The famous historian of Buddhism
Etienne Lamotte has observed: *"To judge from the documents, Pushyamitra
must be acquitted through lack of proof."* The only reason to sustain
the suspicion against Pushyamitra, once it has been levelled, is that
*"where there is smoke, there must be fire"* - but that piece of
received wisdom is presupposed in every act of slander as well.

Hsuan Tsang's story from hearsay about Shashank's devastating a
monastery in Bihar, killing the monks and destroying Buddhist relics,
only a few years before Hsuan Tsang's own arrival, is contradicted by
other elements in his own report. Thus, according to the Chinese
pilgrim, Shashank threw a stone with the Buddha's footprint into the
river, but it was returned through a miracle; and he felled the bodhi
tree but a sapling from it was replanted which miraculously grew into a
big tree overnight. So, the fact of the matter was that the stone and
the tree were still there in full glory. In both cases, the presence of
the footprint-stone and the fully grown bodhi tree contradict Husan
Tsang's allegations, but he explains the contradiction away by
postulating miracles (which everywhere have a way of mushrooming around
relics, to add to their aura of divine power). If we do not accept
miracles, we conclude that the bodhi tree which Husan Tsang saw, and
which was too big to have been a recently replanted sapling, cannot have
been felled by Shashank.

Hsuan Tsang is notorious for his exaggerations and his insertions of
miracle stories, and he had to explain to China, where Buddhism was
readhing its peak, why it was declining in India. It seems safer to base
our judgement on the fact that in his description of Buddhist life in
the Ganga basin, nothing shows the effects of recent persecutions. In
fact, Hsuan Tsang himself gives a clue to the real reason of pre-Islamic
Buddhist decline, by describing how many Buddhist monasteries had fallen
into disuse, esp. in areas of lawlessness and weak government,
indicating that the strength of Buddhism was in direct proportion to
state protection and patronage. Unlike Brahminism, which could sustain
itself against heavy odds, the fortunates of Buddhist monasticism (even
more than those of the Christian abbeys in early medieval Europe) were
dependent upon royal favours, as under Ashoka, the Chinese early T'ang
dynasty, and the rulers of Tibet and several Southeast-Asian countries.

A third story, about a 12th century king Harsha of Kashmir, is
apparently true but has nothing to do with religious persecution: he
plundered Hindu temples of all sects including Buddhism, in his own
kingdom, without bothering to desecrate them or their keepers apart from
lucrative plunder. It is the one geunine case of a ruler plundering not
out of religious motives but for the gold. There is no known case of a
Muslim marauder who merely stole from temples without bothering to
explicity desecrate them, much less of a Muslim ruler who plundered the
sanctuaries of his own religion. Moreover, Kalhana's history book
Rajatarangini relates this story with the comment: *"Promoted by the
Turks in his employ, he behaved like a Turk."* This Harsha employed
Turkish mercenaries (which his successors would regret, for they spied
and ultimately grabbed power), and these Muslims already had a firm
reputation of plundering temples with a good conscience.

Number four is the attack by the Paramara king Subhataverman (1193-1210)
on Gujrat, in which *"a large number of Jain temples in Dabhoi and
Cambay"* were *plundered* (not *"destroyed"* or *"desecrated"*). Harbans
Mukhia cites this as proof that *"many Hindu rulers did the same \[as
the Muslims, i.e. destroy\] with temples in enemy- territory long before
the Muslims had emerged as a political challenge to these kingdoms."*
However, it is well-known that when Subhatavarman acceded to the throne,
the Muslims had more than emerged: North India was being ravaged by
Mohammed Ghori's decisive campaign of conquest. As a proof that Hindus
outside the Islamic sphere of influence practised persecution, this
incident will not do. On the contrary, if the report is correct, then
the background may well be similar to the attested case of Harsha of
Kashmir: inspired by the Turks, he behaved like a Turk.

Another case is the recurrent conflicts between the Shaiva and the
Vaishnava renunciates in Ayodhya. Prof. R.S. Sharma quotes a description
from 1804, which talks of *"soldiers taking pleasure in battle"*,
*"misery"*, *"great fear"* and *"shelter in secret places"*, but no
death toll is given, in fact no killing is mentioned in so many words.
But prof. Sharma concludes nonetheless: *"The passage given above is
sufficient to expose the myth of tolerance practised by medieval Hindu
religious leaders."*

Hindu tradition acknowledges that a rivalry between Shaivas and
Vaishnavas disturbed life in Ayodhya: it was the context in which
Tulsidas decided to write the Ramcharitmanas. In order to emphasize the
superficial and erroneous character of the conflict between the
followers of Shiva and those of Vishnu (and his incarnation Rama),
Tulsidas made Shiva the story-teller of his Rama biography. Shiva and
Vishnu are one, and devotees who don't understand this, well, they have
to learn it. There is no similar record of any Islamic authority who has
said that Shiva and Allah are one, nor Ram and Rahim, nor Kashi and
Kaaba. All this *"oneness of all religions"* rhetoric is a strictly
Hindu projection of the oneness of the different Hindu gods and
traditions on a juxtaposition of radically incompatible notions from
Islam and Hinduism. Whereas the opposition between Ram and Rahim,
between Kashi and Kaaba, led to endless persecutions and a Partition,
such things have not happened between Shaivas and Vaishnavas. All that
Prof. Sharma can show, is a riot which was not bigger than those which
take place between drunken football fans.

As we might expect from Marxists who seek to mould rather than inform
public opinion, this listing of evidence has been done with some
editing. Thus, Romila Thapar writes that *"the Shaivite saint Jnana
Sambandar is attributed with having converted the Pandya ruler from
Jainism to Shaivism, whereupon it is said that 8,000 Jainas were impaled
by the king"*. She omits that this king, Arikesari Parankusa Maravarman,
is also described as having first persecuted Shaivas; that Sambandar
vanquished the Jainas not in battle but in debate (upon which the king
converted from Jainism to Shaivism); and that he had escaped Jaina
attempts to kill him. Unlike the Muslim persecutions, this Shaiva-Jaina
conflict was clearly not a one-way affair. For the sake of blackening
Hinduism, the Buddhists and Jains had to be depicted as hapless victims,
and their share in the intra- Hindu violence had to be concealed.

It is even a matter of debate whether this persecution has occurred at
all: the Hindus were never careful historians, and like Hsuan Tsang they
mixed legend and historical fact, so that the modern historian can only
accept their testimony if he finds supportive outside (epigraphical and
archaeological) evidence. Unlike the conscientious Muslim chronicles or
Kalhana's Rajatarangini, this story about Sambandar comes in the form of
a local legend with at most a historical core. Nilkanth Shastri, in his
unchallenged History of South India, writes about it: *"This, however,
is little more than an unpleasant legend and cannot be treated as
history."* I admit that this sounds like Percival Spear's statement that
Aurangzeb's persecutions are *"little more than hostile legend"*.
However, Mr. Spear's contention is amply disproven by a lot of
contemporary documents including the royal orders to kill Pagans and
destroy Pagan institutions, as well as by eye-witness accounts; such
evidence has not been offered at all in the case of Jnana Sambandar.

Warned by this unmistakable case of distortion of evidence, we take the
rest of the list cum grano salis. But at least, the next incident is
reported by two seemingly independent sources: the persecution of
Buddhists by the Huna king Mihirakula in Kashmir. Romila Thapar herself
admits that Hsuan Tsang's account about *"the destruction of 1.600
Buddhist stupas and sangharamas and the killing of thousands of monks
and lay-followers"* sounds exaggerated, but she has faith in Kalhana's
more detailed version which mentions *"killing innocent people by the
hundreds"*.

But Hsuan Tsang gives an interesting detail which does not sound like a
fairy-tale and may well be historical. Mihirakula, *"wishing to apply
his leisure to the study of Buddhism"*, asked the Buddhist sangha to
appoint a teacher for him. But none of the more accomplished monks was
willing, so they appointed a monk who had the rank of a servant. The
king found this procedure insulting, and ordered the destruction of the
Buddhist church in his kingdom. This king was not anti-Buddhist, was
open-minded and took a sincere interest in Buddhism. But once a king's
ego is hurt, he can get violent, regardless of his religion. That is
regrettable, but it is something else than religious fanaticism.

When a commander in the service of the Buddhist emperor Ashoka was
angered by the Buddhist monks' refusal to let the king meddle in their
affairs, he had 500 of them killed. The massacre had nothing to do with
religious intolerance, merely with hurt pride, and the Marxist
historians have done well not to put it in their list. For the same
reason, Mihirakula's rage against the impolite monks cannot be equated
with the religiously motivated persecutions by the Muslim rulers. There
was never a Muslim king who invited Pagan scholars to instruct him in
the Pagan doctrines, the way Mihirakula asked for a Buddhist teacher.
The only exceptions to this rule were the apostate emperor Akbar, who
was vehemently criticized for it by the Muslim clergy, and Dara Shikoh,
who was executed for apostasy by his brother Aurangzeb.

Another incident of intra-Hindu persecution quoted from Kalhana's
Rajatarangini, is *"an earlier persecution of Buddhists in Kashmir and
the wilful destruction of a vihara, again by a Shaivite king"*. There is
an interesting little tailpiece to this incident: *"But on this occasion
the king repented and built a new monastery for the Buddhist monks"*.
This proves that a substantial number, if not all, of the monks had
survived the *persecution*. But more importantly, it highlights
something completely unknown in the long history of Islamic fanaticism:
remorse. This Shaivite king knew at heart that intolerance was wrong,
and when he had regained his self-control, he made up for his misdeed.
Such a thing has never been done by Mohammed, or by Ghaznavi or
Aurangzeb. If any proof was neded for the radical difference between the
systematic persecutions by the Muslims and the rare abberation into
isolated acts of intolerance by Hindus, Prof. Romila Thapar has just
given it.

The next case: *"The Jaina temples of Karnataka went through a traumatic
experience at the hands the Lingayats or Virashaivas in the early second
millennium AD"*. If all they suffered was *trauma* they were well-off in
comparison with the thousands of temples destroyed by the Muslims in the
same period. After a time of peaceful co-existence, which Romila Thapar
acknowledges, *"one of the temples was converted into a Shiva temple. At
Hubli, the temple of the five Jinas was converted into a
panchalingeshwara Shaivite temple, the five lingas replacing the five
Jinas in the sancta. Some other Jaina temples met the same fate."*

To be sure, conversions of the temples have indeed happened, and the
panchalingeshwara temple may well be a case in point. Yet, that does not
prove there was persecution. When rivalling sects entered public debate,
they often put in high wagers, esp. the promise to convert to be
winner's sect. In such a case, the temple or ashram was taken along into
the new sect. Here, it could well be such a case of peaceful handover:
after all, the temples were not destroyed. Against this, Prof. Thapar
informs us: *"An inscription at Ablur in Dharwar eulogizes attacks on
Jaina temples as retaliation for opposition to Shaivite worship."*

Here we may have another case of distoring evidence by means of
selective quoting. The inscription of which Prof. Thapar summarizes a
selected part, says first of all that the dispute arose because the
Jains tried to prevent a Shaiva from worshipping his own idol. It
further relates that the Jains also promised to throw out Jina and
worship Shiva if the Shiva devotee performed a miracle, but when the
miracle was produced, they did not fulfil their promise. In the ensuing
quarrel, the Jina idol was broken by the Shaivas. The most significant
element is that the Jain king Bijjala decided in favour of the Shaivas
when the matter was brought before him. He dismissed the Jains and
showered favours on the Shaivas.

Again, in this story the conflict is not a one-way affair at all. We
need not accept the story at face value, as it is one of those sectarian
miracle stories (with the message: *"My saint is holier than thy
saint"*) which abound in the traditions surrounding most places of
pilgrimage, be they Christian, Sufi or Hindu. Dr. Fleet, who has edited
and translated this inscription along with four others found at the same
place, gives summaries of two Lingayat Puranas and the Jain
Bijjalacharitra, and observes that the story in this inscription finds
no support in the literary traditions of the two sects. Bijjala's own
inscription dated 1162 AD discovered at Managoli also does not support
the story. The fact that the inscription under consideration does not
bear a date or a definite reference to the reign of a king, does not
help its credibility either. And do authentic inscriptions deal in
miracles?

It is obvious that an inscription of this quality, if it had been cited
in support of the Hindu claim to the Babri Masjid Ram Janmabhoomi site,
would have been dismissed by the Marxist historians as *ridiculous* and
*totally groundless*. They would not view it as a serious obstacle to
their foregone conclusion that there is absolutely definitely no
indication whatsover at all that a Hindu temple was forcibly replaced
with a mosque. But in this case, we are asked to see it as *evidence*
that Shaivas attacked Jain temples, and that *Hindu tolerance is a
myth*.

Unlike the party-line historians of JNU, I do not think that historians
working with conflicting testimonies are in a position to make apodictic
statements and definitive conclusions,, so I will not completely dismiss
this inscription as fantasy. It is possible that the Jainas had indeed
fallen on hard times, and I do not dispose of material that would refute
Prof. Thapar's contention that *"in the fourteenth century the
harassment of Jainas was so acute that they had to appeal for protection
to the ruling power at Vijayanagar"*. Still, in size, duration,
intensity and degree of ideological motivation, this conflict does not
at all compare with the terror wrought by Islam. Incidentally, the
ruling power at Vijayanagar, whose protection the Jains sought, was of
course a Hindu power.

From Dr. Fleet's study of these sources, it seems that the *Shaivas* who
were so hostile to the Jains, belonged to the Veerashaiva or Lingayat
sect. And indeed, Prof. Thapar's next piece of evidence is that
*"inscriptions of the sixteenth century from the Srisailam area of
Andhra Pradesh record the pride taken by Veerashaivas in beheading
Shvetambara Jains"*. Now, the Veerashaivas were an anti-caste and
anti-Brahminical sect. As these are considered good qualities,
negationists have tried to link them to the influence of Muslim
missionaries (*"bringing the message of equality and brotherhood"*), who
were indeed very acvtive on India's West coast, where and when the
Veerashaiva doctrine was developed. Let us assume there was indeed
Muslim influence on the Veerashaiva sect. In that case, the negationists
should acknowledge that the Veerashaivas' occasional acts of intolerance
may equally be due to the influence of Islam. At any rate *Brahminism*
cannot be held guilty of any misdeeds committed by this anti-Brahminical
sect.

Finally, *"in Gujrat, Jainism flourished during the reign of Kumarapala,
but his successor \[i.e. Ajayapala\] persecuted the Jainas and destroyed
their temples"*. In *"The History and Culture of the Indian People"*,
edited by R.C. Majumdar, we read about this: *"The Jain chronicles
allege that Ajayapala was a persecutor of the Jains, that he demolished
Jain temples, mercilessly executed the Jain scholar Ramachandra, and
killed Ambada, a minister of Kumarapala, in an encounter."* Here, the
alleged crime is related by the victims, not by the aggressors. It is
possible that they exaggerated, but I see no reason to believe that they
simply invented the story. So, let us agree that some temples were
destroyed and at least one prominent Jain killed by Hindu aggressors.
After all, the fanaticism displayed systematically by Islam has not come
falling out of the sky, it exists in human nature and may occasionally
pop up in contexts of tension; the difference is that Hindu acts of
fanaticism were occasional and took place in spite of the doctrine,
while Islamic fanaticism was systematic and merely an application of the
doctrine.

The Marxist scholars who have collected this material, have omitted from
their presentations the following cases of intra-Hindu persecution. The
Mahavamsha says that the Buddhist king Vattagamini (29-17 BC) destroyed
a Jain vihara on the same site. In the Shravana-Belagola epitaph of
Mallishena, the Jain teacher Aklanka says that after a successful debate
with Buddhists, he broke a Buddha statue with his own foot. There are
some more instances of Jain- Buddhist conflict, but suich material did
not fit in with the designs of the negationists. They have this pet
theory of Jainism and Buddhism as revolts against *Brahminical tyranny*,
subsequently crushed out by the *Brahminical reaction*. In fact, the
minor instances of intra-Hindu violence were distributed roughly
proportionately between Brahminical, Buddhist, Jaina and other sects.

Among the above-mentioned reports of conflict between the different
traditions within the Sanatana Dharma common wealth, several are
probably unfounded, and several exaggerated. But as we have no firm
evidence for this plausible hypothesis yet, let us assume for now that
all these reports are simply correct and accurate. Let us moreover
assume that a similar number of similar cases has gone unrecorded or
unnoticed by the Marxist historians. Then, as a sum total, we still do
not have the number of victims that Teimur made in a single day. Then we
still do not have the number of temple demolitions that Aurangzeb
wrought on his own. Then we still do not have the amount of
glorification of temple destruction that we find in any of the diaries
of Muslim conquerors like Babr or Firuz Shah Tughlaq or Teimur, or any
of their chroniclers. The fanaticism record of Hinduism throughout
millennia is dwarfed by the record of a single Ghaznavi, Ghori or
Aurangzeb and becomes completely negligeable when compared with the
total record of Islamic destruction and massacre in India. Moreover, a
proper comparison of the fanaticism record of Hindu civilization would
not be with Indian Islam, which represents a far smaller number of
people, but with the entire Muslim world from the Prophet (peace be upon
him) onwards.

Prof. Romila Thapar writes: *"The desire to portray tolerance and
non-violence as the eternal values of the Hindu tradition has led to the
pushing aside of such evidence."* What evidence? These few disputable
cases will not do to prove that *"Hindu tolerance is a myth"*. Hindus
can afford to face this evidence sqarely. A final judgement on whether
Hinduism is tolerant or not shujld not depend on a few instances
selected and edited to fit the proconceived picture, but on an over-view
of the whole of Hindu history. The larger patterns of Hindu history
leave no doubt that the impression cunningly created by the negationists
is false.

Many foreign groups of people persecuted for their religion came to seek
reguge in India. The Parsis have thrived. The heterodox Syrian
Christians have lived in peace until the Portuguese came to enlist them
in their effort to christianize India. The Jews have expressed their
gratitude when they left for Israel because India was the only country
where their memories were not of persecution but of friendly
co-existence. Even the Moplah Muslims were accepted without any
questions asked. All these groups were not merely tolerated, but
received land and material support for building places of worship.

What should really clinch the issue, is the tolerant treatment which the
Muslims received after their reign of terror had been overthrown and
replaced with Hindu rashtras like those of the Marathas, Sikhs, Rajputs
and Jats. The Hindus could have emulated the policy of the Spanish
Christians after the Reconquista, and given the Muslims the choice
between conversion and emigration. With the benefit of hindsight, we can
say that they would have saved many lives and India's unity by doing so,
but forcing people to convert was not in conformity with their
traditions.

When negationists are confronted with the evidence of persecutions by
Islam, they are sure to mention a few cases where Muslim rulers
patronized the building of Hindu temples. In some cases this is
deceitful: in the JNU historians' pamphlet *"The Political Abuse of
History"*, they mention three such cases, but on closer inspection two
of them do not concern Muslim rulers, but their Hindu ministers (in his
rebuttal, Prof. A.R. Khan called this *"not only concealment of evidence
but also distortion of evidence"*). But all right, a few Muslim rulers
have made gifts to Hindu institutions. The negationists insist that
these few gifts make up for the systematic Islamic persecutions. By
contrast, their blatantly unequal standards do not allow them to accept
the systematic patronage of the institutions of Buddhists and Jains by
Hindu kings through the ages as compensation for the few isolated and
aberrant cases of religious conflict.

In order to undersand the problem of religious intolerance, it is
necessary to distinguish between two types of conflict between
religions. The first one is the ordinary conflict between two groups of
people, who may derive their identity from their nationality, language
family stock, economic interests, social class, or allegiance to a
football team: any two people or groups of people can pick a quarrel.
Therefore, two religious communities can have a conflict of interest as
well, and behave just like any kind of group in conflict situation. By
definition, every community can run into this kind of conflict (though
some may remain non-violent throughout because of their doctrine). But
this kind of conflict is temporary, dependent on an accidental state of
affairs and always gravitates back to normal.

The second kind of religious conflict is not accidental, but is a
consequence of the doctrines to which the community adheres. This is the
case only with a handful of religions (including the Marxist
quasi-religion), distinguished by their exclusivism and their ambition
for conquest. Islam has been the most consistent in denying others the
right to exist or at least to freely practise their religion. Its
conflicts with other religions are merely the materialization of its
doctrines.

This discinction between religious conflict as an accident or
aberration, and religious conflict as the direct outcome of fanatical
doctrines inherent in a religion, is fundamental to an understanding of
the problem. In the first case, acts of fanaticism are committed in
spite of the doctrine. The Vedas say that *"the wise call the One by
many names"*, and exhort us to *"let good thoughts come to us from
everywhere"*; in the Bhagavad Gita Krishna assures the adherents of all
religions that *"those who pray with devotion to any god, it is to Me
that they pray"*. Differences in religion are considered superficial and
unimportant, therefore religious tolerance is the norm, and intolerance
cannot be more than an aberration. But in the second case, acts of
fanaticism are sanctioned by the doctrine, and are bound to happen on a
substantial scale as long as the doctrine is taken seroiously. *"Enmity
and hatred will reign between us until ye believe in Allah alone"* says
the Quran, and it is only logical that enmity and hatred have indeed
reigned between Muslims and non- Muslims.

Of course, those with a bad conscience go out of their way to blur this
distinction. Marxists insist on disregarding or blurring the distinction
either because they want to blacken all religion, or because they are in
league with Muslim fanatics.

Among those who like to say that *"all are equally guilty"*, we also
find the Christian missionaries. They too have a history of persecutions
and temple destructions to cover up, not only in Europe and America, but
in India as well. The Portuguese organized a branch of the Inquisition
in Goa, and they practised conversion by force on a large scale. The
French and British missionaries were less brutal, often resorting to
subversion tactics and inducement by means of material advantages for
converts, but they too have a record of temple destructions in India.
Hundreds of churches contain rubble of the Hindu temples which they
replaced. We may look a bit more closely into one case which sums it all
up: the Saint Thomas church on Mylapore beach in Madras.

According to Christian leaders in India, the apostle Thomas came to
India in 52 AD, founded the Syrian Christian church, and was killed by
the fanatical Brahmins in 72 AD. Near the site of his martyrdom, the
Saint Thomas church was built. In fact this apostle never came to India,
and the Christian community in South India was founded by a merchant
Thomas Cananeus in 345 AD ( a name which readily explains the Thomas
legend ). He led 400 refugees who fled persecution in Persia and were
given asylum by the Hindu authorities. In Catholic universities in
Europe, the myth of the apostle Thomas going to India is no longer
taught as history, but in India it is still considered useful. Even many
vocal *secularists* who attack the Hindus for *relying on myth* in the
Ayodhya affair, off-hand profess their belief in the Thomas myth. The
important point is that Thomas can be upheld as a martyr and the
Brahmins decried as fanatics.

In reality, the missionaries were very disgruntled that these damned
Hindus refused to give them martyrs (whose blood is welcomed as *the
seed of the faith*), so they had to invent one. Moreover, the church
which they claim commemorates Saint Thomas' martyrdom at the hands of
Hindu fanaticism, is in fact a monument of Hindu martyrdom at the hands
of Christian fanaticism: it is a forcible replacement of two important
Hindu temples (Jain and Shaiva), whose existence was insupportable to
Christian missionaries. No one knows how many priests and worshippers
were killed when the Christian soldiers came to remove the curse of
Paganism from Mylapore beach. Hinduism doesn't practise
martyr-mongering, but if at all we have to speak of martyrs in this
context, the title goes to these Shiva-worshippers and not to the
apostle Thomas.

So, applying the old maxim that *"attack is the best defence"*, the
spokesmen of intolerant creeds falsely accuse the tolerant Hindus of the
same intolerance. While nobody claims that Hinduism is without faults,
or that Hindu society has never brought forth fanatical individuals,it
is a plain lie that Hinduism has record of fanaticism similar (however
remotely) to that of the three world-conquerors: Christianity, Islam and
Mrxism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.8 GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF ISLAM NEGATIONISM

India has its own full-fledged brand of negationism: a movement to deny
the large-scale and long-term crimes against humanity committed by
Islam. This movement is led by Islamic apologists and Marxist academics,
and followed by all the politicians, journalists and intellectuals who
call themselves secularists. In contrast to the European negationism
regarding the Nazi acts of genocide, but similar to the Turkish
negationism regarding the Armenian genocide, the Indian negationism
regarding the terrible record of Islam is fully supported by the
establishment. It has nearly full control of the media and dictates all
state and government parlance concerning the *communal* problem (more
properly to be called the Islam problem).

Its techniques are essentially the same as those of negationists
elsewhere :

1.  *Head-on denial*: The crassest form of negationism is obviously the
    simple denial of the facts. This is mostly done in the form of
    general claims, such as: *"Islam is tolerant"*, *"Islamic Spain was
    a model of multicultural harmony"*, *"the anti-Jewish hatred was
    unknown among Muslims until Zionism and anti-Semitism together
    entered the Muslim world from Europe"*. Since it is rare that a
    specific crime of Islam is brought to the public's notice, there is
    little occasion to come out and deny specific crimes. Exceptions are
    the Armenian genocide, officially denied in Turkey and the entire
    Muslim world, and the temple destructions in India, which have been
    highlighted in the Ayodhya debate but flatly denied by Syed
    Shahanuddin, Sushil Srivastava and many other pro-Babri polemists.

    The Rushdie affair was the occasion for negationism on a grand
    scale. There happens to be an unambiguous answer to the question:
    *"Is it Islamic to kill those who voice criticism of the Prophet?"*
    According to the media and most *experts*, the answer was
    definitely: no. According to the basic traditions of Islam, it was:
    yes. Mohammed as well as his immediate successors have killed
    critics, both in formal executions and in night-time stabbings. In
    Islamic law, the Prophet's example is valid precedent. At most there
    could be some quarreling over the procedure: some jurists thought
    that Rushdie should first be kidnapped to an Islamic country and
    given a chance to recant before an Islamic court, though the
    ayatollahs have ruled that no amount of remorse can save Rushdie. If
    he stands by his book, even the so-called moderates think he must be
    killed. Islamic law punishes both apostasy and insults to the
    Prophet with the death penalty: twice there is no escape for
    Rushdie. In the Muslim world, several publications have restated the
    clear-cut Islamic provisions for cases like Rushdie's including
    Ahaanat-i Rasool ki Sazaa (*"Punishment for Insulting the Prophet"*)
    by JNU Prof. Maulana Mohsin Udmani Nadwi, and Muqaddas-i Ayat (*"The
    Sacred Verses"*) by Maulana Majid Ali Khan, both published by the
    Islamic Research Foundation, Delhi. Yet, the outside public was told
    by many *experts* that killing Rushdie is un-islamic.

    Flat denial will work very well if your grip on the press and
    education media is sufficient. Otherwise, there is a danger of being
    shown up as the negationist one really is. In that case, a number of
    softer techniques are available.

2.  *Ignoring the facts*: This passive negationism is certainly the
    safest and the most popular. The media and textbook-writers simply
    keep the vast corpus of inconvenient testimony out of the readers'
    view.

3.  *Minimizing the facts*: If the inconvenient fact is pointed out that
    numerous Muslim chroniclers have reported a given massacre of
    unbelievers themselves, one can posit a priori that they must have
    exaggerated to flatter their patron's martial vanity - as if it is
    not significant enough that Muslim rulers felt flattered by being
    described as mass-murderers of infidels.

    Apart from minimizing the absolute size of Islamic crimes, there is
    the popular technique of relative minimizing: make the facts look
    smaller by comparing them with other, carefully selected *facts*.
    Thus, one can say that *"all religions are intolerant"*, which
    sounds plausible to many though it is patently false: in the Roman
    Empire only those sects were persecuted which had political
    ambitions (Jews when they fought for independence, Christians
    because they sought to take over the Empire and outlaw all other
    religions, as they effectively did), while the others enjoyed the
    status of religio licita; similarly with the Persian Empire and many
    other states and cultures.

    An oft-invoked counterweight for the charge-sheet against Islam, is
    the fanaticism record of Christianity. it is indeed well-known that
    Christianity has been guilty of numerous temple destructions and
    persecutions. But the reason for this fanaticism is found in the
    common theological foundation of both religions: exclusivist
    prophetic monotheism. The case against Christianity is at once a
    case against Islam. Moreover, in spite of its theologically
    motivated tendency to intolerance, Christianity has had to go
    through the experience of *"live and let live"* because in its
    formative period, it was but one of the numerous sects in the
    pluralist Roman empire.

    Islam never had this experience, and in order to bring out its full
    potential of fanaticism, Christianity has needed the influence of
    Islam on a few occasions. Thus, it is no coincidence that
    Charlemagne, who defeated the Saxons by force, was the grandson of
    Charles Martel, who defeated the Islamic army in Poitiers; no
    coincidence either that the Teutonic knights who forcibly converted
    the Balts, were veterans of the Crusades, i.e. the campaign to
    liberate Palestine from Islam; nor is it a coincidence that the
    Spanish Inquisition emerged in a country that had needed centuries
    to shake off Islamic oppression. Finally, Christianity is, by and
    large, facing the facts of it own history, though its is still
    struggling with the need to own up the responsibility for these
    facts.

    An even more general way of drowning Islamic fanaticism in
    relativist comparisons, is to point out that after all, every
    imperialism has been less than gentle. That may well be true, but
    then, we are not setting up cults for the Genghis Khans of this
    world. A religion should contribute to man's transcending his
    natural defects like greed and cruelty, and not sanction and glorify
    them.

4.  *Whitewashing*: When one cannot conceal, deny or minimize the facts,
    one can still calim that on closer analysis,, they are not as bad as
    they seem. One can call right what is obviously wrong. This can go
    very far, e.g. in his biography of Mohammed, Maxime Rodinson
    declared unashamedly that the extermination of the Medinese Jews by
    Mohammed was *doubtlessly the best solution*. In numerous popular
    introductions to Islam, the fact that Islam imposes the death
    penalty on apostates (in modern terminology: that Islam opposes
    freedom of religion in the most radical manner) is acknowledged; but
    then it is explained that *"since Islam was at war with the
    polytheists, apostasy equalled treason and desertion, something
    which is still punished with death in our secular society"*. All
    right, but the point is precisely that Islam chose to be at war with
    the traditional religion of Arabia, as also with all other
    religions, and that it has made this state of war into a permanent
    feature of its law system.

5.  *Playing up unrepresentative facts*: A popular tactic in negationism
    consists in finding a positive but uncharacteristic event, and
    highlighting it while keeping the over-all picture out of the
    public's view. For instance, a document is found in which Christians
    whose son has forcibly been inducted in the Ottoman Janissary army,
    express pride because their son has made it made it to high office
    within this army. The fact that these people manage to see the
    bright side of their son's abduction, is then used to *prove* that
    non-muslims were quite happy under Muslim rule, and to conceal the
    fact that the devshirme, the forcible conversion and abduction of
    one fifth of the Christian children by the Ottoman authorities,
    constituted a constant and formidable terror bewailed in hundreds of
    heart-rending songs and stories.

    For another example, negationists always mentionn cases of
    collaboration by non-Muslims (Man Singh with the Moghuls,etc.) to
    suggest that these were treated as partners and equals and that
    Muslim rule was quite benevolent; when in fact every history of an
    occupation, even the most cruel one, is also the history of a
    collaboration. As has been pointed out, the Nazis employed Jewish
    guards in the Warsaw ghetto, disprove the Nazi oppression of the
    Jews.

6.  *Denying the motive*: Negationists sometimes accept the facts, but
    disclaim their hero's responsibility for them. Thus, Mohammed Habib
    tried to exonerate Islam by ascribing to the Islamic invaders
    alternative motives: Turkish barbarity, greed, the need to put down
    conspiracies brewing in temples. In reality, those rulers who had
    secular reasons to avoid an all-out confrontation with the
    unbelievers, were often reprimanded by their clerical courtiers for
    neglecting their Islamic duty. The same clerics were never unduly
    worried over possible secular motives in a ruler's mind as long as
    these prompted him to action against the unbelievers. At any rate,
    the fact that Islam could be used routinely to justify plunder and
    enslavement (unlike, say, Buddhism), is still significant enough.

7.  *Smokescreen*: Another common tactic consists in blurring the
    problem by questioning the very terms of the debate: *"Islam does
    not exist, for there are many Islams, with big differences between
    countries etc."* It would indeed be hard to criticize something that
    is so ill- defined. But the simple fact is that Islam does exist: it
    is the doctrine contained in the Quran, normative for all Muslims,
    and in the Hadis, normative at least for all Sunni Muslims. There
    are differences between the law schools concerning minor points, and
    of course there are considerable differences in the extent to which
    Muslims are effectively faithful to islamic doctrine, and
    correspondingly, the extent to which they mix it with un- islamic
    elements.

8.  *Blaming fringe phenomena*: When faced with hard facts of Islamic
    fanaticism, negationists often blame them on some fringe tendency,
    now popularly known as *fundamentalism*. This is said to be the
    product of post-colonial frustration, basically foreign to genuine
    Islam. In reality, *fundamentalists* like Maulana Maudoodi and
    Ayatollah Khomeini knew their Quran better than the self-deluding
    secularists who brand them as bad Muslims. What is called
    fundamentalism is in fact the original Islam, as is proven by the
    fact that *fundamentalists* have existed since long before
    colonialism, e.g. the 13th century theologian Ibn Taimiya, who is
    still a lighthouse for today's Maudoodis, Turabis, Madanis and
    Khomeinis. When Ayatollah Khomeini declared that the goal of Islam
    is the conquest of all non- Muslim countries, this was merely a
    reformulation of Mohammed's long-term strategy and of the Quranic
    assurance that God has promised the entire world to Islam. In the
    case of communism, one can shift the blame from Marx to Lenin and
    Stalin, but Islamic terrorism has started with Mohammed himself.

9.  *Arguments ad hominem*: If denying the evidence is not tenable, one
    can always distort it by means of selective quoting and imputing
    motives to the original authors of the source material; or
    manipulating quotations to make them say the opposite of the
    over-all picture which the original author has presented. Focus all
    attention on a few real or imagined flaws in a few selected pieces,
    and act as if the entire corpus of evidence has been rendered
    untrustworthy. To extend the alleged untrustworthiness of one piece
    of evidence to the entire corpus of evidence, it is necessary to
    create suspicion against those who present the evidence: the
    implication is that they have a plan of history falisification, that
    this plan has been exposed in the case of this one piece of
    evidence, but that it is only logical that such motivated history
    falsifiers are also behind the concoction of the rest of the alleged
    evidence.

    If the discussion of inconvenient evidence cannot be prevented,
    disperse it by raising other issues, such as the human imperfections
    which every victim of crimes against humanity inevitablly has
    (Jewish harshness against the Palestinians, Hindu untouchability);
    describe the demand for the truth as a ploy to justify and cover up
    these imperfections. If the facts have to be faced at all, then
    blame the victim. If people ignore or refute your distorted version
    of history, accuse them of distortion and political abuse of
    history. Slander scholars whose testimony is inconvenient; impute
    political or other motives to them in order to pull the attention
    away from the hard evidence they present.

10. *Slogans*: Finally, all discussion can be sabotaged with the simple
    technique of shouting slogans: *prejudice*, *myth*,
    *"racism/communalism"*. Take the struggle from the common
    battlefield of arguments into the opponent's camp: his self-esteem
    as a member of the civilized company that abhors ugly things like
    prejudice and communalism. After all, attack is the best defence.

After summing up the forms of negationism, we have to look into its
causes. The following factors come to mind:

1.  *Orientalism and Islamology*: After the medieval Christian pamphlets
    against *"Mohammed the impostor"*, not much has been published
    thematizing the ideological and factual crimes of Islam. Books on,
    say, *"slavery in Islam"* are extremely rare: the raw information
    that could fill such a publication will have to be found in more
    general publications, in which Islam is only referred to in passing,
    often without the author's realizing the implications for an
    evaluation of Islam. It is often said (when introducing
    *"refutations of prejudice"*) that people always associate Islam
    with intolerance; but finding a book specifically devoted to the
    subject of Islamic intolerance will be harder. How many millions
    have been killed by Islam simply because they were non-Muslims?
    Nobody has yet tabulated the figures available to prepare a general
    estimate. We can only notice that critical research of Islam is not
    exactly encouraged, and that there is an increasing tendency to
    self-censorship regarding Islam criticism. In part, this is due to
    muchdelayed reaction against the long-abandoned Christian polemical
    appraoch.

    Now that Islamic Studies departments in Europe are increasingly
    manned by Muslims and sponsored by Islamic foundations and states,
    as has been the case in India for long, the climate for critical
    studies of Islam is only worsening. When comparing the first
    (pre-World War 2) edition of the Encyclopaedia of Islam (Leiden,
    Netherlands) with the new edition, it is striking how critical
    observations have been ironed out. But even in the past, Islam has
    enjoyed a rather favourable treatment in academic circles. Thus,
    about Islamic slavery the prominent Dutch Islamologist C.
    Snouck-Hurgronje wrote in 1887 (i.e. thirty years after the
    Americans had waged a war to impose the abolition of slavery in
    their southern states, and some seventy years after its abolition in
    the colonies): *"For most slaves their abduction was a blessing...
    They themselves are convicted that it is their enslavement that has
    for the first time made them human."*

    The political context of the growth phase of Islamology provides a
    part of the explanation. Mature colonialism was not waging war
    against Islam, but sought the co-operation of the established social
    forces in the colonized populations. The British co-operation with
    the Indian Muslims is well- known; it is epitomized by the founding
    in 1906 of the Muslim League, which sought to *"inculcate loyalty to
    the British Empire in the Indian Muslims"*. In French West Africa,
    in the same period, Islam was accepted as a factor of social
    stability, and General Lyautey pursued a dream of a Franco-Islamic
    synthesis culture in Algeria. In the 1930s, in the last European
    attempt at fresh colonization, the Italian Fascists actively
    supported the spread of Islam in the Horn of Africa. But already
    since 1853 the colonial powers had been supporting the Caliphate
    against a Christian power, Czarist Russia, esp. in the Crimean War
    (a mistaken war if ever there was one), and this had strongly
    contributed to climate of benevolence towards the Muslim culture.

2.  *Church policy*: Christianity has for centuries waged a lively
    polemic against Islam, with Raimundus Lullus as probably the most
    remarkable exponent. Recently, this criticism has subsided. Worse,
    polemical works by clerics have been withdrawn or kept unpublished
    (such as, early this centure, Father Henri Lammens' paper arguing
    that Mohammed's revelations were a psychopathological phenomenon).
    One reason is that the Church is aware of the similarity between
    Jesus' and Mohammed's missions, so that a criticism of the
    foundations of Islam may backfire on Christianity. The second reason
    is the fear that Christians in the Muslim world would have to pay
    for even ideological attack on Islam (that is why Church polemists
    save their sharpest words for harmless religions like Hinduism).
    This fear also motivates other Church policies, such as the
    non-recognition of the state of Israel.

    Meanwhile, the face of the Church has changed. A small but
    significant event in the wake of the Second Vatican Council was the
    deletion from the Saints' calendar of Our Lady of the Redemption of
    Slaves, whose feast was on 24 September. In the Middle Ages, there
    was a special clerical order and a whole fund-raising network
    devoted to the redemption (*"buying back"*) of Christian slaves held
    in *Barbary*. Until the 19th century, coastal villages in Italy had
    watchtowers to alarm the people when a ship of the slave-catching
    Barbarese pirates was in sight. The terror of Islamic slavery was a
    permanent feature of Christian history from the 7th till the 19th
    century, but now the Church is working hard to erase this memory.

    Today, its pastors are the most fervent pleaders for the rights of
    Islam. Muslims in Europe are for them a substitute for the
    disappearing parish members. Separate Christian institutions, whose
    reson of existence is being questioned, find a new legitimacy in the
    fact that Islam in its turn is also opening separate schools,
    charities and even political parties. Islam has become a *sister
    religion* regularly praised as a *religion of peace*.

3.  *Anti-colonialism*: One of the ideological guidelines of
    anti-colonialism was: *"Of the (ex-)colonized, nothing but good must
    be said."* Therefore, mentioning the colonialism and mass slavery
    practised by the Muslims had become undesirable.

    Add to this general taboo the warning that Islam criticism
    effectively implies support to Israel, described by Maxime Rodinson
    as a *"colonial settler-state"*. If one acknowledges that Islam has
    always oppressed the Jews, one accepts that Israel was a necessary
    refuge for the Jews fleeing not only the European but also the
    Islamic variety of anti-Judaisms. Let us not forget that
    decolonization was followed immediately by renewed discrimination of
    and attacks on the Jewish and Christian minorities, and that those
    Jews who could get out have promptly fled to Israel (or France, in
    the case of Algeria). It is no coincidence that these Sephardic Jews
    are mostly supporters of the hard- liners in Israel.

4.  *The enemy's enemy is a friend*: Many people brought up as
    Christians, or as nominal Hindus, never outgrow their pubescent
    revolt against their parents' religion, and therefore automatically
    sympathize with every rival or opponent of the religion they have
    come to despise. Because Islam poses the most formidable threat,
    they like it a lot.

5.  *Leftism*: In this century, Islam has come to be advertised as a
    naturally leftist *"religion of equality"*. This line has been
    developed by Muslim apoligists such as Mohammed Habib, and they have
    even taken it as a rationalization of the irrational claim that
    Mohammed was the *"last Prophet"*: after all, as the *"prophet of
    equality"*, he had brought the ultimate message upon which no
    improvement is possible. Sir Mohammed Iqbal, one of the fathers of
    Pakistan, had claimed that *"Islam equals Communism plus Allah"*.
    The Iranian Ayatollahs, by contrast, and most of the vocal Muslims
    after the Soviet-Islamic war in Afghanistan, have restated the
    orthodox position that Communism is un-Islamic, not only because of
    its atheism but also because of its rejection of free entreprise;
    the current claim is that Islam provides a *"better form of
    equality"* than Communism.

    Even while Communists were slaughtered in Islamic Iran, and even
    while political analysts classify the Islamist movements as
    *"extreme rightist"*, most leftists have kept on cultivating some
    sympathy for Islam. During the Lebanese civil war, they fed us news
    stories about *"leftist Muslims, rightist Christians"*,
    *"Islamo-progressive, christiano- reactionnaire"*.

    Negationism in India is practised with the most prowess by
    historians and writers who are under the spell of Marxism. Lenin had
    wanted to use the Muslims against the French and British
    colonialists, but what was a tactical alliance for Lenin became a
    love-affair for the Indian Communists. However, it would be wrong to
    expect that the collapse of Soviet Communism and the inevitable
    decline of Communism in India will automatically lead to the
    dissolution of negationism. It has become a bias and a thought-habit
    for many people who have only vaguely been influenced by Marxism.
    Children mostly survive their parents, and certain forms of
    negationism may survive Indian Marxism for some time, unless a
    serious effort is made to expose it on a grand scale.

6.  *Rightist traditionalism*: There is also a rightist sympathy for
    Islam. An obvious point of agreement is of course anti-Judaism. A
    subtler basis for sympathy is the so-called traditionalist current,
    which was represented by the converts Rene Guenon and Frithjof
    Schuon, and still has a following: it has been idealizing Islam and
    esp. Sufism as the preserver of the age-old philosophia pernnis
    against modernity. In Russia, some *Slavophile* anti-Western groups
    now seek an alliance with Islam against the impending
    Americanization of their society. In the U.S., Christian
    fundamentalists and Islamic organizations are increasingly creating
    common platforms to speak out against trends of moral decay
    (abortion, pornography, etc.). Some of these phenomena of
    traditionalist alliance-building are quite respectable, but they are
    nevertheless conducive to Islam negationism.

7.  *Hindu cowardice*: Even among so-called militant Hindus, there is a
    shameful eagerness to praise Islam and deny its criminal record.
    E.g., during the Ayodhya movement, many Hindu leaders have been
    pleading that the Muslims should renounce the Ram Janmabhoomi site
    because *"geunine Islam is against temple demolition"*, so that a
    mosque standing on a demolished temple is not in conformity with
    Islamic law. This was, of course, blatantly untrue: Islamic
    scripture and history prove that destroying all expressions of
    unbelief and idolatry is a duty and an honour for Muslims. The
    doctrines that have led to the temple destructions including the one
    on Ram Janmabhoomi, are still being taught in all Islamic schools.

    Apart from being untruthful, this Hindu appeal to *"geunine Islam's
    tolerance"* was also bad debating tactics: if you say that temple
    demolition was standard Islamic practice, and that what had happened
    in Ayodhya was merely the local application of the general rule, the
    onus is on the Babri advocates to prove that the Babri Masjid was an
    exception; but if you say that the Babri Masjid was an exception to
    the rule of Islamic tolerance, the onus is on you to prove that in
    this case, an exceptional and uncharacteristic incident had taken
    place. It was also bad bargaining tactics: if you say that the Babri
    Masjid was merely one among thousands, then renouncing this one non-
    mosque would sound like a very low price for the Muslims to buy the
    Hindus' goodwill; but if you say that the Babri Masjid was an
    exceptional case, an insignificant incident amid the many big
    problems thrown up by history, you look petty by demanding the
    restoration of this one site. Short, Hindu leaders were damaging
    their own position by denying history and avoiding Islam criticism.

    One could understand people telling lies when it serves their own
    interest; but people who tell lies when it is the truth that would
    serve their interest, really deserve to be kicked around. This truly
    strange and masochistic behaviour can only be understood if we keep
    in mind that Hindu society is a terorized society. During the Muslim
    period, all those who stood up and spoke out against Islam were
    eliminated; and under Nehruvian rule, they were sidelined and
    abused. The oppressed Hindus started licking the boot that kicked
    them, and this has become a habit which in their slumber they have
    not yet identified and stopped.

8.  *Liberal Islam*: In the Islamic world, it is unwise to attack Islam
    head-on. Yet, sometimes people in those countries feel the need to
    oppose Islamic phenomena and campaigns, such as the witch-hunt on
    un-Islamic cultural remnants, violence on the non-Muslims, extreme
    forms of gender inequality. In order to have a chance, these people
    have to use Islamic language: *"Mohammed was actually against
    polygamy"*, *"violence against others is in conflict with the
    tolerance which Mohammed has taught us"*, *"respect for other
    cultures is part of Islamic tradition"*. In order to press their
    humanist point, they have to formally identify with Islam and lie
    about its contents.

    Many Muslims have started to believe their own rhetoric. If you
    point out to them that the Quran teaches intolerance and war against
    the unbelievers in the most explicit terms, many of them will
    sincerely protest, and not know what to say when you show them the
    Quranic passages concerned. There is no reason to doubt that the
    Moroccanm authoress Fatima Mernissi genuinely believes in her own
    argument that the Quranic instructions on how to organize your
    polygamous household are to be read as an abolition of polygamy
    (albeit in veiled terms, because Allah, the same Allah Almighty who
    went straight against the prevalent customs of idolatry and
    pluralism, had to be careful not to offend the spirit of the times).
    Many nominal Muslims have outgrown Islamic values and developed a
    commitment to modern values, but their sentimental attachment to the
    religion imbibed in their childhood prevents them from formally
    breaking with Islam and makes them paint a rosy picture of it.

    Among Muslim spokesmen, is is certainly not the fundamentalists who
    are the most active proponents of negationism. It is liberals like
    Asghar Ali Engineer who deny that Islam ordains war on the infidels.
    It is those who are acclaimed by Hindus as being good *"secular"*
    Muslims, like Saeed Naqvi, who go as far as to deny that the
    Partition of India was brought about by Muslims. An Islam that wants
    to be *secular*, cannot but be dishonest and untrue to itself.
    Unfortunately, a tolerant Islam is a contradiction, and a tolerant
    past for Islam to buttress the position of liberal Muslims, is a
    lie.

9.  *Muslims differing from Islam*: Many people have a Muslim neighbour
    who is a fine man, and from this empirical fact they conclude: Islam
    cannot be all that bad considering our friend Mustapha. This one
    empirical fact gives them a tremendous resistance against all
    information about Islamic intolerance. People usually reduce the
    world to their own sphere of experience, and general historical
    facts of Islamic fanaticism are not allowed to disturb the private
    experience of good neighbourly relations.

    Many nominal Muslims have retained from their Quran classes only
    some vague generalities about morality, and they normally go by
    their own conscience and sensibility without ever developing the
    doctrinally prescribed hostility towards non-Muslims. These good
    people but had Muslims can ignore but not change Islamic doctrine.
    They cannot prevent the Quranic message of hatred from infecting at
    least some of the more sesceptible among their brethren.

    There have certainly been situations where sane Muslims have calmed
    down their more riotous brethren, and such individuals do make a
    real difference. We should not make the Islamic mistake of judging
    people simply by their belonging or not belonging to the Muslim
    community, rather than by their human qualities. But the fact
    remains that the presence of a doctrine of intolerance as the
    official and identity-defining ideology of a community, exerts a
    constant pressure tending towards separatism and confrontation. The
    alleviating presence of the humanist factor even within the Muslim
    community should not be used to deny the ominous presence of Islamic
    factor.

*"Those who deny history are bound to repeat it"*: that is what many
critics of Holocaust negationism allege. This seems slightly
exaggerated, though it is of course the well- wishers of Nazism who
practise negationism. In the case of Islam, it is equally true that
negationism is practised by the well-wishers of that same doctrine which
has led to the crimes against humanity under consideration. While Nazism
is simply too stained to get a second chance, Islam is certainly in a
position to force unbelievers into the zimmi status (as is happening in
dozens of Muslim countries in varying degrees), and even to wage new
jihads, this time with weapons of mass-destruction. Those who are trying
to close people's eyes to this danger by distorting or concealing the
historical record of Islam are effective accomplices in the injustice
and destruction which Islam is sure to cause before the time of its
dissolution comes. Therefore, I consider it a duty of all intellectuals
to expose and denounce the phenomenon of negationism whenever it is
practised.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
