+++
title = "04 CHAPTER THREE PSYCHOLOGY OF JESUS"

+++
**CHAPTER THREE**

**PSYCHOLOGY OF JESUS**

**3.1. Nietzsche on Jesus**

The first to take on Jesus as a psychologist, though not as a medically
trained psychopathologist, was the German scholar and philosopher
Friedrich Nietzsche, one of the greatest critics of Christianity (who
ended up suffering an irreversible mental breakdown himself).^([1](#1))
Like many Christians, he thought that the historical Christ was a very
different man from the Christ of theology.  Thus, Christ had renounced
the law and chosen a life of childlike innocence, whereas the Churches
had built an elaborate system of morality on top of his teachings.

However, unlike some softhearted poetic Christians who felt unhappy with
dogmatic Christianity and attracted to the “experiential” Christianity
of Christ himself, Nietzsche rejected this original religion of Christ. 
For him, Christ was a *décadent*.  This somewhat technical term in
Nietzsche’s philosophy means: someone who has given up worldly
ambitions, who is tired of the world with its passion and struggle, who
wants to retire to some kind of paradisiacal sphere.  Such a prophet may
be good for people who are tired of this world, weak and unhappy people,
losers.

In Nietzsche’s assessment, Jesus was anti-world, anti-mighty,
anti-order, anti-hierarchy, anti-labour, anti-struggle,
anti-difference.  Total non-struggle, surrender, softness, love.  That
is the Jesus who is still somewhat popular among those few young
dreamers attracted to Christianity.  Tolstoy thought this was the real
Christ, sharply different from the Church’s Christ created by Saint
Paul.  For instance, obedience to the worldly authorities is a duty for
Church Christians, not for the original Christ.  Nietzsche, while
agreeing with Tolstoy on the contrast between Jesus and the Church
teachings, does not follow him in choosing for the original Jesus.  He
merely sees two forms of decadence at work, both to be rejected.  But he
will agree that Jesus’ attitude was his own problem, whereas Saint
Paul’s attitude (and theology) has sickened an entire civilization.

While Jesus preached a spontaneous and unconcerned life, his posthumous
disciple Paul, “the first Christian”, would build a full-fledged
theology out of a few elements of Jesus’ career and teaching, an
ideological system that has very little to do with the actual Jesus. 
For Jesus, the concepts of Sin and of Law had lost all meaning.  He
believed in sinlessness, no need to tread any specific path of morality
to avoid sin.  But in Christianity, sin becomes the *raison d’être* of
religion: Christ has come, suffered and risen in order to save humanity
from sin.

And yet, somehow this Salvation is not complete, because on top of it,
man must also go under the yoke of a system of morality, adapted with
strong simplification (deritualization) from the Mosaic Law, in order to
earn his place in Heaven.  It is this emphasis on dry morality that has
made Pauline Christianity so unpopular among the pleasure-seeking
section of humanity.  A lot of modern Western literature is about people
outgrowing their tense submission to Christian morality.  Some
Protestant sects have decided that morality is not instrumental in our
Salvation (though for the sake of public order they support morality and
explain that one’s degree of morality is a *sign*, but not a factor, of
one’s predestination for either Heaven or Hell), but they too stick to
the notion of sin as fundamental to the human condition until Jesus
saves us.

The question of “salvation” through one’s own “works” or through mere
“faith” in Jesus’ autonomous act of Salvation is a much-debated one
among Christian thinkers including Augustine, Thomas Aquinas, Luther,
Calvin etc.  The controversy exists, *mutatis mutandis*, in some other
traditions too, e.g. Shaiva Siddhanta.  Borrowing a Shaiva metaphor, we
might say that Christianity too has advocates of “the way of the
kitten”, which is grabbed by its mother and “saved” without effort, and
of “the way of the baby monkey”, which clings on to its mother and is
“saved” through its own effort.  But in Christianity, unlike Shaivism,
one is saved not from ignorance about one’s own ever-divine Self (i.e.
restored to one’s own intrinsic divinity), but from one’s own
ever-sinful self.  No one is a Christian if he does not accept that we
human beings are all intrinsically sinful, and that Jesus has come to
save us from sin.  But, all according to Nietzsche, Jesus never cared
about sin.  Contrary to Jesus, Christianity feeds us an obsession of
being profoundly evil and God-alienated.

At this point we must comment that Nietzsche has taken the traditional
image of Jesus too much for granted, an image built on those Bible
stories that are the most likely to be inserted borrowings from other
sects, such as the Sermon on the Mount.  In the more reliable Gospel
passages, we find that the historical Jesus was not the exalted,
ever-innocent pacifist and passivist he is often made out to be.

One thing that Nietzsche has against the Christianity of the Church
still dominant in his time, is that it is not religious enough. 
Religion for Jesus was a revolutionary thing, an extreme thing.  And
while Jesus’ religiosity was bizarre and unintegrated in the world (it
was an anticipation of the Kingdom of Heaven expected soon), it has a
certain kind of uncomplicatedness and cheerfulness about it which is
proper in a healthy religion.  But Pauline moralistic Christianity is
drab, unhealthy, worrisome, negatively limiting without offering
anything positive and great in return.  Nietzsche’s own religiosity is a
longing for the superhuman which transcends human smallness.  It is the
antithesis of Pauline Christianity, which to him seems to have nothing
great and mentally uplifting to it.

While Christ’s religion is centred on love and surrender, Paul’s
Christianity becomes, in Nietzsche’s analysis, the religion of hatred
and revenge.  Paul was obsessed with the Law, the central topic for the
Pharisees.  He was painfully aware of man’s (esp. his own) incapability
to live up to the letter of the Law.  Fortunately, Christ has delivered
us from the Law, and replaced it with the “law of love”: a revolution. 
So far, Paul is in tune with the spirit of Christ, as Nietzsche
understood it.  But in Paul’s vision, this revolution comes hand in hand
with another revolution, in one movement: the abrogation of the Law is
the ideological starting-point of Christianity’s mission among the
Gentiles.  Paul’s life, and with it that of many others, will no longer
be burdened with the Law, but will now burden itself with a new task,
unprecedented in history.  Paul breaks with Judaism and its oppressive
Law observance, and starts to win the rest of humanity for Christ.  His
own frustrated desire to live up to the demands of the Law, now gets
transformed into a tremendous ambition to spread his new-found religion
of Salvation through Christ.

Nietzsche draws the parallel with Luther, who had aspired so earnestly
to live an ascetic life and fulfill the commandments imposed by Church
teaching, but had ended up hating the Church and the pope and the
monastic rules so bitterly that he became their declared enemy,
crusading to spread an alternative.  Paul is so tired of the Law, that
he turns into a follower of its declared enemy, Jesus, once a
psycho-physiological crisis had broken through his resistance.  As Dr.
Somers has shown, this crisis, befalling Paul on the road to Damascus,
was a sunstroke, of which the effects and sensations were afterwards
interpreted as a divine revelation.  Once this liberating decision to
break with the Law has its exalting effect on him, he feels that this
solution for him, is also the solution for mankind.  He will now become
the apostle of the destruction of the Law, which has been replaced by
faith in Christ.

Saint Paul was not a prophet, but he was a political genius.  He saw the
potential of his new doctrine and of the situation in the Roman empire,
especially the provincial towns.  Away from the worldly turmoil of Rome
and from the extremist zealotry of Palestine (two places where the
Christians would encounter plenty of martyrdom), Paul found the optimum
terrain for the onward march of his new religion.  In these towns (in
Greece and Asia Minor), he would set up communities that would imitate
the social ways of the Jewish communities spread across the Empire, with
their honourable inconspicuous lives as craftsmen and traders, with
their mutual support and communal solidarity, and with their quiet sense
of superiority as the Chosen People.  Instead of the unbearable burden
of the Mosaic law, he would give them some petty bourgeois morality, but
all the same he would promote among them this communal superiority
feeling of being the Saved ones in Christ.

The contrast between Jesus and Pauline Christianity, is treated by
Nietzsche as a contrast between two doctrines.  Nietzsche does not
really analyse Jesus’ personality, self-perception or public image.  He
mistrusts the historicity of the Gospels.  At the time, the critical
method of investigating the historicity of pieces and layers of text was
not as refined, and especially the psychological analysis which 20th
century psychologists tried out on Jesus, was not yet at his disposal. 
So, his psychological evaluation of Jesus, and of Saint Paul, the
creator of Christianity, concerns more the ideology they represent than
their historical personalities.  Nietzsche puts their personalities
between brackets, and concentrates on the ideologies that their
(doubtlessly distorted) Biblical biographies represent.

One might say that Nietzsche’s view of Jesus was very one-sided.  The
peaceful apostle of love is a popular image of Jesus based on only a few
gospel texts: the Sermon on the Mount; “when you get slapped, offer the
other cheek also”; “he who lives by the sword shall perish by the
sword”; “the lilies of the field don’t toil, yet Solomon in his
splendour was not as good-looking as any of them”; “do not judge lest
you yourself by judged”.  These passages are of disputed historicity,
while many reliably historical passages show us a very different Christ.
short-tempered, defiant, and a Doomsday prophet.  The gentle Jesus, who
was in Nietzsche’s view the original Jesus whose teaching and example
were later deformed by Pauline Christianity, was himself just as much a
creation of his second-generation disciples.

While Nietzsche’s evaluation of Christ is somewhat marred by the
immaturity of the historical research on Christ, his understanding of
the Old Testament already had the benefit of a Biblical scholarship that
has, in great outline, been confirmed by the more recent scholarship. 
The chronology of the Old Testament had more or less been established,
and the political context of the successive stages of editing were
already understood.

According to Nietzsche, Yahweh’s support for his people came to be seen
as “conditional” and dependent upon the Hebrews’ own behaviour, when
they had become losers on the international scene.  God was no longer
seen to be giving them victory, so they tried to regain control over
their destiny by assuming God’s support to be dependent upon their own
moral behaviour (observance of the Law).  Nietzsche considered the
Bible’s emphasis on morality as a revenge operation of a defeated
people: winners are not burdened with morality, which is the weapon of
the losers.

Nietzsche has paid little attention to the next stage in Israel’s
religion.  During the period of the exile, prophets like Jeremiah,
Ezekiel and deutero-Isaiah had again disconnected God’s sovereign
decision from man’s degree of obedience to God’s will.  Man’s morality
and law-abidingness no longer make a difference: God’s judgment has
already been determined, his final intervention will come anyway, and
our Salvation will be brought about not by our own goodness but by the
Messiah.  The apocalyptic stage in the doctrinal development in Hebrew
religion, which will culminate in the Jewish rebellions of the first and
early second centuries AD, was already appearing on the horizon at the
time of the exile, when the classical doctrine of the Covenant, the
mutual contract between Yahweh and His chosen people, was still being
formulated and imposed upon Israel’s history through the final Bible
editing.

While Nietzsche’s analysis concerns ideologies or collective mind-sets
rather than persons, and while some of his insights have simply become
outdated by the newest Bible research, he has the merit of being one of
the first to apply human psychology to the supposedly divine revelation
embodied in the Bible.  He was instrumental in breaking the spell that
had been shielding the Bible from critical inquiry.  Moreover, unlike
the radical atheists and skeptics who simply disregarded the Bible or
dismissed it as fable, Nietzsche took the more balanced position of
“honouring” it as a highly interesting and psychologically revealing
human document.

**3.2. Psycho-analyzing Jesus**

Shortly after Nietzsche made his psychological analysis of what he
understood as Christian doctrine, rightly or wrongly attributed to the
historical Jesus by the Gospel editors, professional psychologists tried
to get at the historical personality of Jesus.  In the beginning and
more even at the end of this twentieth century AD, psychology has thrown
a mighty new light upon the development of the Abrahamic or
prophetic-monotheist lineage of religions.

Since the dawn of modem Western psychology, the Bible has interested
psychologists.  Freud, the Austrian-Jewish father of psychoanalysis,
gave a lot of attention to the character of Moses.^([2](#2)) For
example, in Freudian theory, Moses’ lack of a normal father relation
(according to the Bible, he was a foundling brought up in the Egyptian
court) made him an excellent object of study: this circumstance could
have accounted for his sternly authoritarian and patriarchal conception
of God.  Even more unorthodoxly, Freud claimed that Moses had not been a
Jew but a high-placed Egyptian: fearing trouble after committing a
murder, he had joined the impending Exodus of the beleaguered Jewish
immigrant community.

Freud was very hesitant to publish his work on Moses, because he
expected it to shock the Jewish community, and that at a time when Nazi
Germany was taking one anti-Jewish measure after another.  Freud’s work
is in many ways outdated, but remains of great importance in this
context because he did, even while expressing his great scruples and
hesitation, what many believing Jews and Christians could not
intellectually tolerate: he looked at the founder of his religion
through the inexorable eyes of scientific analysis.  Some other older
psychological studies of Bible characters include C.G. Jung’s study of
job and K. Jaspers’ study of Ezekiel.

Probably the first attempt to analyze Jesus was made in the late 19th
century by the French neurologist Jules Soury, also known as the
secretary of Ernest Renan.  Inspired by remarks by David Friedrich
Strauss, who had called Jesus a rabid fanatic, Soury wanted to go beyond
scornful rhetoric and apply the budding science of neurology to the case
of Jesus.  However, it was the heyday of materialism in the human
sciences, and with the conceptual instruments at his disposal, he could
hardly do justice to psychic phenomena.  In his diagnosis, he settled
for a highly disputable verdict which we would consider more
physiological than psychological: “progressive paralysis”.

The first truly psychopathological diagnosis of Jesus was made
separately by three psychiatrists, W. Hirsch, Ch.  Binet-Sanglé, and
G.L. de Loosten.  After thorough examination of the Gospel narratives,
they independently reached the same conclusion: Jesus was mentally ill
and suffered from *paranoia*.^([3](#3)) In E. Kraepelin’s classification
of mental diseases, paranoia is defined as “the sneaking development of
a persistent and unassailable delusion system, in which clarity of
thought, volition and action are nonetheless preserved”.

In his reply, the Christian theologian and famous medical doctor, Albert
Schweitzer, admitted: “if it were really to turn out that to a doctor,
Jesus’ world-view must in some way count as morbid, then this must not -
regardless of any implications or the shock to many - remain unspoken,
because one must put respect for the truth above all else.” But he
rejected the psychiatrists’ conclusions.^([4](#4))

Schweitzer alleged that from a historical point of view, most texts were
dubious or certainly not historical, e.g. the quotations from the Gospel
of St John, the most theologically polished and least historical of the
four Gospels; and that from a medical point of view, the alleged
symptoms were misunderstood.  Three objections seemed essential:

1.  there is no certainty about the historical truth of the texts;

2.  what seems to us to be a symptom, was possibly a normal trait, a
    cultural feature in that civilization;

3.  there are not enough fully reliable elements in order to base a safe
    judgment on them; even the pathological symptoms claimed, viz.
    pathological Ego-delusion and hallucinations, are insufficient to
    conclude a definite diagnosis.

These objections can be met, as we shall see in subsequent chapters. 
The last of the three can be met right away: if a psychiatrist notices
both hallucinatory crises and an Ego-delusion in a patient, he will most
certainly conclude that these are symptoms of a mental affliction, and
this all the more certainly if they can be identified as a known
syndrome, and are accompanied by a number of coherent typical behavioral
features.

Dr. Schweitzer was not a psychiatrist, but his Doctor’s title was
already enough to put all doubts to rest.  After his reply the Churches
felt reassured, and few outsiders made new attempts to psycho-analyze
Jesus.

An exception is Wilhelm Lange-Eichbaum, with the chapter “The problem of
Jesus” in his book *Genie, Irrsinn und Ruhm* (German: “Genius, Madness
and Fame”), of which we have excerpts from the third edition at our
disposal: it was still prepared by the author himself in 1942, while the
fourth edition of 1956 has been seriously tampered with by outsiders,
esp. in this chapter.^([5](#5))

Dr. Lange-Eichbaum writes: “The personality during the psychosis (we
only know Jesus during this life stage) is characterized by
quick-tempered soreness and a remarkable egocentrism.  What is not with
him, is cursed.  He loves everything that is below him and does not
diminish his Ego: the simple followers, the children, the weak, the poor
in spirit, the sick, the publicans and sinners, the murderers and the
prostitutes.  By contrast, he utters threats against everyone who is
established, powerful and rich, which points to a condition of
resentment. In this, all is puerile-autistic, naive, dreamy.  In this
basic picture of his personality, there is one more trait that is
clearly distinguishable: Jesus was a sexually abnormal man.  Apart from
his entire life-story, what speaks for this is the quotations of Mt.
19:12 (the eunuch ideal), Mk. 12:25 (no sex in heaven, asexuality as
ideal) and also Mt. 5:29 (removing the body parts that cause sin:
intended are certainly not hand and eye).  The cause may have been a
certain weakness of libido, as is common among paranoia sufferers…

“There is a lack of joy in reality, extreme seriousness, lack of humour,
a predominantly depressed, disturbed, tense condition; coldness towards
others insofar as they don’t flatter his ego, towards his mother and
siblings, lack of balance: now weak and fearful, now with violent
outbursts of anger and affective lack of proportion… According to both
modern and ancient standards, he was intellectually undeveloped, as
Binet has extensively proven; but he had a good memory and was, as is
apparent from the parables, a visual type.  Binet also emphasizes the
lack of creativity.  A certain giftedness in imagination, eloquence and
imaginative-symbolic thought and expression cannot be denied.  He was
certainly not a ‘genius’ in the strict modem sense.  The later psychosis
is however in no way in contradiction with his original giftedness which
was above average: in paranoia this is quite common…

“The entry in Jerusalem is doubtlessly the result of increased
excitement: psychically, Jesus is on fire.  For laymen as well as for
theologians, there is something painful and absurd about this entry.
Isn’t the psychotic streak all too obvious here?  Hirsch calls the
parade on the donkey ‘absurd and ridiculous’ and Schweitzer too finds it
painful.  It is only enacted to fulfill the Messiah prophecy,
secretively and for the eye of his followers.  It may be sad or
tragic-comical that the buffoon-king is making his entry this way. 
Nowhere is the purposeless nature of psychotic activity more in evidence
than in the entry in Jerusalem: his acts lack any logic.  What does
Jesus want?  He is tossed this way and then that way.  Worldly power? 
Yes and no.  Messiah claim?  Yes and no.  Defiance and death wish?  Yes
and no…

“The exact diagnosis is not that important for us.  A paranoid
psychosis: that may be enough.  Maybe real paranoia, maybe schizophrenia
but without irreversible decay, in the form of a paraphrenia.  Or a
paranoia based on an earlier slightly schizophrenic shift.  Anyone
checking with the extant scientific literature is struck by the
remarkable similarity of the symptoms.”

Dr. Lange-Eichbaum’s diagnosis belongs to an earlier stage in the
development of psychopathology, when all kinds of explanations were read
into symptoms, without using strict criteria.  Freud’s psycho-analysis
is so notoriously full of unfalsifiable statements (i.e. impossible to
prove wrong, escaping every cold test) that Karl Popper classifies it
among the pseudo-sciences along with astrology.  Dr. Lange-Eichbaum
stays closer to factual reality in his description of symptoms, but is
hazy in the formulation of a final diagnosis.  Moreover, his knowledge
of the Biblical backgrounds and the Roman-Hellenistic cultural milieu
are limited, so that many possibly pertinent facts escape his
attention.  We would have to wait for Dr. Somers’ multidisciplinary
competence to formulate a truly comprehensive diagnosis.

There is an element of modem man’s triumphalism, so typical of the
Enlightenment, in Lange-Eichbaum’s conclusions: “Can an intelligent and
critically disposed person, who has abandoned childish beliefs and
childish prejudice, seriously doubt that this is a case of psychosis? 
For an educated mind this psychosis is so clearly discernible that he
would expect even the layman to notice it.  Jesus’ destiny cannot
possibly be understood without the aid of psychopathology.  The dark
misgiving which historical theology has had for the past 100 years, was
on the right track.  Anyone who surveys the extant literature, can see
it with shocking clarity.  The notion that Jesus was a mentally ill
person, cannot be removed anymore from the scientific investigation. 
This notion is triumphant.  First, science has brought Jesus down from
his divine throne and declared him human; now it will also recognize him
as a sick man.”

A confirmation that the dispassionate study of Jesus as a human person
leads irrevocably to a psychopathological diagnosis, is given by a
Protestant preacher, Hermann Werner.  Objecting to “liberal” theology
with its historicization and humanization of the divine person Jesus (in
the theological line of research known as the *Leben Jesu-Forschung*,
“investigation of Jesus’ life”), he shows what becomes of Jesus when he
is measured with human standards: “The image of Jesus as \[the liberal
theologians\] want to describe it in ever greater detail, got equipped
with traits which made it ever less commendable.  This Jesus is, no
matter how much one would want to ward off this conclusion, mentally not
healthy but sick.  Although man’s - and certainly Jesus’ - deepest life,
is a mystery which we cannot unveil down to its deepest roots, yet
certain limits can be agreed upon within which one’s self-consciousness
must remain if it is to be sane and human.  There are, after all,
unassailable standards which are valid for all times, for the ancient
oriental as well as for the modem western.  Except in completely
uncivilized times and nations, no one has ever been declared entirely
sane and normal who held himself to be a supernatural being, God or a
deity, or who made claims to divine qualities and privileges. A later
legend may ascribe such things to this or that revered person, but when
someone claims it for himself, his audience has always consisted
exclusively of inferior minds incapable of proper judgment…”^([6](#6))

Perhaps Rev. Hermann underestimates the belief of the ancient civilized
Pagans in the possibility of divine incarnation, of having a divine
person in their midst, in which the meaning of the word “divine” can be
stretched a bit; but then he is right in assuming that this divine
status is normally only ascribed to the revered person after his death. 
That the modem skepsis towards claims of being a divine person were
shared by Jesus’ contemporaries, can be seen from the Gospel itself. The
Jews (for whom this skepsis became indignation for reasons of exclusive
monotheism) wanted to kill Jesus “because he not only broke the Sabbath
but also called God his Father, making himself equal with God” (John
5:18), and “because you, being a man, make yourself God” (John
10:33).^([7](#7)) Either Jesus was really God’s only-born son (and by
accepting that, you become a believing Christian), or his claim to
divine status was absurd and abnormal by the standards of both ancients
and moderns.  A liberal theology which humanizes Jesus and yet remains
Christian, is impossible: it is either the “fundamentalist” belief in
Jesus’ divinity, or no belief in Jesus Christ at all.

Rev. Hermann concludes: “Everyone knows that the sources on Jesus’ life
are insufficient for writing his biography.  But they are sufficient to
reach the conclusion that he was a pathological personality.  At any
rate, these are the conclusions which liberal theology has reached by
thinking and taking into account the findings of modern psychiatry.”

**3.3. Jesus the magician**

From the Gospel it is amply clear that Jesus was first of all known to
his contemporaries and to the audiences of later Christian preachers as
a miracle-worker, a magician.  He must have had an aura of intensity
about him.  He impressed the ordinary people with his charismatic airs,
and he believed in his own miracle-working act. The role he fulfilled in
the eyes of his followers, was that of the *exorcist*, a well-known type
in those days (though the characters filling this role must have been of
diverse kinds and dispositions).^([8](#8))

The softness and harmlessness which peaceniks have sought in Jesus, was
an image possibly based on some historical events in Jesus’ life, but
certainly not the dominant traits of his character or public image.  He
would never have become such a public and controversial figure had he
been such a simple dove.

In popular preaching and counter-polemic, miracles were the most
important topic.  As late as the third century, the Pagan polemist
Porphyry tried to counter Jesus with the story of Apollonius of Tyana,
who was also depicted as a miracle-worker.  Jesus was accused by
audiences and rival preachers of having an evil spirit himself, thought
to be the cause of all kinds of ailments with which people came to
miracle-workers.  Much in the miracle reports in the Gospels is polemic
against such allegations.

While some miracle stories are simply unbelievable, there is a
historical core in quite a few of them.  Thus, the procedure of
demanding that the evil spirit declare its name accurately fits the
exorcism procedures then in use.

Moreover, some of the miracle stories convey information which was not
useful to the early preachers, much less to the later theologians.  For
instance, Jesus chasing the evil spirits of the possessed man of Gerasa
into the swine, is, in spite of what theologians may say, not very
edifying.  Those swine who lost their lives had done no harm to anyone;
their owner, who lost a source of income, had not done any wrong to
anyone.  Certainly this story cannot be meant as a symbol for “Jesus
defeating the forces of evil”, as some theologians claim.  In fact it is
quite an authentic report of what was believed to be a miracle (which
interested the common people a lot more than the defeat of Evil).  But
as we have seen in ch.2.2, its details suggest precisely that both Jesus
and his followers deluded themselves, mistaking the end of the acute
crisis for the end of the chronic disease, and mistaking an ordinary
symptom for a miraculous cure.  Like the crowds, Jesus saw Jesus as a
man of miracles.  Like many Pagans, he believed that a divine being
could walk on the earth; but unlike them, he (and Paul and the
theologians after him) also gave this an interpretation of a unique and
exclusive divine status.

If miracles are the only argument for the supposed divinity of Jesus,
one must take into account that a number of these are certainly
pseudo-miracles.  The other miracles, which are unverifiable either way,
become equally suspect, if one considers the fact that not Jesus, nor
the disciples were able to see the difference between the end of a
crisis and the end of a disease.  With regard to the exorcisms it is
very dear that Jesus, as the Gospel attests, cannot prevent the devil
from coming back (Mt 12: 43-45).

We should also study the cases where Jesus refuses to do a miracle: e.g.
in Nazareth (where everybody knows him); before the Syro-Phoenician
woman; when the Pharisees ask for one.  One should understand the
difficult position of somebody who has to do miracles and to heal the
sick in a village where everybody knows everybody.  If there are true
recoveries, anybody will know; but pseudo-recoveries will soon be seen
for what they are.  So Jesus refuses to do miracles before his home
community.  One could also wonder why the Pharisees had to ask for a
sign, if it was true that so many miracles were taking place already. 
Further, one can suppose that some miracles were simply declarations of
Jesus that somebody was healed.  Thus, from the ten leper-patients
declared cured, only one came back.  The nine others, sent to the
priests for verification, had obviously not been declared cured.  So,
the miracles of Jesus cannot seriously be considered as a proof of
divinity.

Suppose the Son of God really appeared on earth, would he need miracles
of disputable quality to prove his identity?  Surely he could do
something unmistakably supernatural like, say, actually moving a
mountain (which he declares possible for those who have faith)?  The
whole story of these shaky miracles supports the hypothesis of an
ego-delusion which made Jesus really believe in his supernatural powers,
combined with a willingness on the part of a gullible and uneducated
community of fishermen to be over-awed by the divine airs which Jesus
gave himself.

**3.4. Sifting out the real Jesus**

We know by now that the Gospel is not a 100% authentic report about
Jesus’ doings and sayings.  But it is possible to more or less sift out
the authentic core from the theological additions.  Some of the
recognizable additions are the following.

According to the Gospels, Jesus is tried and sentenced by the Jews, with
Pilate a mild and innocent bystander.  In reality, Pilate was a cruel
governor, and even the central rulers in Rome ended up removing him from
office for causing too much trouble by his harshness.  As for the
“Jews”, it was the priests who tried Jesus, but the crowds (at least in
the province) who supported him.  But after the defeat of the Jewish
rebels at the hands of Titus in 70 AD, it became more rewarding for the
Christian missionary strategy to move closer to the Romans and emphasize
their separateness from the Jews.  These could now be blamed for
everything, while an early sympathy for Christ on the part of the Roman
governor was also suggested.

That is why Pilate is made to say: “I see no guilt in this man… I wash
my hands in innocence.” On the other hand, the Jewish crowd is reported
in the Gospel as clamouring for Jesus’ death: “His blood may come over
us and our descendents”, so that they become morally guilty of
“deicide”, god-murder.  On the basis of this Gospel story, the Church
has considered the Jews as the murderers of Jesus, a stigma it has only
removed (and that only on condition that they dis-identify with the
Jewish generation contemporary with Jesus) in 1962.

It is possible that Pilate had sympathy for everyone who was a
troublemaker to the Jews, whom he hated, but the depiction of his
personality is certainly the product of missionary editing.  The
allotment of guilt in the story of Jesus’ trial is in very large measure
responsible for centuries of Christian anti-semitism, culminating in
Auschwitz.  This allotment of guilt, with its far-reaching consequences,
was the product of conscious history distortion by the early Christian
missionaries, who considered it opportune to identify with the Romans
and blame the Jews.

A similar political turn is probably the key to the story of Jesus
saying: “Give unto Caesar what is Caesar’s, and unto God what is God’s.”
At first the Christians were very uncompromising and they refused to pay
taxes: they expected the Second Coming and the destruction of the
Empire.  When that changed (around 55, probably because at first the new
emperor Nero had raised high expectations among the Christians, or
because Claudius’ persecutions had forced them into compromise), they
justified this change to some of their more radical followers, and at
the same time assured Roman or pro-Roman listeners about the genuineness
of this new policy by invoking Jesus’ own authority.  So, possibly this
well-known episode is not historical, but a motivated insertion.

A lot of the parables and sermons attributed to Jesus may well be common
proverbs and insights of the contemporary religio-cultural scene.  For
instance, the dictum: “To him who hath, shall be given, but from him who
doeth not have, even what he hath shall be taken”, may well have been a
commonly known observation on life.  Most people will feel compelled to
give bigger presents to rich friends than to poor friends on a similar
occasion: it is the kind of common knowledge that ends up crystallizing
into a proverb.  Jesus himself may have applied this dictum to a
religious topic (the Kingdom of Heaven), but even in its application to
a religious context, it may have been borrowed from the Pharisees or
from one of the proliferating sects of the time.

It is very common that the miracles of one saint are attributed to
another saint by the latter’s followers.  In Communist books, I have
found Voltaire’s witticisms being attributed to Karl Marx.  The pranks
attributed to the Turkic wit Mollah Nasruddin (now popular in the
People’s Republic as *A-fan-ti*, i.e. Effendi) have been appropriated in
Indian sources for the Indian wit Birbal, and vice versa.  So, it is
only normal that wise and saintly statements that carried an aura of
respected profundity, were put in Jesus’ mouth by followers.

An important statement of Christian doctrine that was probably borrowed
from sectarian sources, either by Jesus or by the Gospel editors, is the
Sermon on the Mount.  Another Christian classic, the injunction to “love
thy neighbour as thyself”, is typically pharisaic, and in tune with
traditional morality expressed here and there in the Old Testament.  It
can readily be linked with pharisee Hillel’s famous statement that the
Jewish law can essentially be summed up as: “What ye do not want done
unto you, do not do that unto others”,- the Golden Rule which Hillel had
in common with Confucius, among others.

A different type of addition by the Gospel editors is the hardening of
miracle stories into fully attested reports.  In the Gospel of John,
written as the last of the four, we read that the apostle Thomas refused
to believe that the man before him was the resurrected Jesus, so he
asked to touch his wounds.  And yes, they were real, it was the
crucified and resurrected Jesus.  This detail of the checking of Jesus’
wounds is not present in the other Gospels.  What happened was that
Christian preachers used to relate the story of the resurrected Jesus’
meeting with the apostles, and people in the audience would ask: “Did it
really happen?  Do you know this for sure-?” And so, to anticipate these
questions, John fabricated a certificate of empirical proof.

Similarly, in the successive Gospels, the report on the baptism of Jesus
in the river Jordan becomes ever more “realistic”.  Mark reports it as a
subjective impression: “Jesus saw the heavens open and a dove descend on
Him”. In Matthew this becomes: “And lo!  The heavens opened and He saw
God’s Spirit descend on Him in the shape of a dove.” The seeing of the
dove is still a matter of Jesus’ own subjective perception, but the
interpretation that it was God’s Spirit has been added.  According to
Luke, “it happened that the Heavens opened and the Holy Spirit, in the
physical shape of a dove, descended on Him”.  Now, the whole episode has
become an objective fact.  Finally, John goes another step further: “And
John \[the Baptist\] gave testimony and said: ‘I have seen that the
Spirit descended as a dove from heaven… I have seen it myself and
attested: this is the son of the Lord.’” This time, there is even a
witness willing to testify.

What has started as a report of Jesus’ subjective experience, recorded
from Jesus’ own report, has become an objective and even a well-attested
fact.  A theology as well as a polemical fortification is increasingly
being imposed on the original innocent report.  Now, all such
insertions, suspected omissions, and reworked versions, can more or less
be traced and mapped.  After that, a solidly historical core remains. 
Among the reliably historical elements are those which go against the
intentions of the Christian preachers, or those which are beyond their
capacity of invention.

Therefore, a solidly historical element in the Gospel narrative is the
psychopathological syndrome which is clearly present in Jesus’
personality.  The Gospel writers could not have invented such a coherent
description of a well-defined syndrome even if they had wanted to, and
secondly they certainly didn’t want to pass on such information about
their Saviour.  The syndrome so well illustrated in the Gospel is called
*paraphrenia*.

**3.5. Jesus the paraphrenic**

Paraphrenia is a fairly rare mental affliction in which the patient
develops a delusion (mostly genetic, i.e. concerning his parents or
ancestry), which is triggered and fed by only rarely occurring
hallucinatory crises. Starting from this delusion, he builds up an
entire system complete with interpretative delusions (misreading events
to make them fit, rather than disturb, the basic delusion).  Otherwise
he remains well-integrated in his environment.^([9](#9)) Paraphernia is
sometimes classified in the larger category of “paranoia” and opposed to
schizophrenia.  In contrast to the schizophrenic, the paraphrenic
remains adapted to his milieu, has a coherent thinking and a
well-organized behaviour.  Generally hallucinations are rare, but
initiate a delusional state, often with a grandiose genetic theme.  The
paraphrenic is very sensitive to opposition to his ideas; he is
therefore somewhat secretive, and often full of resentment and hate. 
This is exactly the image the Gospel has painted of Jesus.

If we assume this diagnosis, which is suggested by several striking
events in Jesus’ life, and extend it to understand his whole life story,
the Gospel narrative becomes coherent.  One hypothesis will suffice to
explain diverse elements for which the exegetes now need a whole string
of hypotheses: methodologically, that is a very strong point.

Today, the theologians have caught themselves in a construction of
difficult and contradictory hypotheses that is convincing no one.  The
fundamentalists who refuse to think and therefore just take the whole
Bible as God’s own word, ridicule the theologians with all their
difficult terminology invented to create a conceptual framework in which
the diverse and contradictory Bible narratives might make sense.  The
real scientist is equally unimpressed by the patchwork of hypotheses to
which the theologians resort in order to make sense of the Gospel
narrative.  The paraphrenia hypothesis takes care of the entire Gospel
narrative at once.

Jesus had, on all hands, a problem with the identity of his father.  In
the apocrypha, he is called “son of a whore”.  According to the Jewish
tradition, he was the son of the Roman soldier Pandera and the local
girl Miriam (Mary), the hairdresser.  The existence of a Roman soldier
with that name has actually been verified.  A few years after the start
of the Christian Era, he was transferred to the legion in Germany, where
a grave bearing his name has been found: perhaps the only left-over of
the Holy Family.  At any rate, the Gospel narrative is explicit enough
that Jesus’ conception was a matter of scandal: his social father Joseph
wanted to break off his engagement with Mary when he found she was
pregnant. In a village, such a circumstance could not possibly be kept
secret from the child Jesus.  In the playground he must have been
reminded often enough of being an illegitimate child.

The first sign that Jesus is trying to work out his inner problem with
his parentage, and at the same time that people think there is mentally
something wrong with him, is his visit to the temple at age 12.  For
lack of a physical father, the only father that was left to him was the
Creator, Yahweh.  Like many boys of his age, he wanted to know more
about his origins, and he looked for information in the Scriptures. 
When he went to the temple, he went to the house of his Father.  There,
he expected to learn more from the Scribes.  The questions he asked them
must have sounded strange to them.  Jesus was hanging around for three
days, without telling his parents anything.  And when he returned home
and his family got angry for his causing them so much worry, he replied:
“Don’t you know I belong in my Father’s house?” He claimed the right to
solve his own identity problem, even if that implied insensitivity to
others’ feelings.  At that age, this behaviour is not abnormal, except
that few youngsters would have taken Scriptural imagery so literally as
to believe that their personal fatherhood problems could be solved by
identifying God as the missing father.

The little bit of information about this childhood episode indicates a
*prodrome* of the later crisis.  By itself, the temple episode need not
be pathological, it could have been a fairly ordinary event in the
difficult puberty process of self-discovery.  But it does betray a
psychological setting in which a deeper mental disease can develop.

The first real crisis we hear of, is the baptism in the river Jordan. 
There, Jesus sees a bird coming from the opened sky, and hears a voice
bringing an enormous message: “You are my son, in whom I take pleasure.”
Seeing light, perceiving a bird (zooscopy), hearing a voice with a short
message in the second person and which is absolute and takes away all
doubts: that is the description of a typical sensorial hallucination.

The famous Flemish theologian Edward Schillebeeckx sees in the baptism
episode “Jesus’ vocation meaningfully surrounded by interpretative
visions”.  This implies that the visions were literary embellishment,
meaningful but nonetheless unhistorical and invented by human beings. 
Progressive theologians like Schillebeeckx abhor the traditionalist more
literal interpretation.  They dislike supernatural things like “visions”
and voices from the sky.  But with that, they fail to give a coherent
explanation of why this imagery is being created (and why, as we have
seen, John tries to make his audience believe that the events were very
real).  In this case, the literal interpretation is the more scientific
one: the bird did appear, the voice did speak from the sky - but only as
a subjective experience of the mental patient Jesus, rather than as an
objective cosmic revelation directly from God the Creator.

In the Bible numerous texts mention the hearing of voices, especially
the voice of God.  Current exegesis interprets these texts as
metaphorical: “hearing the voice of God” is simply the expression for a
vocation by God.  Sometimes, this metaphorical interpretation is
justified: to take an example from outside the Biblical tradition, when
the Greek philosopher Parmenides says that “a god has revealed” his
philosophy of Being to him, it is just a manner of speaking, not an
actual auditory hallucination.  In psychopathology however, “hearing a
voice” is a common expression for an auditory hallucination, often
accompanied by other sensorial hallucinations, esp. visions (other
phenomena include feeling of heat or of being pierced by needles).  That
the voices heard by Jesus were hallucinatory, is even admitted by Albert
Schweitzer.

Important supportive information for the paraphrenia thesis is furnished
by the apocryphal Gospel of the Hebrews.  It relates that Jesus’ family
thinks he is possessed by a demon, and that they want him to try this
baptism as a possible way of exorcising the demon; he is at first
unwilling (all accounts mention a preliminary discussion between Jesus
and John the Baptist).  It seems that Jesus’ behaviour had been strange
for some time already, and now that there is an exorcist in the
neighbourhood, the remedy should be tried: if it doesn’t help, it
doesn’t harm either.  But the emotionally charged baptism experience
triggers a “revelation” that will plunge Jesus completely into a
distorted self-image.

Typical for the delusion that gets articulated in such a sensorial
hallucination, is the absolute certainty with which the patient believes
in it.  Jesus will doubt no more: he is the son of the heavenly Father. 
Later, when a Church theology was developed, this notion of God as the
personal Father was made into a central theme in Christianity, setting
it apart from the Mosaic ‘Old Covenant’.  In the latter, God was a
vengeful ruler, who only stood by His chosen people on condition of its
total obedience.  Now, God became a loving Father.  What this
interpretation of the baptism revelation overlooked, is that the
vengefulness of Yahweh was now transferred to His Son.  Jesus did not
have an army, like Mohammed, but he was very intolerant of skepsis and
full of hatred against the indifferent world.  In his own
hallucinations, he himself would be the avenger on the Day of Judgment.

After the baptism crisis, Jesus retires to the desert, where he doesn’t
eat for forty days, and gets visions of angels serving him and the devil
tempting him.  This period of extreme introversion after the shocking
hallucination, as if to digest his new self-understanding, is again very
typical.  He is offered nothing less than the power over the whole
world, but he turns down the offer.  This is a typical rationalized
delusion, with a reasoning which we can imagine along these lines: “To
me the power over the world has been given.  Then why do I not
effectively have the power?  Because I spurned it, though it is
rightfully mine and I could have taken it.” Still, the subsequent
episodes show that he has started ascribing extra-ordinary powers to
himself.

Dr. Somers makes the diagnosis: “Psychopathological investigation
discovers in Mark, Luke and Matthew, regardless of the fact that Luke
especially adapted the original version, a number of well-known symptoms
of a hallucinatory state: hearing the voice of the devil, seeing wild
beasts (zoopsy), having the desire to fly (vestibular hallucinations,
having visions of the ‘whole world’, suffering from anorexia (fasting). 
In this light, the vision of the baptism episode is also certainly
another manifestation of this hallucinatory state: a well-localized
(heavenly) vision, the seeing of light (opening of heaven), of a bird,
the hearing of a voice speaking in the second person and communicating a
grandiose genetic message (‘you are my beloved son’).  The whole picture
is coherent with regard to the psychopathological symptoms.  In the text
therefore, one finds the correct description of a delusional
hallucinatory state.  Moreover, the Gospel also mentions circumstances
which are coherent with this pathology.”

After this bewildering revelation, Jesus starts to live up to his new
self-image.  He becomes a wandering god-man, doing miracles.

The next hallucinatory crisis is on Mount Tabor.  He goes up on the
mountain with his disciples Peter, James and John.  There, in a sea of
white light, he meets with Elijah and Moses.  Again, a voice from the
clouds speaks: “This is my Son, the Beloved.  Listen to Him.” According
to Luke (9:28-36), Jesus spoke with Moses and Elijah about ‘his
going-out which he would perform in Jerusalem.  Then, the scene stops
and Jesus is alone with his disciples, who have not seen Moses and
Elijah: they merely wake up when they hear Jesus talk to somebody.  In
the testimony of Mark (9:2-10) there is the same revealing
contradiction: while it is contended that Elijah and Moses appeared,
only Jesus is described and it is said that finally the apostles saw
nobody but Jesus.

This crisis marks the beginning of the predictions of Jesus’ suffering
and death, which had been the topic of his conversation with Moses and
Elijah.  Taking inspiration from a description of the “Servant of
Yahweh” in Isaiah (53:7), he understands he will be led unto his
slaughter like a lamb.  He reads into Scripture the indication that the
Son of Man will go into his glory through suffering and meek submission
to this expiatory sacrifice.  According to the logic of the delusion, he
must now go to Jerusalem and provoke his death by entering as king.  He
predicts he will rise on the third day and thus enter his Kingdom.

A third report of a hallucinatory crisis is only given by John
(12:20-36).  During the entry in Jerusalem he hears the voice of the
Father saying: “I have glorified him and will glorify him again.” The
people said it had thundered, some said an angel had spoken to him, i.e.
to Jesus.  So it was only Jesus who had heard the words.

Contemporary theologians like E. Schillebeeckx ascribe these stories to
the imagination of the primitive Church, which wanted to glorify Jesus. 
But, asks Dr. Somers: “Why should the Church invent a number of stories
which caused nothing but difficulties?  Why should the son of God be
baptized?  Why should he be tempted by the devil, and that with such
extravagant temptations?  Why should he fast during 40 days?  Why should
he see wild beasts?  It is quite inconceivable that the primitive Church
invented these strange stories for the glorification of Jesus.  On the
contrary, the primitive Church leaders tried to interpret and to adapt
the existing story in order to demonstrate the divine origin of these
phenomena.  Of a hallucinatory visionary state, they made objective
supernatural events.  But they were sufficiently ignorant so that they
could not mask the pathological background of the events they
recounted.”

These hallucinations, few in number but elaborating the same theme,
together with the testimonies of people thinking he is “possessed” or
mentally disturbed, point to the paraphrenia syndrome.  What confirms
this tentative diagnosis and makes it into the first coherent
explanation of the entire Jesus narrative, is Jesus’ behaviour.

The paraphrenic patient has some marked characteristics, other than the
rare hallucinations and the delusional state, e.g.: a great hostility
against those who contradict him, often also a familial rage, as the
family usually contradicts him; autistic behaviour, in the sense that
the criterion for judgment and action is not reality, but his subjective
will; an interpretative delirium, i.e. interpreting events and
utterances as pointing to him and to his delusion; concealing his
conviction and temporizing as long as circumstances seem unfriendly. 
All these typical features can be found in the Gospel.

Jesus threatens Bethsaida, Kapharnaum, Jerusalem, because they did not
believe him.  If the Son of Man comes with heavenly power, all those who
did not believe will be killed, along with all kings and mighty men. 
Jesus insults the Pharisees, because they disbelieve and criticize him. 
Jesus is especially angry with his family which tried to prevent his
preaching.  A number of logia (= sayings of Jesus) are directed against
the family, and in the Gospel one cannot find any friendly word to the
family and especially to his mother.  Spurning his mother and brothers
who are waiting at the door, he points to his disciples: “These are my
mother and my brothers, who accomplish the will of God” (Mk 3:35).  The
disciples of Jesus should hate their fathers and their mothers (Lk
14:26) because the true enemies of man are his family members (Mt 10:35;
see also Mk 11:30; Mt 10:35; Mk 13:11).

A highly irrational act is Jesus’ cursing of the fig tree when, out of
season, it is not bearing fruit (Mk 16:20-25; Mt 21:18-22).  The tree is
behaving normally, but Jesus punishes it: never again will it bear
fruit.

Jesus is also violently sensitive to things relating to his supposed
Father.  The violent scene he makes against the traders in the temple
(Mk 11:15-17; Mt 21:12-13; Lk 19:45-46), where he objects against the
transportation of any object, is motivated by what he perceives as their
dishonouring his Father’s house.  Modem preachers say that Jesus was
protesting against materialism, that he was making an important ethical
and religious statement.  But in fact, Jesus’ behaviour vis-a-vis the
traders in the temple premises was highly unadapted to reality.  Those
traders were not doing anything unethical or irreligious.  They had an
important function in temple life, where sacrifices were the normal and
statutory practice.  Even if their activities had been misplaced, so was
Jesus’ tirade that they were making “his Father’s house” into a
“robbers’ den”: traders are not necessarily robbers, theirs is an
honourable profession, and eventhough God may be our Father, we
shouldn’t take disrespect for God’s house so personally.

Another, more specific detail is that he attempts to keep his status as
Son of Man secret: “Do not talk about this with anyone”, he says several
times.  Only when his disciples, and later the priests during his trial,
ask him straight if he is God’s son, he consents, saying that they have
said it.  But to theologians, it has always remained a riddle why Jesus
should be so secretive about his glorious mission.  Paraphrenia patients
are very aware of the attitude (and possible lack of understanding) of
their fellow men.  That is why Jesus temporizes, in expectation of more
auspicious circumstances.

A final symptom is the anti-sexual attitude.  As the studies of Bultmann
have shown, the primitive church has cleansed, adapted a number of
logia.  A relevant example is provided by the logia about the children
and the reign of God: unless you become like children, you cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God.  In the apocryphal Gospel of Thomas, some
logia have been preserved which explain the periscopes of the Gospels:
to be a child is to be asexual and free of sexual shame (log. 12, 21;
cfr. also log. 37, 114: if you make masculine and feminine one).  In the
canonical Gospels it is also said that in heaven there is no marriage,
and virginity is exalted, as it is in the Apocalypse.  The theme is
constant: virginity, inhibition of sexual activity, as well in the
canonical Gospels and the Gospel of Thomas as in the Apocalypse.

Jesus’ behaviour during his trial is in conformity with the diagnosis. 
We should keep in mind that from the vision on Mount Tabor onwards,
Jesus has been mentally preparing himself for death.  The priests accuse
him of blasphemy: he has insulted Yahweh by calling himself His son. 
Normally, they have to produce witnesses to prove this extremely serious
allegation.  But Jesus saves them the trouble: he commits an even
greater sacrilege right on the spot, by pronouncing God’s name aloud. 
Strictly following the prescribed procedure, the high priest tears his
mantle into two.  Jesus stands convicted of sacrilege.  The Gospels make
no secret about Jesus’ guilt of this sacrilege, which was well known to
be a capital offence.

He commits what is blasphemy before the priests, with a straight face,
because he is fully prepared to die.  For months he has been mentally
readying himself for it, announcing that this would be the road to his
glorification.  When you think death is the end, the prospect of dying
may be a bit horrifying.  But when you think it is the way to the glory,
it is alright: “Death, where is thy sting?” His frankness in the face of
a certain death penalty must certainly have added to his superhuman
aura.

**3.6. Some fantastic stories**

The Gospel of Infancy, i.e. the Gospel narrative of Jesus’ conception,
birth and early childhood, is not so much a source of
psychopathologically relevant information.  It is less reliable and more
open to speculative interpretations.  Yet, it also provides material for
some interesting psychological observations.  In this respect it is
important to see the essential difference between the Gospel of Infancy
and the visions during the Baptism and Tabor episodes.  Most Bible
students see the Gospel of Infancy as a entirely mythical corpus in the
New Testament and they mention numerous reasons.

1\. The chronological indications are contradictory.  According to
Matthew, Jesus should be born between 6 and 4 BC, during the reign of
the great Herod, who died in 4 BC; but the census which according to
Luke, obliged the parents of Jesus to travel to Bethlehem, was organized
by Quirinius, who according to the precise indications of Flavius
Josephus, the Jewish historian, became procurator of Syria in 6-7 AD,
i.e. 11 to 12 years later.  Furthermore, the beginning of Jesus’ public
life, when he was about 30 years old, is traced by Luke (3:1) to the
15th year of the reign of Tiberius (27 AD).  According to that
indication, Jesus should have been born in 4-3 BC.  These difficulties
were never solved by the historians. 

2\. The divergence between Matthew and Luke is striking.  According to
Matthew, an angel appears to Joseph, not to Mary; but for Luke an angel
appears to Mary and to Zachariah.  According to Matthew, each event is
predicted in the Old Testament; but Luke replaces the quotations of the
Old Testament with occasional prophecies by Hannah and Simeon.  Matthew
writes that a star appears, Magi come, there is a flight to Egypt and a
slaughter of innocents by the Great Herod.  For Luke there are only
shepherds, angels and music, the circumcision in the Temple, and a
simple return to Nazareth.  He does not mention Egypt, nor the slaughter
of the innocents.

In the *Protevangelium* of James another series of divergent elements
can be found.  Herod kills Zachariah, while John is sought for; there is
no star, no Magi, no prophecies, only the angels and their message to
Mary and Elisabeth.

3\. The only elements which all witnesses have in common are: 1) the
exceptional pregnancy of Mary; 2) the hesitation of Joseph; 3) the birth
of Jesus; 4) the exceptional atmosphere of wonders.  Each witness
surrounds these historical events with a scenery of marvellous elements
of his own.

4\. Whoever the witness, the given details are typically feminine
notwithstanding a masculine elaboration.  Typically feminine are: the
attention to what people say, to gifts, visits, the emotional reactions
of the fiancé and the niece.  Typically masculine is Matthew’s
elaboration: the narration of each event is rigorously closed with a
quotation from the Old Testament.  Typically masculine is also Luke’s
elaboration: he omits a number of marvellous elements (the star, Herod,
the visit of the Magi, the appearance of the angel to Joseph); he
replaces them by the more credible visit of shepherds; while he omits
the Biblical quotation, he replaces it with the occasional prophecies of
Hannah and Simeon.  Typical for both is the atmosphere of wonders (signs
in heaven versus heavenly music, angels), a great historical context (a
Roman census versus Herod and a flight to Egypt) and the glorious role
for the mother to give birth to a future king of Israel.

If we submit the texts to a psychological examination, to get at its
historical core, we find that there is a common source for all stories
and particularly a feminine one, and secondly that the majority of
events are due to imaginative ‘loose’ construction (e.g. the
“prophecies” are not even exact allusions).

It is common opinion among exegetes that this mythic scenery can be
dated to after Jesus’ Resurrection, when in the primitive Church
questions arose about Jesus’ origin.  As it was due, all signs had to be
present that Jesus was the future Messiah.  As there was a Hellenistic
Church (Paul) and a Jewish Church dames), so there was a Jewish version
(Matthew) and a Hellenistic version (Luke).  For the Jews, Jesus had to
be predicted by the prophets; for the Hellenistic people the credibility
was to be ensured by a more common course of events.

Even in this mythical context some fundamental data may appear which are
based on real facts.  As the indications about the census of Quirinius,
about Herod, about the descent from David, about the journey to
Bethlehem (according to James’ *Protevangelium*, Joseph and Mary live in
Jerusalem, not Nazareth) may be false, it is not impossible that Jesus
was born in the period that Herodes Archelaos succeeded his father in 4
BC.  Ibis was a period of revolutionary agitation and consequent
repression in Jerusalem.  Is it unthinkable that the murder of the
innocents goes back to this period, and that Joseph and Mary, like
probably a lot of people, escaped from Jerusalem to safer surroundings,
such as Bethlehem? In that context and in accordance with the most
probable chronology, Jesus was born in 3 BC during the flight from
Jerusalem.  But that he was born in Bethlehem, is certainly not more
than an invention of the Gospel editors, to declare the apparent
prophecy about the birthplace of the Messiah fulfilled in Jesus.

According to the Jewish tradition Mary was a whore and Jesus’ father was
the Roman soldier Panthera.  There are, however, some unsolved
questions: how is it possible that from the beginning there is the
supposition that Jesus could become king in Israel?  This seems quite
unrealistic, if Jesus was the son of a Roman soldier.  Things may change
if on hypothesizes that actually his father was a prince, named Herodes
Archelaos (a name which evokes the word *Archangelos*), who in 4 BC
became the successor of the great Herod, and who was known for his
unrestrained sexual behaviour.  Is it unthinkable that a prince said to
a girl that her son could become a king?

As it had to be shown to the many new adepts of the primitive Church,
who became curious about Jesus’ origins, that he was really born as the
Messiah, the inferior conditions of his birth had to be
overcompensated.  The scenario of conceiving outside marriage and giving
birth to an illegitimate child in bad conditions (flight to Bethlehem)
had to be changed to a direct divine intervention, a virginal
conception, the birth of a future king with the presence of royal Magi,
shepherds, angels, heavenly signs and prophecies.

About the mythical character of this Gospel of Infancy, there is a
consensus among exegetes: a fantastic scenery was elaborated in order to
mask the inferior conditions of Jesus birth. It is impossible to
understand these fantastic stories, if one does not reduce them to their
historical origin: a woman, the mother of Jesus, who had to play her
glorious role as the mother of the Messiah to the community of disciples
that had gathered around her son.  It is a fair guess that after Jesus’
resurrection and departure, Mary was questioned about the circumstances
of Jesus’ birth, and told the apostles the story that became the Gospel
of Infancy.  Some of the miracle-mongering may have been her own doing,
as may the variations: she must have told the story on more than one
occasion, with less concern for consistency than regular preachers would
have.

We find Jesus’ mother back in another episode: the Pentecost (Acts 2). 
This story is also full of commonplaces.  There was a great wind, sounds
from heaven, tongues of fire appeared, and the apostles spoke several
languages.  In the text it is said quite realistically that the people
thought it was the language of drunkards.  But Luke adds that they all
understood the preaching in their own language, which seems rather
contradictory.

This contradiction, together with the commonplace nature of several
features and the phenomenon of excited and unclear speech (therefore
described as “foreign language”), casts doubt upon the authenticity of
the event.  It appears as a show which had to overcompensate the
subjective uncertainty of the apostles.  Of course they were anxious:
would the people believe that Jesus was resurrected?  Could it become a
success?

The story of the Ascension is even worse.  The Gospel editors who
mention it (not all even do) relate the whole event in only one sentence
and they are not unanimous about the precise location. Luke mentions two
different ones: Bethany and Jerusalem.  Nobody describes clearly the
place, the event, the circumstances.

Is it credible that a witness of such a wonderful and glorious event
could say nothing more than “he disappeared”?  It sounds like a very
simple goodbye.  Why did they not invite a number of witnesses to this
ultimate glorification?  Even the high priest?  For this instance let us
recapitulate the arguments:

1.  The Apostles are witnesses who try to defend the thesis that Jesus
    now returned to heaven.

2.  According to the criteria of courtroom evaluation of witnesses these
    are clearly false with regard to the way of disappearance of Jesus.

3.  The only historical fact is that about Jesus nothing is said any
    more: he disappears definitively from among the Apostles in
    Jerusalem.

It should be noted that angels appear at all difficult moments: the
conception, the birth of Jesus, the resurrection, the ascension.  The
Holy Ghost explains both the conception of Jesus and the conception of
the Church.  The structural analysis reveals a systematic trend, a
thematic thinking: when there is a difficult situation, a myth with
angels or Holy Ghost is masking the truth.  So there is a constant
“mythologic” activity, why not say “mythomanic” (not in a truly
pathological, but in a larger sense).

Exegetes use the term: “post-Paschal glorification”, indicating by that
terminology that all these mythical stories were “invented” by the
Church and are to be classified as devoid of historical foundation, as
purely literary products, only intended to promote the faith in Jesus. 
But this theory is unable to specify which were the true historical
events, masked by this mythology.

So the distinction should be made between two aspects of the Gospel. 
The first one is the mythological: a myth is built, a fantastic scenery
in order to show the divine nature of Jesus.  The second aspect is the
transparency of the factual pathological trend, which could not be
masked because of ignorance of psychopathology (baptism, Tabor, etc.).
The first has been adequately recognized by the exegetes, the second has
been ignored.

**3.7. Son of Man**

Jesus calls himself the Son of Man.  But according to the voices he
heard, he was the Son of God; they never called him Son of Man.  In
order to understand this complex psychological situation, one has to be
familiar with the cultural background, as well as with the
psychopathological one.

The theme of the “Son of God” is essential in the story of his
conception, of his birth, of the temple-episodes (as a 12-year-old, and
with the merchants), in the baptismal and the Tabor visions.  While some
kings in divergent cultures have been called Son of God (or Son of
Heaven, etc.), they never pretended to be the physical Sons of God,
conceived without a human father’s intervention, as Jesus did.  Where
followers have ascribed magical non-human conception to their leader
(e.g. the Buddha conceived on his mother by an elephant), at least the
leader or prophet himself did not call himself Son of God.

The “Son of God” theme is clearly the fundamental one: the voices
confirm that tide.  The contents of this status is the problem which
preoccupies Jesus in the desert.  Could he become a Roman Emperor? 
Could he transform stones into bread?  Could he precipitate himself in
the air?  Jesus of course had to consult the Bible about his condition. 
There he found the roles of the King, the Messiah and the Son of Man. 
Never was it predicted that the Son of God would come, so if he himself
was the Son of God, he had to appropriate to himself the tide of the Son
of Man as well.  And this Son of Man was dearly described by Henoch. 
Once he was convinced, it became clear to him that now his reign was
coming, because soon he would come on the clouds of Heaven.

And then he announced the reign of God, implicitly his own.  He kept his
secret, because it was impossible to declare to the people that soon he
would be the Master of the whole world for eternity.  After a while it
became a problem to him how he should attain his glory.  On Mount Tabor
he heard the voices that convinced him that he was also the Servant of
Yahweh, who had to suffer and die before attaining his glory.  Moses and
Elijah clarified to Jesus that he was going to die in Jerusalem.

Jesus is convinced that all texts of the Bible point to him, because he
is the Son of God.  In Jerusalem he has to make his entrance on an ass
“as Zechariah predicted”.  Before his judges Jesus was silent because he
enacted the Lamb of Isaiah, except when he was asked who he was: then he
affirmed that he was the Son of God, the Son of Man, the King of the
Jews, the Messiah.

The starting-point of this development was the genetic theme: who is my
father?  The purely pathological elements are the progressive
Ego-inflation, the specific elaboration of the delusion, the
interpretative delirium (all texts point to him) and the hallucinatory
state.  So, against Schweitzer, it has been shown that although the
content of the delusion is partly indebted to the cultural background
(Jewish Scripture), the specific pathological elements are
culture-neutral.

**3.8 The resurrection**

Jesus is sentenced to crucifixion.  This was a Roman, not a Jewish
punishment, and Bible scholars have debated a lot about this seemingly
unnecessary hand-over of Jesus by the Jewish authorities to the Roman
governor Pilate, who proceeded to implement the death penalty which
Jesus had deserved according to the Jewish law.

Crucified convicts were tied (not nailed) to a cross, and their death
was brought about by torture and by breaking their bones. 
Interestingly, the Roman soldiers refrained from breaking Jesus’ bones,
no doubt because they had orders to do so.  Having heard of the
prediction that Jesus would rise on the third day, Pilate must have
thought it quite an interesting practical joke to arrange for the
effective re-appearance of this weird godman.  So, he ordered a servant
to look after Jesus after he had been taken down from the cross, and to
get him back on his feet by the third day.

Postulating, as many modernist theologians do, that Jesus died on the
cross and that his re-appearance, which the four Gospels unanimously
report, was a mere fable, is hardly tenable.  The rather sensational
tradition that Jesus came back alive after being crucified, can much
better be explained by assuming that he did indeed come back.  The
belief that he had come back was crucial to the Christians’ faith, and
only a few years after the fact, Saint Paul declared that without the
“resurrection”, the Christian faith would make no sense.  This belief is
best explained by the hypothesis that Jesus did indeed come back: to
everyone’s surprise, he had survived the crucifixion.  They still could
not believe that one could survive it, so they accepted that this was
Jesus’ ultimate miracle: he had died and returned to life.

To find out with reasonable certainty which versions of the resurrection
story are reliable, there are methods of internal psychological
criticism, esp. the criteria of U. Undeutsch.  According to Undeutsch,
the clearest sign of falsity of a testimony is the presence of
commonplaces.  A true witness mentions particular details which caught
his attention; he mentions his emotions; even his faulty reactions. 
These criteria can help a lot in the study of our witnesses.

It is clear from the vivid and contingent details that Mark and John
relate some true events: Mark recalls how the Apostles did not believe
the story of Magdalen, when she told them that the grave was empty. 
John mentions the fact that he arrived first at the grave, because he
had run faster, but let Peter enter first.  By contrast, Matthew and
partly Luke give a collection of commonplaces: an angel appears, there
is light and thunder, suddenly two men are present.  The conclusion
therefore is: Matthew and partly Luke falsified the true story; Mark,
John and partly Luke relate true events.  So, to the great astonishment
of the disciples, the grave was empty.

On similar grounds, it is also true that afterwards, Jesus met his
apostles at Jerusalem and in Galilea.  Jesus survived crucifixion.  Some
details in the Gospel may become more important in this perspective: 1)
the attitude of Pilate, who was not a friend of the Jews and liked to
ridicule them; 2) the contacts between Pilate and Joseph of Arimathea;
3) the “good” centurion who spared Jesus; 4) the hasty end to the
crucifixion and the restitution of the body to Joseph of Arimathea; 5)
the new grave and the presence of a young person (a servant).

One can suppose that Pilate ordered the centurion to spare Jesus, so
that he would not die but “resurrect”.  After three days, Jesus was
sufficiently healed, and a few days later he paid a nightly visit to his
disciples in Jerusalem.  But he had to be careful, because if he was
caught, he would have been stoned or decapitated.  After the sobering
experience of torture and convalescence, he had the presence of mind to
escape to safer regions like Galilea, and from there to disappear
forever from Palestine.

When the Apostles wanted to announce his resurrection, they had to say
where Jesus was.  The simplest way to get rid of this problem was the
story of the Ascension.  The criteria of Undeutsch stamp the Ascension
story as obviously false. It is also possible that the question of
Jesus’ whereabouts was initially not very important, as long as Jesus’
Second Coming was expected; and that only when the expectation was
abandoned after decades of vain hope, the Church chose to lodge Jesus
safely in heaven whence he shall return “at the end of time”.  Either
way, whether it was the apostles themselves or the later editors of the
New Testament, those who have reported the Ascension have left us a
stereotypical glorification story, immediately recognizable as
unhistorical.

The ascension story is one of the most vulnerable points in Christian
theology, because it makes a mockery of that one cornerstone of the
Christian faith: Jesus’ victory over death in the resurrection.  After
all, if he has disappeared from among us by ascending to heaven, he is
not different from us mortals, who also disappear after death. If
vanquishing death means remaining in your physical body, as the
resurrection story implies, then Jesus has not vanquished death but
merely postponed it for a few weeks, something which doctors routinely
do with cancer patients.  On the other hand, if he ascended to heaven
physically, with body and all, then he is still physically roaming
somewhere, in a physical heaven, like the astronauts.  This dilemma, the
Church can only solve by statements like: “Hallowed be those who believe
without having seen”, or: “I believe because it is absurd”, or: “It is a
mystery, and we should be humble enough not to try and reduce it to our
intellectual comprehension”.

We will let the theologians sort it out, and direct our attention back
to the historical situation after Jesus’ resurrection.  Jesus did indeed
reappear, shocked at his own unexpected survival, but only briefly. 
Shortly after, he left from among the apostles, probably from fear of
the priests as well as of the Romans, who must have found it a good
practical joke, but not one that should last too long.  This survival
scenario is far better able to explain why people effectively believed
that Jesus had resurrected, than the modernist interpretation that he
just died and that later his disciples merely “claimed” to have seen him
again.

There are indeed traces of Jesus’ survival in the New Testament.  Saint
Paul relates how, immediately after his conversion, he went to Arabia,
and returned to Damascus invested with the authority to lead the Church
among the Gentiles; and how he went and joined the apostles in Jerusalem
only after three years (Gal. 1:17). This is only seemingly in
contradiction with the version of Acts 9:26, which makes him go from
Damascus to Jerusalem.  It is indeed from Damascus that he arrived in
Jerusalem, but the information that he had to be smuggled out of
Damascus indicates that he had already been a controversial preacher for
some time, which again presupposes that he had been invested with some
authority.  Only after preaching for three years did he visit the
Christians in Jerusalem, including the original apostles who must have
been the highest authority in the Church after Jesus.  What did Saint
Paul go to Arabia for?  Could it be that that is where Jesus was
staying, safely just outside the Roman Empire?

Secondly, the first line of the book Apocalypse says quite clearly that
the book was a revelation from God to Jesus.  The next line says that it
was then passed on to John through his *angelos*, a term which has come
to mean “angel” but literally means “messenger”.  The last verses of the
Book repeat this information, and assure: “He who testifies to these
things says, ‘Surely I am coming soon.’ Amen.” To which a later editor
has added: “Come Lord Jesus!  The grace of the Lord Jesus be with all
the saints.  Amen.” The Apocalypse is a vision “revealed” to Jesus and
subsequently communicated to a disciple who calls himself John.

Jesus claims to have received a Revelation, and relates it, through a
messenger, to John and his other followers: this clear-cut information
given in the book itself has never been satisfactorily explained by any
theologian.  The theory that Jesus himself was the author, does explain
it in the most straightforward way.  This obviously presupposes that
Jesus survived the crucifixion and “ascension” for some years.

If he went to live at some other place and survived for some more years,
by what could we recognize his traces if ever we come across any? If we
want to find Jesus’ traces, we have to look for traces of paraphrenia. 
The Apocalypse of John is a striking expression of a developed
paraphrenic condition.  This mysterious text could reveal the truth
about the later Jesus.

**3.9. The date of the Apocalypse**

One of the least understood books of the Bible is no doubt its very last
book, the Apocalypse or Book of Revelation, ascribed to Saint John the
apostle, also called the “Seer of Patmos”.  No theologian knows really
what to do with it, and a coherent explanation of it is simply not
extant.  The book is very popular among crackpots and people who expect
the end of the world, like the Jehovah’s witnesses.

Charles Manson, who killed the actress Sharon Tate and some of her
friends in 1969, was an adept of the Apocalypse.  He had taken the
Beatles song “Revolution \#9” (correctly) as a pun on “Revelation \#9”,
and interpreted this as a message to himself, connected with the
fire-and-brimstone 9th chapter of the Book of Revelation.  Like so many
madmen, he related everything (in this case, both the Apocalypse and the
songs of the Beatles) to himself. he was the leader of the select
humanity that would survive the catastrophe God was about to inflict on
the world, as well as an instrument in God’s destruction of doomed
‘piggies’ such as the decadent god-forgetting actors.

This use of the Apocalypse in crank millenarist movements is not
abnormal: the Apocalypse is a manifesto of the expectation of Judgment
Day, and it is definitely the product of a sick mind.

A first problem with this book is its date.  The prevalent opinion still
is that it was written only in the nineties AD, making it the latest
Bible book.  Dr. Somers has, however, convincingly demonstrated that it
must have been written in the mid-forties, some two decades before the
Gospels. Among the clues he discovered, one certainly deserves mention,
because an end should be put to all the nonsense read into it so far:
the mysterious number 666, which is said to be the number of the Beast.

The arguments for the prevalent dating are the following: in the text,
seven or eight kings of Rome (emperors) are mentioned; there is a
predictive allusion to a great fire in Rome, probably in 64 AD under
Nero^([10](#10)) (taken to be a reference inserted as a *vaticinium ex
eventu*, a prophecy after the fact); and the number of the beast, 666,
is probably the number of Nero (*gematria* value of QSAR NRWN, the
approximate Hebrew transcription of the Greek pronunciation of the Roman
name Caesar Nero).  Counting the Roman emperors from the beginning with
August, and not taking into account the short-lived reigns of Galba
(68-69), Otho (69) and Vitellius (69), one arrives at Domitianus (81-96)
as the seventh.

But this construction does not exactly shed light on this mysterious
text.  On the contrary, it is in contradiction with other information
given in the text.  It is said that five kings are fallen and that the
seventh is not yet there, and that he will not remain for a long time. 
It follows that the Apocalypse has to be dated during the reign of the
sixth emperor, and that the cryptogram 666 indicates his name.  In that
case Nero should be the sixth, but this is impossible because in the
list of the emperors, he is the fifth.  And according to the text the
destruction of Rome should happen during the reign of the seventh, which
cannot be Nero, because he is the sixth or the fifth.  The solution that
Domitianus is the seventh, or the eighth, is also unsatisfying for this
reason, that he did not reign for a short period.  It is also rather
arbitrary to exclude Galba, Otho and Vitellius from the list because of
their short reigns.

The reason for this hermeneutic chaos is the fact that a number of
details are not understood very well, e.g. the indication: “the eighth
king who was one of the seven.” What is needed here is an interpreter
who is not merely a psychologist but also a Classical philologist,
thoroughly familiar with the details of Greco-Roman culture. 
Notwithstanding the particular traits of loose mental association
operative in the Apocalypse writer, some details may be exact allusions
to the political reality, metaphors which should be identified.

This identification should proceed from an exact representation of the
cultural background at the time the Apocalypse was conceived.  In the
previously mentioned interpretation this exact representation is
lacking.  Thus, it was forgotten that the name Caesar was not a title of
a function, but a proper name; that the list of emperors we have does
not coincide with the succession of *Caesares*; that the description of
the fire of Rome (borrowed from Ezekiel) is entirely different from the
description of the real fire (Tacitus relates an indescribable chaos
*inside* the city), and looks more like a genuine prediction based on
the Scriptural model of Ezekiel rather than a fake prophecy based on a
description of the actual event.

To start with an easy one: “the eighth who is one of the seven” is
simply Octavianus (from *Octavus*, “the eighth”), the personal name of
Caesar Augustus. Julius Caesar was the first in the list of the
*Caesares*, though he was not an emperor: he was murdered precisely
because he was suspected of scheming to become king.  That the list is
projected to end with the *seventh* emperor is a reference to a list of
seven who ruled in the beginning: the seven kings of Rome.  As the
seventh is not yet there, the Apocalypse has to be dated during the
reign of the sixth, because five have already fallen.

This then is the list: 1) Julius Caesar; 2) Octavianus Augustus, “who is
also the eighth”; 3) Tiberius; 4) often forgotten, Germanicus, who was
poisoned (fallen) before assuming power but had formally been invested
with the *imperium maius*, 5) Gaius Caligula; 6) Claudius; 7) Nero,
whose reign lay in the future when the Apocalypse was written, according
to the Apocalypse text itself.  The Apocalypse can then be dated in
45-47 AD, rather than in 90 AD or later.

The text of the Apocalypse makes unmistakable reference to the political
situation of the day.  There is a dragon and two beasts, the first beast
with seven heads and ten horns, the second beast with only two horns:
the first beast’s seven heads symbolize the seven kings of Rome (the
seven Caesars), one of them fatally wounded (Julius Caesar).  The ten
horns are the governors of the ten Provinces of the Roman Empire (the
dragon).  The dragon gave power to this beast (the imperial power).  The
beast reigns 42 months, which is exactly the period of the reign of
Caligula who reigned from the 1st July, 37 AD till the 21st January 41
AD and who wanted to be worshipped as a God (*Zeus Epiphanes neos
Gaios*), even in the temple of Jerusalem: the absolute horror for
iconoclastic monotheists.  The second beast has only two horns, it
decrees the worship of the emperors and the taxes; it reigns under the
supervision of the first beast.  This is clearly the senate of Rome with
the two consuls at its head.  The elaborate symbolism of the horns
signifying rulers is an imitation of the imagery employed by Daniel in
his allusions to the Hellenistic rulers.

But the reference to the emperor as “the Beast” does not merely express
hatred against the institution of the Roman *imperium*, which is
conceived as the new Babylon that holds the Chosen People in exile.  It
is directed against the then emperor Claudius personally.  It is written
that the Beast is also a man and this man has the number 666.  Written
in Greek characters 666 = Kh.Ks.W, as follows: W or *digamma* signifies
6; Ks or *ksi* signifies 60; Kh or *khi* signifies 600.  For 6/Digamma
the meaning is clear: five kings are fallen, the seventh is not yet
there, so it is the sixth.  For 60/Ksi, the associating mind may think
of Kaisar, abbreviated KS: 66 signifies then the 6th Caesar (this is
plausible but not convincing by itself).  For Khi or 600, the meaning
becomes clear when we turn to the Roman number system, where 600 - DC,
is also used as shorthand for Divus Caius as well as for *Divus
Claudius*, “the divine Claudius”.  The number 666 signifies emperor
Claudius.

This informed guess is confirmed when we realize that in his time,
Claudius was routinely compared with a monster, because he was indeed
ugly like a beast: according to Suetonius, even his own mother said so. 
*Divus* was a title, which was an object of mockery for Romans, and all
the more in the case of Claudius because of his un-divine appearance. 
Seneca writes that Claudius’ body was created by the gods when they were
angry.  The fact that Claudius is described unanimously as a beast and a
monster by Suetonius, by Seneca and by the Apocalypse, was also due to
the fact that he suffered from a vigorous head and hand tremor, and that
he had an abnormal gait and a raw voice, “like that of a sea-monster”. 
Seneca describes these defects and adds that Hercules had seen several
monsters, but not all.  Finally, the comparison with a monster may also
refer to Claudius’ readiness to have people killed.  Seneca accuses
Claudius of sentencing to death numerous people and one can understand
the allusions in the Apocalypse to the decapitation of a great number of
Christian Jews, ordered by Claudius (Apoc. 6:9; 13:9,15; 16:6; 17:6;
18:6,24; 19:2; 20:4).

One sees that the Apocalypse imagery is a mixture of allusions to the
reigns and persons of the successive Caesars: the violent death of
Julius Caesar, the short reign of Gaius, the appearance and the symbolic
cypher of Claudius.  The evocation of his ugliness is completed with the
traits of the beast in Ezekiel (with the face of a lion, etc.). The
aversion for the emperor is situated in the Jewish-Roman conflict:
emperor-worship and the taxes (paid in coins bearing the name or picture
of the emperor: the “mark of the Beast”).  So one can deduce the
procedure of composition: the text is an agglomerate of historical
details, loosely unified by symbolic figures, all woven into a
catastrophic vision of the impending Doomsday.

The Apocalyps can safely be dated to the year 45 AD, because this date
is corroborated by other historical Information.  In 49 Claudius
banished the Jews from Rome, because they were restless under the
instigation of a certain *Chrestos* (as reported by Suetonius).  If the
Apocalypse was known in Rome in 47, it is quite understandable that some
of the Jews were in a revolutionary mood, not only because of the taxes
and the worship of the emperor instituted by Gaius, but also because
they were instigated to set fire to Rome and to refuse to pay the
taxes.  Those who obey the laws of Rome are threatened with being
condemned by Jesus and being tortured with fire (Apoc. 14:10) and with
tumors (16:2).  There was a campaign of civil disobedience and terrorism
severely repressed by Claudius.  This repression created more fervour
for rebellion, because the rebels had to avenge the death of some of
them, condemned to decapitation by Claudius.  It appears that Suetonius
is right when he calls the instigator Chrestos.

There is a satirical play by Seneca about Claudius titled *Divi Claudii
Apokolokyntosis*, “Claudius’ transformation into a pumpkin”.  No
transformation into any pumpkin figures in the play and the title is
probably alluding to Claudius’ helpless attempt at pronouncing the word
*Apokalypsis*.  The Christian pamphlet Apocalypse with its prophecies of
doom against Rome and the emperor was the talk of the town, and in the
ensuing persecutions of the Christians, the Romans will give proof of a
remarkable familiarity with the Apocalypse’s threats and predictions.

According to Suetonius, a senator said to Nero that he wished that Rome
would not be destroyed during his reign.  Nero answered that he would
welcome its destruction, because he hated the small streets of
ancient Rome and wanted to reconstruct the city.  So one can suspect
that talk of “the destruction of Rome” was in the air at that time, and
that the prophecy was known and talked about.  Afterwards Nero did not
hesitate to arrest the Christians as guilty for the fire of
Rome.^([11](#11)) The way he tortured them was an obvious allusion to
the treatment which the Apocalypse had in store for the emperor: he let
them bum like living torches, and let them face the lions while
themselves sewn into animals’ skins.  Anybody could understand the
allusion.  That the Romans were capable of such cruel practical pun on
the rebels’ own Apocalyptic predictions, was demonstrated a few years
later when rebellious Jerusalem was conquered by Titus: then also, the
rebel leader was given exactly the same treatment which Jewish
Apocalyptic literature had promised the Roman commander.

A very important indication is the reference to the hated taxes.  The
saints should persevere and die (14:12), and refuse to pay taxes: they
should not take the mark of the emperor’s name, which is on the coins
(cf. 13:17: nobody can sell or buy, if he does not carry the name of the
beast).  There can be no doubt that the Apocalypse instigates the
Christian Jews to civil disobedience, even when they are sentenced to
death.  As Suetonius writes, Christ is the instigator of the troubles in
Rome; the reason is his hatred for him who stands in the way of his
coming in glory to rule over the whole world (2 Thess. 2:1-12). Claudius
was radical in the repression.  By capital sentence and by banishment
(49 AD) he tried to keep the troubles under control.

The Jews, especially the Christian ones, did not have the sense of
humour that characterized the Roman attitude regarding the deification
of the Roman Emperors.  If one reads Seneca, one sees how Romans were
full of mockery about these deifications.  Claudius is ridiculed as he
wants to become a god, and finally condemned to be a slave, and the
fundamental reason is that “tam facile homines occidebat quam canis
adsidit” (Seneca: “he killed as easily as a dog urinates”).  This
seriousness in their opposition to the Emperor’s deification makes them
susceptible to calls for rebellion, like the one launched by Chrestos. 
But they get killed or exiled by Claudius, the Beast.

It is remarkable that Paul in his letter to the Romans (Ro. 13) tries to
convince them to be submissive to the authorities and to pay the taxes
(13:6).  This letter should have been written in 56 AD, shortly after
Claudius’ death (54 AD).  As Seneca suggests, the young Nero inspired a
new hope in Rome, also for the Jews, who started returning there.  This
does not mean that the plans for the final confrontation had been
abandoned: “For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
wickedness…” (Ro. 1:18). in the meantime Paul was in Rome as a
(well-treated) prisoner.  Probably Peter also came to Rome and was there
during the fire.

If the Christian Jews set the fire to Rome, this had to be prepared by
Paul and Peter in great secret.  In Thess. 2:1-12, Paul alludes to the
thesis of the Apocalypse that Jesus cannot come back because he is
impeded by the Antichrist, viz. the Roman Empire; and that his coming
must be preceded by rebellion.  But the end will come soon, during
Paul’s own lifetime.  The strategy had been changed: they would pay
taxes and honour Caesar; but this did not change the fundamental
attitude and the hostility against Rome, which was still to be
destroyed.

If the hypothesis is accepted that Nero and some senators knew that the
destruction of Rome was predicted, as Suetonius suggests, then of course
during the ten years of Nero’s reign, there was some rumour against the
Christians, who were persecuted.  The 1st Letter of Peter (1 Petr.
3:13-17; 4:11-19; 5:9) mentions these difficulties between 60 and 64
AD.  Peter too tries to obtain obedience to the emperor (1 Petr., 2:13;
4:17).  It is easy to distinguish two periods after 45 AD, the presumed
date of publication of the Apocalyps: the first one a period of troubles
in Rome and elsewhere till the banishment of the Jews in 49 AD; a second
period (54-64 AD) when Peter and Paul preach submission to the Law,
announcing that the end is coming soon.  In the meantime the Christians
have difficulties and are criticized, they have to behave prudently,
they should not provoke reactions: that is the doctrine of Peter and
Paul, in contradiction with the doctrine of the Apocalyps.

The contradiction between the Apocalypse (not to pay taxes, to die
instead) and the directives of Paul and Peter is a normal evolution:
when there is sufficient repression, the outward behaviour normalizes,
though the inner rage remains.  If we suppose that Jesus’ (active) life
ended around 54 AD, along with his fanatic revenge against the emperor,
who impeded his coming in glory, it is possible that Peter and Paul took
charge of the Christian community and gave it a new direction.  And
because it could not be a long time before Jesus would come back (“the
times are now decisive”, Paul writes to Timothy (2 Tim. 3:1)), it was
not very useful to sacrifice a number of lives by objecting to the taxes
and resisting the new emperor openly.  So they preferred the secret
subversion: Rome had to be destroyed, because it impeded the second
coming of Jesus. It has been forgotten for too long that the first
Christians were true anarchists.

The period of ten years before the fire was one of caution.  After the
fire, the opposition to Rome of the entire Jewish community was at its
apogee: in 66 AD there was a revolution in Jerusalem, and in Alexandria
thousands were killed.  Until 135 AD, the revolutionary fire would rage
in Jerusalem.

Given the opposition between the doctrine of Peter and Paul and the
doctrine of the Apocalyps, it would be extremely improbable that the
Apocalyps came later than the letters of Paul and Peter.  In the year 90
AD the taxes were more than 50 years old, the worship of the emperor was
an old tradition; the indignation could not be so fresh as when Gaius
prepared his statue for the temple in Jerusalem and when the commercial
taxes were newly imposed.  The real sequence is: indignation, troubles,
revolution, repression, outward submission, inner rage, secret
subversion.  It fits the developments between 40 and 64 AD.

The Apocalypse is therefore the first document of Christianity. In the
light of these problems one can ask if the logion of Jesus: “Give unto
Caesar what is Caesar’s”, has not been added later as a part of the
Church’s strategy to convince the Christians to pay taxes, or to
convince Rome that they were no longer subversive.

The consequences of this change in perspective are important.  The
Apocalypse is the bridge between the real public life of Jesus and the
letters of Paul, and later the Gospels as texts.  That the cited logion
is probably a later addition is strongly supported by the fact that in
the trial of Jesus before Pilate the accusation against Jesus is: that
he preaches revolution against Caesar, that he forbids to pay taxes and
that he pretends to be the Messiah, the King.  And this is confirmed by
the Apocalypse, which incites to revolution against Rome and Caesar in
order to burn Rome, and which forbids to pay taxes (to take the mark of
the beast).  Luke (22:2) simply mentions the accusations, but not the
acts of Jesus that might have led to them.  When the Gospels are
published, Jesus is presented as a taxpayer and a loyal subject of
Caesar, and this is in accordance with the official strategy of the
Church (Rom., 1 Petr.).

Given the evidence of the Apocalypse and of the allegation during Jesus’
trial, we have to admit that the historical Jesus did indeed preach the
revolution against Rome and forbade at least his own disciples to pay
taxes.  In the Gospel discussions about the subject are mentioned (Mk.
12:13-17). While the anti-Roman thrust may have been secondary as long
as Jesus lived in the Jewish milieu in Palestine, it came centre-stage
when he fled his homeland after the resurrection and found himself
constantly exposed to the Pagan culture that was so repulsive to his
Jewish sensibilities.

**3.10. The author of the Apocalypse**

The Apocalyps is certainly the most primitive document.  Is it also a
paraphrenic document?

The general opinion of the exegetes about the Apocalyps is that it is a
literary work of the genre of the apocalyptic literature (Ezekiel,
Daniel, Henoch, etc.), which contains prophecies about the end of time,
predicting catastrophes, with visions, angels and cryptic symbolic
expressions, not always well understood today.^([12](#12))

We may at once remark that this is an improper use of the term “literary
genre”.  One could call the poem, or the novel, or the comedy, “literary
genre”.  But “Apocalypse” does not belong in a formal classification of
literature, and refers to the contents.  In different genres, you could
have an apocalyptic play, an apocalyptic poem, etc.

The psychopathological examination of the texts leads to conclusions far
removed from current theological opinions.  Ezekiel, Daniel and Henoch
were mental patients, schizophrenics and paraphrenics, showing all
typical symptoms of these diseases: receiving revelations, seeing
visions, believing they are the elected ones, predicting catastrophes. 
The apocalypse is not an exception.  Characteristic of the Apocalypse is
the megalomaniac atmosphere, the horrible aggressiveness and the
boundless narcissism.  Symptomatic are the loud voices, crying;
symbolic, idiosyncratic, pedantic expressions; zoopsy (seeing monsters
and beasts); the hallucinatory state; the sense of impending
catastrophe, the typical systematic elaboration of assimilated earlier
predictions (Henoch, Ezekiel and Daniel had. been “digested” into the
delusion).

The abnormality of the mental processes can easily be shown.  A number
of expressions are inspired by an enormous Ego-inflation: glory and
power to him, omnipotence, everybody will see his power, he will destroy
the earth and all peoples, he is the Son of Man.  This is coupled with
an enormous narcissism: all will adore him, everybody has to sing his
glory because he alone has power and wisdom (5:12), he alone is worthy
to receive the glory, only the Lamb is worthy to open the book with the
seven seals, he is the king of kings, the Lord of Lords.

All events are cosmic: stars fall, angels occupy the four corners of the
earth, events are accompanied by thunder and lightning and earthquakes;
all voices are loudly crying, some with the voice of the thunder.

All punishments are terrible: blood streams abundantly, Rome will be
destroyed in one hour or one day (18:8-9), all kings, all soldiers, all
their horses will be eaten by the birds, the beast will be burnt alive
(that is why Nero burnt the Christians alive), all others will be killed
by Christ himself (19:17-21), all living beings in the sea will die
(16:3), etc.

All these catastrophes are the effect of God’s anger.  Rome is described
as the great whore and the Roman Empire is identified with Satan
himself.  All this anger, all these catastrophes are due to the fact
that all others are supposed to be the enemies of Jesus (the majority of
humanity did not even know who Jesus was), and are therefore guilty and
worthy to be destroyed.  Only those who are the elected ones will reign
with the Christ for 1000 years.  Those who died, will resurrect when
Jesus comes back to reign for 1000 years (cfr. also the prediction of
Paul: 1 Thess. 4:13-19).

This immense, irrational aggressiveness is a consequence of the enormous
inflation of the Ego.  The pathological character of these mental
processes is well-known.  The hypothesis that the source of this text is
a megalomania cal paraphrenic is highly plausible, if one considers the
original part of the content, as distinct from the assimilated part. 
The latter consists of a few borrowed notions, esp. the notion of the
resurrection: according to Ezekiel (37:1-14), the bones of the slain
warriors of Israel shall be raised from the grave, and covered with
sinews and muscle and skin, and quickened with breath.  As the Jehovah’s
witnesses correctly maintain, the Bible does not teach an afterlife but
a physical resurrection; the Apocalypse specifies that it will take
place at the time of Jesus’ second coming, and will only concern the
saved ones.

It deserves repetition that among religious believers, there are a great
many takers for the prophetic pretences of such revelations. 
Schizophrenics such as Henoch and Ezekiel, both authors of apocalyptic
writings, have the revelation to be elected by God, they understand
suddenly all mysteries of the world, they travel from one end of the
world to the other, they are always at the centre of immense events,
they predict catastrophes.  The delusions of paraphrenics are generally
more systematically evolved, but share often the same cosmic
dimensions.  As most of these delusions are religious and genetic, it is
clear that their content was ready to be believed as the word of God. 
Mysterious, grandiose, futuristic, these revelations seemed to contain
higher divine truth and so became the stuff of Sacred Scripture.  In
fact they were reports of the schizophrenic or praphrenic delusions of
mental patients.

Let us now take a closer look at the condition of the author of the
Apocalypse.  A precise examination of the style of the Apocalyps
reveals: 1) a typical Jewish, non-Greek, style, including an excessive
use of conjunctions and a scarce use of particles; 2) a non-Johanneic
style, as compared with the Gospel and the Epistles of John.  The author
is definitely non-Greek, probably Jewish, and definitely not John the
Evangelist.

In Apo.1:9, John has a vision and hears a voice and then he sees an
angel, who dictates to him what was earlier called the “revelation of
Jesus Christ, which God gave him to show his servants what must soon
take place” (Apo. 1:1).  In john’s narrative, there is a direct
communication of the visions.  According to our criteria, and going by
the factual validity of the angels appearing in other New Testament
stories, the angel is only there in order to hide or to embellish the
truth.  It is Jesus who speaks and orders to write to the Churches in a
typical authoritative style as in the Gospels (“He spoke with
authority”, say Mt. 7:29, Mk. 1:22, Lk. 4:32), and with the same
expressions: “those who have ears to hear…”, developing the same themes:
“Those who believe in me…”, “I shall come…”

The other visions are attributed to John, but at the end the angel comes
back, and while the angel is speaking Jesus speaks again (Apoc. 21:12)
“I Jesus, I have sent my angel”.  There is a constant osmosis of the
angel and Jesus.  These inconsistencies together with the recurring
observation that the angel is merely there in order to conceal the
truth, lead to the hypothesis, that a secretary just noted the visions
of Jesus and gave a literary form to them.  This scribe could have been
John, but that is not certain.  These names are sometimes pseudonyms,
just, as in the Proto-Gospel “of James”.  Given all these elements, we
can formulate the hypothesis that the real inspiring author of the
Apocalypse was the surviving Jesus himself in a later stage of his
illness.  With this hypothesis in mind, the Apocalypse, formerly a
poorly understood text, becomes a dear manifesto of early Christianity.

It is quite astonishing that the style of expression of Jesus in the
Gospels corresponds precisely with the style of the expressions of Jesus
in the Apocalyps.  In the Gospel, he posits himself as authority: “I say
to you…” The same “I” - style can be found in the Apocalypse: “I shall
give you…I know…I shall come… I shall confess their names… I knock at
the door”.  Other expressions, like: “I shall confess their names before
my father and the angel” (Apo. 3:5); “We shall eat together” (Apoc.
3,20); “I shall come as a thief” (Apo. 3:3), are common to the
Apocalypse and the Gospels (Mk. 8:38; Mt. 10:32; Lk. 9:26; Lk. 12:36;
22:29-30; Jn. 14:23; Mk. 8:38; Mt. 24:42-44; Mk. 13:33).

Identical is also the egocentric point of view, e.g. in the Gospel:
“those who remain faithful to me (Jn. 8:31, 12:44); in the Apocalypse:
“those who remained faithful to me” (Apoc. 2:3, 2:13, 3:8).  The same
doctrine with regard to suffering and death for the faith in Jesus: “He
who loses his life because of me” (Mk. 8:35); “Do not fear what you are
about to suffer… be faithful till death” (Apo .2:10; cfr. also 6,11).

The character of the similarities is rather convincing: they are all
idiosyncratic features (the egocentric authoritative style, the
insistence on faith to Jesus till death), not stereotypes or vague
generalities.  It is difficult to imagine that an independent author
would have so well crystallized the idiosyncracies of Jesus in the
Gospel and used them so naturally.  Thus, the expression: “those who
have ears to hear” is not that frequent in the Gospel (Mt. 13:9; 13:43;
Mk. 4:12), but here this expression is used quasi-systematically.  We
cannot suppose that the expression was so striking, that an independent
author would have imitated that expression so systematically.

Another idiosyncratic feature is the insistence that the faithful should
lose their lives for Jesus, because the only important thing is the
faith in Jesus.  A number of letters of apostles are known; there is not
one that is so extraordinarily filled with allusions to the Gospels and
the Old Testament, and none of them is so extravagantly characterized by
an ego-inflated style.  The suspicion that the Gospel and the Apocalyps
belong to the same inspiration is therefore well-founded.  One can see
clearly that the so-called literary genre hypothesis does not hold: the
Apocalypse is not merely one in a series of books that propagate a view
of the end of time, with prophecies of catastrophes, etc.  It is a very
personal account of the imaginary life of a paraphrenic.

The “intertextual” elements in the Apocalypse, i.e. the references to
other literary sources, equally provide an indication that Jesus and the
seer of the Apocalypse are one and the same person.  The source of
inspiration, apart from the personal visions, is still the prophetic
tradition; but while in the Gospel it was more Henoch and Isaiah, here
it is more Daniel and Ezekiel.  The theme remains the Son of Man who
shall return to avenge himself because of unbelief and because the
people had slaughtered him like a lamb.

The Apocalypse seer is already an old hand at hearing voices: “Then I
had a vision. I saw a door in heaven standing open, and the voice, loud
as a trumpet, *which I had heard speak to me before*, called: ‘Come up
there, then I shall show you what must happen after this.’” (Apo. 4:1)

The central images of the Apocalypse signify the visionary himself (a
self-centredness through diverse *personae*, which is a feature even of
ordinary dreams), in his self-pity and vengefulness, in his frustrated
and hurt narcissism: the slaughtered Lamb which will be glorified into
an object of universal adoration, and the woman in labour pains, who is
about to give birth to the Son of Man.

The enemy of the woman in labour is the Beast, i.e. all worldly rulers
who usurp the Son of Man’s God-given rights, and esp. the Roman Empire,
which divine intervention is about to destroy under the rule of the next
emperor.  In these pages of fire and brimstone, the paraphrenic delusion
has been cosmically elaborated with unbridled visions of catastrophe,
full of horrible revenge and hatred.  The fact that the seer’s own
enemy, the Beast, is the enemy of the woman in labour pains, gives a
clue to the identity of the woman, viz. the seer himself.  This
trans-gender self-image can be compared with Freud’s famous case of
Justice Schreber, who thought he would be turned into a woman, get
impregnated by a god, and become the mother of a new human race.

The woman in labour pains is one motif that is not represented in the
Gospel, but of which the appearance in the Apocalypse fits a logical
development.  The full confidence of *being* the Son of Man, soon to be
covered with glory, has, after the shock of surviving his glorious
execution, and after years of impotent anger against the world’s
skepsis, evolved into a vision of the near future, when he will *become*
the Son of Man, after the ongoing painful stage of expectation,
described as labour pains.  After he survives the crucifixion, his
Kingdom does not start.  Instead of shattering his delusion, this gets
explained, and the Kingdom is put off to a later date.  We see this in
all the predictions of the end of the world: for every failed
prediction, there is an explanation that prevents utter disillusionment,
and the believers persist in their slightly amended expectation, in
spite of all the refutations of their belief by reality. In people
afflicted with a delusion, this capacity of rationalizing experiences
that are logically disturbing to the delusion, is virtually
unassailable. 

One could characterize the Apocalyps as the hymn of the wrath, of the
anger and the hate, exactly the contrary of the (later) doctrine of
Jesus in the Gospels.  Nothing in the Apocalyps is love or mercy, all is
self-glory, revenge, wrath, power, cruelty.  The Apocalypse is in stark
contradiction with the more theologically elaborated books of the New
Testament, esp.  John and Paul.  In those books, Jesus has been
humanized in order to make him more acceptable to the faithful.

The hypothesis that the Apocalypse is Jesus’ own swan song, is based on
psycho-pathological parallelism, taking into account the time factor:
further development of the delusion into a form at once more extreme and
yet incorporating a compromise with unresponsive reality, viz. the fact
that his glorification as the Son of Man has so far failed to come
about.  This hypothesis has the immense advantage that it requires only
one theory to explain both the Gospel and the Apocalypse, not the string
of dozens of little separate explanations which the theologians offer. 
In fact, it is the first-ever coherent explanation of the Apocalypse, a
text with which the theologians have never come to terms.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))For an assessment of Nietzsche’s view of Christianity, in the
light of recent Bible scholarship, see Henk Van Gelre: *Friedrich
Nietzsche en de Bronnen van de Westerse Beschaving* (Dutch: “Friedrich
Nietzsche and the Sources of Western Civilization”), vol. 1, Ambo, Baarn
1990.

^([2](#2a))Sigmund Freud: *Der Mann Moses und die Monotheistische
Religion: Drei Abhandlungen* (1939), republished in vol. 13 of *The
Penguin Freud Library*.

^([3](#3a))Ch. Binet-Sanglé: *La Folie de Jésus* (French: “Jesus’
Madness”), Paris 1908-12; W. Hirsch: *Religion und Civilisation*,
Munchen 1910., G.L. de Loosten: *Jesus Christus vom Standpunkt des
Psychiaters* (German: “Jesus Christ from the Psychiatrist’s Viewpoint”),
Bamberg 1905.

^([4](#4a))A. Schweitzer: *Die psychiatrische Beurteilung Jesu*,
Tubingen, 1913.

^([5](#5a))Excerpts in Elke Schlinck-Lazarraga: “De vraag naar de
psychischgeestelijke gezondheidstoestand van Jesus” (Dutch: “The
question of Jesus’ psycho-mental health condition”), in *Teksten
Kommentaren en Studies*, December 1981.

^([6](#6a))Hermann Werner: “Der historische Jesus der liberalen
Theologie - ein Geisteskranker?”, in *Neue Kirchliche Zeitschrift* 22
(1911), p.347-390, quoted in Elke Schlinck-Lazarraga: op.cit.

^([7](#7a))With these quotes from John’s Gospel, it should be kept in
mind that they are part of the most “theological” Gospel, the one most
unscrupulously tailoring stories to fit the emerging Christian theology
and also the Church’s missionary programme, which rejected
Christianity’s Jewish roots and therefore exaggerated the opposition
between Jesus and “the Jews” Nonetheless, even if John concocted these
incidents, this proves that he expected his audience to accept them as
realistic.

^([8](#8a))The classic on the magician’s role which Jesus played or was
considered playing, and at the same time a very informative work on the
role of the missionary/polemical context in which the Gospels were
written, is Morton Smith: *Jesus the Magician*, Victor Gollancz Ltd.,
London 1978.

^([9](#9a))In Anglo-Saxon textbooks of psychopathology, *paraphrenia*
will be subsumed-under the larger category *paranoia*.  This should,
according to Dr. Somers, be considered a recrudescence and loss of an
essential distinction.

^([10](#10a))The number 666 has also some numerical properties, e.g. it
is the triangular number of 36 (= sum of all numbers from 1 to 36); but
then, many numbers have remarkable properties, so this is not
sufficiently distinctive.  Incidentally, Jesus’ name in Greek, *Iesoys*,
has the numerical value 888; and 8 was a sacred number for early
Christians, signifying the “eighth day”, the completion of the 7-day
Creation, viz. the Resurrection. See C.F. Dumermuth: “Number Symbolism:
a Biblical Key”, in *Asia Journal of The Theology*, 1/1990.

^([11](#11a))Suetonius mentions the measures against the Christians
among Nero’s *praiseworthy* reforms, and calls this sect “a new
superstition involving the practice of magic”.

^([12](#12a))E.g. M.J. Lagrange: *Le Messianisme chez les Juifs*, Paris
1909; id.: *Le Judaisme avant Jésus-Christ*, Paris, 1931; and E.
Schillebeeckx: *Jesus, het verhaal van een levende*, Brugge 1975.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
