+++
title = "14 10 Jihãd and Religious Riot"

+++
**10**  
***Jihãd* and Religious Riot**

An important question relating to the subject of *jihãd* is this: in
mixed populations consisting of Muslims and non-Muslims alike, should
this sanguinary creed not inevitably lead to religious riots? Certainly,
the Koran furnishes us with verses which have the appearance of
extremely provocative utterances aimed at rousing the Mussalmans to a
state of murderous mob-fury. “Go forth light armed and heavy armed and
strive with your wealth and your lives in the way of Allah,” says the
Koran (9/41). A verse of this kind does look like being more in the
nature of a rabble-rousing ejaculation than a proclamation of preplanned
and premeditated warfare. “Slay the idolaters wherever you find them”
(9/5) is again, to all appearances, a call to lawless violence rather
than a general’s directive to draw the battle lines with discipline and
forethought. Indeed, the whole group of the so-called Immunity Verses
(9/1-12) of the Koran seems for all practical purposes to indicate a
sort of abdication of the Islamic state’s responsibility for law and
order by asking the Muslim masses to destroy the infidel population by
whatever means available to them. A close examination of the context and
consequences of the verses is, therefore, necessary to investigate the
question of the relation of the doctrine of *jihãd* to religious riot.

As has been mentioned earlier, the Immunity Verses of *Sûrah Taubah*
were issued in early 631 AD to inform the idolaters of Arabia that after
the expiry of 4 months their religion would no longer be tolerated. As
Mohammed Pickthall, the orthodox translator of the Koran, mentions in
the introduction to this *sûrah*, these verses formed the “proclamation
of Immunity from obligation toward the idolaters” and “signified the end
of idolatry in Arabia”. But how was that end to be achieved? By “slaying
the idolaters” indiscriminately, says the Koran; by “besieging them” and
by “laying for each of them an ambush”. In other words, Allah does
appear to have sanctioned, by these verses, religious riots on an
unprecedented scale.

But did the Prophet so interpret them? The biographies do not narrate
any large-scale riot following upon the issuance of these verses. It has
to be remembered that the Prophet survived these injunctions by only
about a year, and most of the time he was receiving delegations from the
tribes of Arabia offering voluntary submission and voluntary adhesion to
his creed. Information regarding forcible conversions during the period
is scanty; and apart from the riot-mongering verses of the Koran
mentioned above, we are not informed of any specific instance of
religious riot actually taking place in pursuance of them. In the
technical language of Islam, we should say that the riot-mongering
verses did not in fact give rise to a body of Sunnah to illustrate them.

But indeed such Sunnah is not necessary. The Islamic concepts of
*Dãr-ul-Islam* (territory of Islam) and *Dãr-ul-harb* (territory of
war), which originated from the jihadic provisions of the Koran and the
Hadis, seem to have grown out of this very dilemma. These concepts
presuppose the extermination of Arabian idolaters by the power of the
state, while in non-Arab Islamic states the practice is to spare the
lives of idolaters on payment of the poll-tax. Such an arrangement
dispenses with the need for religious riots in Islamic states for the
simple reason that the state on its own does the work of conversion or
refrains from it according to its own convenience. In these states, the
populace is absolved from its duty of “slaying the infidels”
indiscriminately.

By the same token, non-Islamic states with a large body of Muslim
population must of necessity give rise to religious riots, if the Ulema
declare these states to be *Dãr-ul-harb*. The Immunity Verses of the
Koran must, in the nature of things, come into full play in such states.
In this restricted sense at least, *jihãd* and religious riot are one.

Who would give the call for such riots ? It has been shown in the
previous chapter that *jihãd* cannot start without the Imam pronouncing
a call for it. It has also been pointed out that in Islamic states, the
king is the person best qualified to pronounce such a call. But in
*Dãr-ul-harb* such an Imam is obviously not available. So any person
with the requisite Islamic qualifications can give the call for *jihãd*,
and even the Imam who leads the congregation in Friday prayers can very
well undertake the job. Needless to say, such a *jihãd* can hardly turn
out to be anything but a species of religious riot.

To illustrate such *jihãds*, which should more properly be called
*jihãd*-riots as distinct from a full-fledged *jihãd*, I should give
some examples from India’s recent history. In such a case, historical
examples of lesser Imams must replace the Prophet’s Sunnah if only
because the Prophet’s career antedated the doctrine of *Dãr-ul-harb*.

\(1\) The first considerable religious riot in India under British rule
was the so-called Mopla rebellion of 1921 which occurred in Malabar as
an offshoot of the Khilafat Movement. The Moplas burst into
unprecedented violence against the British, following upon the Khilafat
Committee’s call for the same addressed to the believing population of
Malabar. As it turned out, most of the casualties in this *jihãd* were
Hindus rather than the British. Hundreds of Hindu women jumped into
wells to save their honour, others being ravished and slaughtered with
absolute indifference by blood-thirsty *mujãhids*. Hundreds of corpses
of Hindu women as well as children were recovered from the wells after
the end of the riots. The call for this *jihãd* had been pronounced by
the Ali Brothers, Hasrat Mohani, and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. Mahatma
Gandhi himself acknowledged these atrocities as part of Islam’s holy
war. He referred to the *mujãhids* as “God-fearing Moplas” and said:
“They were fighting for what they consider as religion and in a manner
which they consider as religious.” Needless to say, such manner of
fighting for such a cause is the essence of an Islamic *jihãd*. It
should be mentioned that leaders like Azad gave the call for *jihãd*
against the British rather than the Hindus, but it is not known how they
intended to confine the war against a single class of infidels.

\(2\) The Great Calcutta Killing of 1946 was again the consequence of a
call for *jihãd*, which in this case was pronounced by Mohammed Usman,
the Mayor of Calcutta at that time. He put the call in black and white
and addressed the *mujãhids* as follows:

“It was in this month of Ramzan that open war between Mussalmans and
Kafirs started in full swing. It was in this month that we entered
victorious into Mecca and wiped out the idolaters. By Allah’s will, the
All India Muslim League has selected the selfsame month of Ramzan to
start its *jihãd* for realising Pakistan.”^([1](#1))

\(3\) The holocaust in Noakhali in the same year (1946) was likewise
intended as a full-fledged *jihãd*. The call in this case was pronounced
by Gholam Sarwar, a Muslim M.L.A. from those parts. Gholam Sarwar’s call
was not documented, but the report submitted by Judge Simpson clearly
refers to “large-scale conversion of Hindus to Islam by application of
force in village after village. In many instances, upon the refusal of
the menfolk to embrace Islam, their women were kept confined and
converted under duress.”^([2](#2)) All these of course were
characteristic of a true *jihãd*.

This was not all. As in Calcutta, the Noakhali riots were characterised
by the dishonouring of thousands of Hindu women. There were clear
indications that these unfortunate women were looked upon as the
*mujãhids’* lawful plunder (*ghanîmah*). Baboo Rajendralal Roy, the
President of Noakhali Bar Association, attempted to put up on his own
some resistance to this *jihãd*. The outcome of this resistance has been
described by a contemporary writer: “Rajenbaboo’s head was presented to
Gholam Sarwar on a platter, and two of his lieutenants received as
guerdon both of his young daughters (in their harem).”^([3](#3))

\(4\) The large-scale communal riots taking place in places like
Aligarh, Bulandshahar and the like in December 1990, were all the
handiwork of worshippers proceeding from mosques at the end of the
Friday prayers. Most newspapers reported these riots, but none quoted
the call given by the Imams.

\(5\) Almost all Hindus have in recent years been evicted from the
Kashmir Valley as a result of *jihãd*. This particular *jihãd* has been
authorised and financed by Pakistan and other Islamic countries.
Clinton’s America is the latest addition to the names of countries
actively promoting this *jihãd*. Of course, America has not called it a
*jihãd* but declared its support of the *mujãhids* in the name of Human
Rights, which means the same.

\(6\) The large-scale arson of December 1992 occurring in Islamic
Bangladesh in the wake of the demolition of the Babri structure at
Ayodhya was characterised by gangrapes of thousands of Hindu girls,
assaults on Hindu temples, and widespread loot and violence. It had all
the marks of a full-fledged *jihãd*.

All these examples go to show that riots on many occasions break out in
the name of *jihãd*. I have mentioned Indian examples alone, but similar
examples can no doubt be cited from most countries with a substantial
Muslim population. It is a moot point whether such *jihãd*-riots satisfy
all the scriptural requirements of an unadulterated *Jihãd fi
Sabilillah* (*jihãd* in the way of Allah). But there is little doubt
that *jihãd*-riots do take place. If a country with a sizeable Muslim
population neglects the possibility of their incidence, it does so at
its own peril. In India, for example, the ever-increasing uncertainty in
Hindu-Muslim relations can be set down to our long-standing failure in
taking a clear stand on the subject of riots inspired by the psychology
of *jihãd* endemic in the Muslim community. Before taking up this topic,
I should give a summary of the discussion spread out in the foregoing
chapters.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Translated from the Bengali original cited in R.C. Majumdar,
*Bãñglãdesher Itihãsa*, Volume IV.

[²](#2a) Ibid.

[³](#3a) Benoy Bhushan Ghosh, *Dvijãtitattva O Bãñgãli*, p. 68.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
