+++
title = "10 Chapter Nine Rama-Janmabhumi Temple Muslim Testimony Harsh Narain"

+++
Chapter Nine  
**Rama-Janmabhumi Temple Muslim Testimony**  
Harsh Narain

All relevant British government records followed by the District
Gazetteer Faizabad compiled and published by the Congress government in
1960 declare with one voice that the so-called Babari mosque at Ayodhya
is standing on the debris of a Ramjanmasthan temple demolished by the
order of Babar in 1528.  Syed Shahabuddin, JNU historians, and.
self-styled ‘secular’ scholars and leaders are hotly contesting that the
existence and demolition of such a temple is a myth floated by the
British in pursuance of their policy of ‘divide and rule’.  Syed
Shahabuddin and many Muslim divines go a step further and assert that
neither Babar nor any other Muslim for that matter would take into his
head to erect a mosque by displacing a temple, for, they argue, such a
mosque would not be a mosque in the eye of the Shari’ah and would be
liable to demolition by the Muslims themselves.

With this idea in mind, Syed Shahabuddin is going about proclaiming
that, if it is shown independently of the British sources that the
Babari mosque has displaced a temple, he would pull it down with his own
hands and hand it over to the Hindus.

The challenge is worth taking, and I hereby do it with good grace, on
behalf of those who place truth above politics.

Well, granting for the nonce that the Babari mosque cannot be shown to
have displaced a temple, there are certain other mosques which can
indisputably be shown to have done so. Is Syed Shahabuddin prepared to
keep his word in the case of such mosques? It is common knowledge that
most of the mosques built by the Muslim invaders stand on land grabbed
or extorted from the Kafirs. And what about the Ka’bah itself?

Sayyid Shahabuddin Abdur Rahman, the well known Muslim historian who
died in an accident recently, modifies the stand of the Muslim divines
thus: ‘It is also thinkable that some mosque was erected close to or at
a short distance from a temple demolished for some special reason, but
never was a mosque built on the site of a temple anywhere.’ (See his
*Babri Masjid*, 3rd print, Azamgarh: Darul Musannifin Shibli Academy,
1987, p. 19.)

As regards the verdict of the Shari’ah, it is true that there are
theologico-juristic rulings to the effect that no mosque can be built on
land grabbed or illegally/illegitimately acquired. See for example the
great *Fatawa-i Alamgiri*, Vol. 16, p 214. But the question is, Do they
hold true for land acquired in Jihad as well? The answer has to be an
emphatic ‘No’. The Prophet has made it clear that all land belongs to
God or the Prophet (*A’lamu ann’l-arza li’llah-i wa rasul-i-hi*), and,
obviously, through the Prophet to the Muslims (Bukhari, II, Kitab
al-Jibad wa’s- Siyar, Hadith 406). Iqbal puts the following words, in a
Persian verse, into the mouth of Tariq, the great conqueror of Spain :
*Har mulk mulk-i ma’st ki mulk-i Khuda-i ma’st*.  That is, all land
belongs to the Muslims, because it belongs to their God. Ibn Taymiyyah,
the 14th century theologian and jurist, argues that Jihad simply
restores lands to the Muslims, to whom they rightly belong.  This serves
to vouchsafe to them the moral right to extort lands in Jihad from
others.

Thus, the argument from the Shari’ah has no leg to stand upon.

Now, I proceed to cite certain purely Muslim sources beyond the sphere
of British influence to show that the Babari mosque has displaced a
Hindu temple-the Ramjanmasthan temple, to be precise-wholly or partly.

First, an indirect evidence.  In an application dated November 30, 1858,
filed by one Muhammad Ashghar, Khatib and Mu’azzin, Babari Masjid, to
initiate legal proceedings against ‘Bairagiyan-i Janmasthan’, the Babari
mosque has been called ‘masjid-i Janmasthan’ and the courtyard near the
arch and the pulpit within the boundary of the mosque, ‘maqam Janmasthan
ka’. The Bairagis had raised a platform in the courtyard which the
applicant wanted to be dismantled. He has mentioned that the place of
Janmasthan had been lying unkempt/in disorder (*parishan*) for hundreds
of years and that the Hindus performed worship there (*maqam Janmasthan
ka sad-ha baras se parishan para rahta tha. Ahl-i Hunud puja karte
they*). See Sayyid Shahabuddin Abdur Rahman, op, cit., pp. 29-30.  Well,
if the Babari mosque is the Janmasthan mosque, its courtyard is the
Janmasthan, and the Hindus had all along been carrying out their
worship, all that implies that there must have been some construction
there as part of a (Janmasthan) temple, which Mir Baqi partly demolished
and partly converted into the existing Babari mosque, with or without
Babar’s approval. And the Hindus had no alternative but to make do with
the temple-less courtyard. Otherwise, it is simply unthinkable that they
might have been performing worship for such a long time and on such a
sacred place without a proper temple.

**Failure of Jihad**

My second document is the *Hadiqah-i Shuhada* by one Mirza Jan, an
eyewitness as well as active participant in the Jihad led by Amir Ali
Amethawi during Wajid Ali Shah’s regime in 1855 for recapture of Hanuman
Garhi (a few hundred yards from the Babari mosque) from the Hindus. The
book was ready just after the failure of the Jihad and saw the light of
day in the following year, viz. in 1856, at Lucknow. Ra’is Ahmad Jafari
has included it as chapter IX in his book entitled *Wajid Ali Shah aur
Un-ka Ahd* (Lucknow: Kitab Manzil, 1957), after, however, omitting what
he considered unnecessary but without adding a word from his side.

Now, let us see what information we gather from it, germane to our
enquiry. Mirza Jan states that ‘wherever they found magnificent temples
of the Hindus ever since the establishment of Sayyid Salar Mas’ud
Ghazi’s rule, the Muslim rulers in India built mosques, monasteries, and
inns, appointed mu’azzins, teachers, and store-stewards, spread Islam
vigorously, and vanquished the Kafirs. Likewise, they cleared up
Faizabad and Avadh, too, from the filth of reprobation (infidelity),
because it was a great centre of worship and capital of Rama’s father.
Where there stood the great temple (of Ramjanmasthan), there they built
a big mosque, and, where there was a small *mandap* (pavilion), there
they erected a camp mosque (*masjid-i mukhtasar-i qanati*). The
Janmasthan temple is the principal place of Rama’s incarnation, adjacent
to which is the Sita ki Rasoi. Hence, what a lofty mosque was built
there by king Babar in 923 A. H. (1528 A.D.), under the patronage of
Musa Ashiqan! The mosque is still known far and wide as the Sita ki
Rasoi mosque.  And that temple is extant by its side (*aur pahlu mein
wah dair baqi hai*)’ (p. 247).

It must be borne in mind that Mirza Jan claims to write all this on the
basis of older records (*kutub-i sabiqah*) and contemporary accounts.

My third document is a chapter of the *Muraqqah-i Khusrawi*, otherwise
known as the Tarikh-i Avadh, by Shykh Azamat Ali Kakorawi Nami
(1811-1893), who happened to be an eyewitness to much that happened
during Wajid Ali Shah’s regime. The work was completed in 1869 but could
Pot see the light of day for over a century. Only one manuscript of it
is extant and that is in the Tagore Library of Lucknow University. A
press copy of it was prepared by Dr. Zaki Kakorawi for publication with
the financial assistance of the Fakhruddin Ali Ahmad Memorial Committee,
U.P., Lucknow. The committee vetoed the publication of its chapter
dealing with the Jihad led by Amir Ali Amethawi for recapture of Hanuman
Garhi from the Bairagis, from its funds, on the ground that its
publication would not be opportune in view of the prevailing political
situation, with the result that Dr. Kakorawi had to publish the book
minus that chapter in 1986, for the first time.  Later, however, lie
published the chapter separately, and independently of any financial or
other assistance from the committee in 1987 from the Markaz-i Adab-i
Urdu 137, Shahganj, Lucknow-3, under the title *‘Amir Ali Shahid aur
Ma’rkah-i Hanuman Garhi’*.

It is a pity that, thanks to our thoughtless ‘secularism’ and waning
sense of history, such primary sources of medieval Indian history are
presently in danger of suppression or total extinction.  Dr. Kakorawi
himself laments that ‘suppression of any part of any old composition or
compilation like this can create difficulties and misunderstandings for
future historians and researchers’ (p. 3).

Well, what light does our author, Shykh Muhammad Azamat Ali Kakorawi
Nami, have to throw on the issue of demolition versus non-existence of
the Janmasthan temple?  The opening paragraph of his book is akin to the
passage quoted above from Mirza Jan’s *Hadiqah-i Shuhada*. I give below
the paragraph in the author’s own words, omitting very few details:
‘According to old records, it has been a rule with the Muslim rulers
from the first to build mosques, monasteries, and inns, spread Islam,
and put (a stop to) non-Islamic practices, wherever they found
prominence (of kufr). Accordingly, even as they cleared up Mathura,
Bindraban, etc., from the rubbish of non-Islamic practices, the Babari
mosque was built up in 923(?) A.H. under the patronage of Sayyid Musa
Ashiqan in the Janmasthan temple (*butkhane Janmasthan mein*) in
Faizabad-Avadh, which was a great place of (worship) and capital of
Rama’s father’ (p. 9).  ‘Among the Hindus it was known as Sita ki Rasoi’
(p. 10). The passage has certain gaps, thanks to the wretched condition
of the manuscript, which I have tried to fill within brackets.

Dr. Kakorawi has appended to the book an excerpt from the *Fasanah-i
Ibrat* by the great early Urdu novelist. Mirza Rajab Ali Beg Surur
(1787-1867), which constitutes our fourth document.  It says that ‘a
great mosque was built on the spot where Sita ki Rasoi is situated.
During the regime of Babar, the Hindus had no guts to be a match for the
Muslims.  The mosque was built in 923(?) A.H. under the patronage of
Sayyid Mir Ashiqan… Aurangzeb built a mosque on the Hanuman Garhi… The
Bairagis effaced the mosque and erected a temple in its place. Then
idols began to be worshipped openly in the Babari mosque where the Sita
ki Rasoi is situated,’ (pp. 71-72). The author adds that ‘formerly, it
is Shykh Ali Hazin’s observation which held good’ and quotes the
following Persian couplet of the Shykh:

> Bi-bin karamat-i butkhanah-i mara aiy Shaikh!  
> Ki chun kharab shawad khanah-i Khuda garded

Which means: O Shykh! just witness the miracle of my house of idols,
which, when desecrated, or demolished, becomes the house of God (a
mosque). So, purporting to mean that formerly temples were demolished
for construction of mosques, the author, Surur, laments that ‘the times
have so changed that now the mosque was demolished for construction of a
temple (on the Hanuman Garhi)’ (p. 72).

**Clinching the Issue**

The forming four-fold documentary evidence leads us to certain
incontrovertible conclusions, which can be stated as under:

1\. That, in their zeal to hit Hinduism and spread Islam, the Muslim
rulers had the knack of desecrating or demolishing Hindu temples and
erecting mosques, etc., in their place-bigger mosques in place of bigger
temples and smaller mosques in place of smaller temples.

2\. That there did exist a temple called the temple of Janmasthan at
Ayodhya, where Rama is believed to have incarnated and that adjacent to
it was what is called Sita ki Rasoi, which might originally have been
part of it.

3\. That, like Muslim rulers who desecrated Mathura, Vrindavana, etc.,
Babar chose Ayodhya for spread of Islam and replacement of temples by
mosques, thanks to its supreme importance as a holy place of the Hindus,
and in 1528, under the patronage of Sayyid Mir Musa Ashiqan, got the
so-called Babari mosque erected in displacement of the Rama Janmasthan
temple, certain relics of which appear to have persisted at least till
1855.

4\. That the Babari mosque was also called ‘masjid-i Janmasthan’ and
‘masjid-i Sita ki Rasoi’ from long before 1855.

5\. That the Hindus had long been carrying on worship at the Rama
Janmasthan even after the replacement of the Janmasthan temple by the
Babari mosque.

6\. That the foregoing facts are yielded by authentic Muslim records and
have not been fabricated by the much-maligned British to ‘divide and
rule’.

These conclusions are irresistible and should clinch the issue of
demolition versus non-existence of the Ramjanmasthan temple.

<div align="right">

**Indian Express, February 26, 1990**

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
