---
title: Collaboration
---

## Benefits

### Gives Encouragement

Doing research alone is possible; but it requires huge amount of focus
and determination; especially when it comes to doing less pleasant tasks
like experimentations and simulations.

From collaborations, even boring aspects of research become more
pleasant. Enthusiasm for research increases. It is also more
pleasurable. See benefits of pair programming in ’programming strategy’.

### Toughness of problems solved

With different viewpoints, the probability of the problem being solved
is higher. Also more interesting problems often discovered.

It is also a source of new problems to attack.

Papers involving collaborations tend to have much higher impact and are
more cited.

Between-institution collaborations had a higher average impact.

## Identifying good collaborations

If a collaboration yields much more pain than pleasure, more
discouragement than encouragement, it is probably a bad collaboration.
In a bad collaboration, stress is high and productivity is low.

## Beginning collaborations

Present many papers. You will hear/ give ideas unrelated to what you/
others were thinking. Happened in the case of the use of affiliation
networks, microscopic node analysis in solving link prediction problems;
and in case of use of collaborative filtering in link prediction.

By presenting papers and generating ideas in others, reap goodwill and
increase reputation.

## Executing a good collaboration

### Contributing

Bring in enthusiasm, ideas and work. Show ownership, take initiative.

Be prompt in accomplishing what you promised: without it, collaborators
loose patience and interest, research projects then fizzle out. So, you
cannot work on too many things simultaneously.

Have clear communication, supply updates upon major milestones, inform
others about tough roadblocks which you could not tackle autonomously.

### Feedback and setting the record

Use feedback well, but No groveling - correct unfounded statements and
suppositions about your work without fail.

### Getting updates

Ask if the person who is most actively involved has new thoughts/ tried
new avenues about his research project.

Fix concrete date and time to discuss project, papers.

## Technical discussions

People form opinions about your abilities partly through your ability to
communicate and collaborate well. This includes ability to propose
ideas, solve problems on the spot, having a supple mind.

It often involves making oral presentations of technical work - this is
described elsewhere.

Note down important things to follow up.
