+++
title = "13 9 Jihãd in the Shariat"

+++
**9**  
***Jihãd* in the Shariat**

In Islam, the term ‘Shariat’ is often used to mean the system of
ordinances as given in the Koran and the Hadis. But I shall use it in a
more restrictive sense - for those ordinances which were formulated in
the schools of jurisprudence (*Fiqh*) of the famous Imams Hanîfah,
Hanbal, Mãlik and Shãfi’î. The school of Hanîfah being the most popular
in the Islamic world, I shall confine my attention to that school alone
and use Shykh Burhanuddin Ali’s (d. 1198 AD) *Hidãyah* in order to set
forth the opinions of the Shariat on the subject of *jihãd*.

From the foregoing chapters it would appear that the Koran and the
Hadis, between them, have exhausted the subject of *jihãd* and that
there is little to add to their ordinances. But in fact it is not so.
For example, if *jihãd* be a Mussalman’s supreme duty as indicated in
the Koran and the Hadis, a question is inevitable: Is it not proper for
a Muslim to be engaged in *jihãd* continuously and permanently? Should
he not set out on his own to “make slaughter” amongst the infidels
without caring for what his fellow Muslims are doing? Not so, says the
Shariat; one can engage in *jihãd* only when the Imam gives a call for
it. In the Prophet’s time, he himself was the Imam par excellence. But
after him the duty has vested in lawfully constituted Imams. Jihãd is
indeed compulsory for all able-bodied Muslims; it is a *farz* - the
Arabic word for duty that is binding and unavoidable under all
circumstances. But it is not a *farz-i-ain* - the canonical duty binding
on every Muslim without reference to any other person. It is a
*farz-i-kifãyya* - a duty that can be left to others until the Imam
gives out his call. When the Imam does so it becomes *farz-i-ain* and no
able-bodied Mussalman under his jurisdiction can shirk the duty of
waging *jihãd*. But till that moment he can rest on his oars. Such is
the prescription of the Shariat regarding the nature of the duty of
*jihãd*.

Can any and every Imam of any and every mosque give out the call for
*jihad*? The question does not arise in Islamic states where the Sultans
and Padishahs count as lawfully constituted Imams. But in non-Islamic
states, the question becomes important. Any Muslim leader, even the
leader of the congregation for Friday prayers, in non-Islamic countries
can put forth his claim for authorising a *jihãd*. The Shariat has
indeed prescribed certain qualifications for Imamhood, but has not
provided any foolproof method for testing such qualifications.

\(2\) The Shariat has clarified another point which is not mentioned in
the Koran or the Hadis with sufficient clarity. Is it necessary to serve
a notice to the infidels who are being attacked? The Koran is silent on
the question. The Hadis, in the context of the Jews mentioned in a
previous chapter, says that the Prophet did serve such notice on at
least one occasion. But most of his *jihãds* being in the nature of
raids embarked upon in extreme secrecy, these were not usually preceded
by formal declarations of war. The Shariat accepts both the provisions,
but sets out to explain the importance of prior notification with some
care. According to the *Hidãyah*, “\[the infidels have to\] perceive
that they are attacked for the sake of religion, and not for the sake of
taking their property, or making slaves of their children”.[¹](#1) Thus
the *Hidãyah* makes the notification compulsory when attacking those
infidels who have never been “called to the faith”, but makes it
optional in other cases.

\(3\) On the other hand, the Shariat asks the Imam to declare *jihãd*,
if necessary, by violating or terminating the pacts and treaties
previously entered into with the infidels. In other words, the Shariat
asks the Muslims to look upon treaties with infidels as no more than
temporary expedients to be dispensed with when these no longer serve
their purpose. As already mentioned, immunity from such obligation to
the unbelievers is enjoined in the Koran itself, but the Shariat spells
it out with absolute frankness. Says the *Hidãyah*: “If the Imam makes
peace with aliens for a single term, and afterwards perceives that it is
most advantageous for Muslims to break it, he may in that case lawfully
break it after giving due notice; because upon the change of
circumstances… the breach of peace is war and the observance of it is a
desertion of war; and war is an ordinance of God, and the forsaking of
it is not becoming.”

\(4\) Is there any room for civilised rules in the war that is *jihãd*?
None whatsoever, declares the Shariat. “The Mussalmans must attack the
infidels with all manner of warlike engines (as the Prophet did by the
people of Taif) and must also set fire to their habitations (in the same
manner the Prophet fired the Baweera) and must inundate them with water,
and tear up their plantations and tread down their grain. These means
are all sanctioned by law.”

\(5\) Is it permissible to kill women and children in *jihãd*? Better
not, says the *Hidãyah*, not because they are to be pitied but because
they constitute booty. But if the *mujãhid* does kill them, he is not
liable to punishment or fine, “because that which protects (that is
Islam) does not exist in them”. Clearly, the Shariat is no believer in
understatement or the soft option.

\(6\) It is evident that the Shariat is bent upon taking the injunctions
of the Koran and the Hadis to their logical end. Thus it is not prepared
to release captives even after they have decided to profess Islam. They
have to be sold as slaves, says the *Hidãyah* “because the reason for
making them slaves had existence previous to their embracing the faith”.

(7) Even a non-Muslim captive is not to be ransomed for his Mussalman
opposite number. “The argument of Hanifa,” says the *Hidãyah*, “is that
such an exchange is an assistance to the infidels; because these
captives will again return to fight the Mussalmans which is an
evil.”[²](#2)  In fact, the emphasis in the Shariat is towards
slaughtering the kafir prisoners – kafir-slaughter being preferable to
having Muslim prisoners released.

It is not possible in so short a notice to do justice to the vast
literature of the Shariat on the single subject of *jihãd*. But the
foregoing material is quite adequate to explain the tendency of this
literature. That tendency is to close whatever loophole for charity
might exist in the exceedingly sanguinary business called *jihãd*. It is
not as if the injunctions of the Koran and the Hadis are not sanguinary
enough. But the Shariat is all the more so and even a cursory glance at
this literature brings out the hollowness of the claim put forth by
modern apologists like Maulana Abul Kalam Azad who would have us believe
that *jihãd* is nothing but a species of defensive warfare. Azad has
indeed appealed from the Shariat to the Koran. But as has been clearly
pointed out in the previous pages, that book itself suggests very little
foundation for such a belief. I have also shown that the Hadis does even
less. And the Shariat clinches the matter beyond any scope for ambiguity
or equivocation. As the *Hidãyah*, at the very start of its pedantic
exercise on the subject of *jihãd* points out: “\[*jihãd*\] is
established as a divine ordinance by the word of God, who has said in
the Koran “slay the infidels’ and also by a saying of the Prophet: ‘war
is permanently established until the day of the Judgment’.” This shows
that the Shariat merely confirms the doctrines of the Koran and the
Hadis, and adds to them only incidentally.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) *The Hedaya*, translated by Hamilton, Book IX, Chapter II.

[²](#2a) It is, however, fair to mention that the school of Imam Hanîfah
is not unanimous on this point.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
