+++
title = "03 Chapter 2 Rise of Muslims under the Sultanate"

+++
**Chapter 2**  
**Rise of Muslims under the Sultanate**

Muslim population in India grew with the expansion of Turkish rule in
Hindustan.  Its rise was due mainly to the immigration of Muslims from
abroad and conversion of Hindus to Islam.  There were Muslim losses
also, in wars, famines, and through reconversions, and there was the
growth of Muslim numbers through natural procreation in years and
decades.  We study all these processes, to begin with between C.E. 1200
and 1400.

**Muslim Immigration**

In the armies of Turkish conquerors Muslims of many tribes like Khitai,
Qara-Khitai, Qipchaqi, Garji and Ilbari came to India,^([1](#1)) and
they stayed on here.  Fakhre Mudabbir writes that the army of Qutbuddin
Aibak was composed of Turks, Ghoris, Khurasanis and Khaljis.^([2](#2)) 
Thus in the early years of Turkish conquest immigrant soldiers comprised
an important segment of Muslim population in India.

Also with the establishment of Muslim rule, batches of other types of
Muslim began to arrive in Hindustan from Central Asia, Persia, African
Muslim countries, and what is now called Afghanistan.  India was rich
and fertile as compared with their own lands, and with the extension of
Muslim political power, many immigrants - soldiers and traders, saints
and scholars, political refugees and adventurers, and even musicians,.
jesters and jugglers - attracted by the “abundance of wealth in cash and
kind” - began to flock to India.^([3](#3))  Only a few instances of such
immigration may be mentioned.  Minhaj Siraj says that people from Persia
(and adjoining countries) came to India in “various
capacities”.^([4](#4))  A great scholar of Iltutmish’s reign was Amir
Ruhani; he had come from Bukhara to Delhi during Chingiz’s
upheaval.^([5](#5))  Qazi Hamid-ud-din Nagori had also come from
abroad.^([6](#6))  Fakhr-ul-Mulk Isami, who had been Vazir at Baghdad
for thirty years but then had suffered some disappointment, arrived in
India and was appointed Vazir by Iltutmish.^([7](#7))  Nuruddin Muhammad
Ufi, the author of *Jama-ul-Hikayat* had also come to Delhi during
Iltutmish’s reign.^([8](#8))  Their important positions in India as well
as the influence of the Abyssinian slave Yaqut at the court of Raziyah
shows the presence of all types of foreign Muslims in India.

During the reign of Iltutmish, the Khwarizmi prince Jalaluddin
Mangbarani fleeing before Chingiz escaped into India with 10,000
followers (1221).  Even after his return (1224), some of his followers
stayed on here.^([9](#9)) Because of the Mongol upheaval, again, in the
court of Iltutmish there arrived twentyfive princes with their retinues
from Iraq, Khurasan and Mawaraun Nahr.^([10](#10))  During the reign of
Sultan Balban fifteen more refugee princes arrived from Turkistan,
Mawaraun Nahr, Khurasan, Iraq, Azarbijan, Persia, Rum and
Sham.^([11](#11))  It appears that each one came with a large number of
followers because Balban allotted for their residence a locality
(*mohalla*) each.^([12](#12))  These followers comprised masters of pen
and of sword, scholars and *mashaikh*, reciters and musicians.  The fact
that Balban had garrisoned the forts of Gopalgir, Kampil, Patiali,
Bhojpur and Jalali with thousands of Afghan troops,^([13](#13)) and in
the royal procession 500 Sistani, Ghori, Samarqandi and Arab soldiers
with drawn swords used to march by his side, indicates that a large
number of foreigners had come to India during his reign.

The Mongols, who had sent central and west Asian refugees fleeing into
India, themselves occasionally arrived as invaders and stayed on in the
country.  Some also came, as in 1244, from the eastern passes of Tibet
into Bengal.^([14](#14))  A large number of Mongols who had arrived with
large armies and sought service under Balban entered into relationships
with Muslim nobles.^([15](#15))  In 1291, the Mongol invader Alghu “with
4,000 Mongols and their families”, made India his home.^([16](#16))  The
colony of these neo-Muslims came to be called Mughalpura.  Under
Alauddin Khalji also many Mongol captives embraced Islam and settled
down in India.  According to Ziyauddin Barani, many needy persons from
Khurasan, Iraq, Mawaraun Nahr, Khwarizm, Sistan, Herat, and Demascus
came to Hindustan to receive bounty from Muhammad bin
Tughlaq.^([17](#17))  Ibn Battuta says that no new comer from Khurasan
was allowed to enter into Indian territory unless he came with the
express intent of staying permanently in Hindustan.  Battuta was himself
required to write a bond to that effect.^([18](#18))  Under Muhammad bin
Tughlaq especially, foreigners are said to have been preferred to Indian
Muslims on important posts and their immigration
encouraged.^([19](#19))  Foreign slaves, male and female, too arrived
from countries as far off as China and Abyssinia.

Then there is the fact of foreign traders and merchants coming to India
in large numbers.  They came both by land and by sea.  Horse traders in
particular came from the north-western side to Sind, Gujarat, Punjab and
U.P.; some also came through the eastern passes into Bengal leading to
the establishment of an Arab traders’ colony in
Chittagong.^([20](#20))  It is said that the ancestors of Lodi rulers in
India (1451-1526) were horsedealers.^([21](#21))  We hear a little later
that the best houses in Delhi belonged to the Khurasani
merchants,^([22](#22)) which shows that they had built permanent homes
in India.  Such was the position in North India.  In the South, the
coastal towns like Calicut, Cochin, and Quilon, to mention only a few,
were hub of international trade.  There were Muslim colonies on the West
Coast from very early times.  Indigenous converts added to the numerical
strength of foreign Muslims.  How quickly their numbers swelled may be
inferred from the fact that when, early in the fourteenth century, Malik
Kafur marched into Maabar (Malabar), about 20,000 Musalmans who had
settled in South India for long and were fighting on the side of the
Hindus, deserted to the imperialists and were spared.^([23](#23)) 
During the thirteenth century Muslim territorial expansion was rather
restricted.  Till the very end of the century Muslim rule could not
extend beyond what it had been by 1206.  In the fourteenth century,
however, Muslim arms penetrated into the south also encouraging Muslim
immigration.  With the founding of the Bahmani kingdom, in the middle of
the fourteenth century, the avenues of Muslim employment increased still
further and so also their immigration.

What could be the quantum of this immigration?  It is true that ever
since the inception of Muslim rule in India we come across references to
Abyssinians (Habshis), Arabs, Afghans, Mongols, Persians, people from
Khurasan, Rum and Sham, and of course the Turks, as constantly arriving
or living in Hindustan.  It is also true that the whole atmosphere of
the courts of the Turkish sultans was Islamic; all high officers were
Muslim.  Their repeated mention in the chronicles creates the impression
that they were flooding the country.  But repeated references to foreign
Muslim elements may not have been due so much to their large numbers as
to the important positions they held.  It appears that the number of
actual immigrants could not have been large.  A somewhat detailed
discussion on this point will follow later on.

**Conversions**

One important mission of Islam was to spread throughout the world.  The
Quran, the Hadis, the Hidaya and the Sirat-un-Nabi, the four all
important works of Islam, direct the faithful to fulfill the above
task.  Therefore, “there was never any doubt in the minds of the Muslims
of their right to spread over the earth… The *Hidayah* is quite explicit
about the legality of *jihad* (holy war) against infidels even when they
have not taken the offensive… The Muslim Turks found the moral
justification for their advance into India in the induction to propagate
Islam.  As this could not, in the opinion of kings and warriors, be
achieved without the subjugation of non-Muslims and occupation of their
territory, the propagation of Islam became identical with war and
conquest.”^([24](#24))  In simple language, conquerors and rulers
converted people by force.  It has been seen that during the Arab
invasion of Sind and the expeditions of Mahmud of Ghazni, defeated
rulers, garrisons of captured forts, and civilian population were often
forced to accept Islam.  Turkish rule in Hindustan was established in
the teeth of Rajput opposition and the process of war and conversion
never ceased.  Malik Kafur, the general of Alauddin Khalji, gave the
Raja of Dwarsamudra a choice between Islam, death or payment of a huge
idemnity.^([25](#25))  But under Muhammad bin Tughlaq there is greater
insistence on the vanquished Hindu princes to embrace Islam.  The most
glaring example of this is that during the Warangal campaign all the
eleven sons of the Raja of Kampila were made Muslims.  Muhammad bin
Tughlaq converted many people in this fashion.  When Firoz Tughlaq
invaded Jajnagar (Orissa), he captured the son of the Rai of Sikhar,
converted him to Islam, and gave him the name of Shakr Khan.^([26](#26))

Ordinarily, captivity for a Rajput was out, of the question; his sense
of honour and the dire punishments with which he was visited in case of
captivity,^([27](#27)) excluded any attempt on his part to save his life
by surrender.  He either died on the field of battle or escaped.  But in
war civilians and non-combatants could easily be taken.  Kafur
Hazardinari from Gujarat or Hasan (Khusrau Khan) from Malwa would not be
the only ones who were captured.  They rose into prominence and
therefore the circumstances of their enslavement and conversion are
known.  Large numbers became Musalmans in this way.  Muslim rulers were
keen to obtain captives in war and convert them.  During warfare it was
still more easy to enslave women and children.  It was almost a matter
of policy with the Turkish rulers and their commanders, from the very
start of Muslim rule, to capture and convert or disperse and destory the
male population, and carry into slavery women and children.  Ibn-ul-Asir
says that Qutbuddin Aibak made ‘war against the provinces of Hind…  He
killed and returned home with prisoners and booty.’^([28](#28))  In
Banaras, according to Ibn-ul-Asir, Shihabuddin’s slaughter of the Hindus
was immense, “none was spared except women and children,”^([29](#29))
Who were destined to be made slaves.  No wonder that slaves began to
fill the household of every Turk from the very inception of Muslim rule
in Hindustan.  Fakhre Mudabbir informs us that as a result of the
Turkish achievements under Muhammad Ghori and Qutbuddin Aibak, ‘even a
poor householder (or soldier) who did not possess a single slave
(before) became the owner of numerous slaves…’^([30](#30))

In 1231 Sultan Iltutmish attacked Gwalior, and ‘captured a large number
of slaves’.^([31](#31))  Minhaj Siraj Jurjani writes that ‘his
(Balban’s) taking of captives, and his capture of the dependents of the
great Ranas cannot be recounted.’^([32](#32))  Talking of his war in
Avadh against Trailokyavarman of the Chandela dynasty (Dalaki wa Malaki
of Minhaj), the chronicler says: ‘All the infidel’s wives, sons and
dependents… and children… fell into the hands of the
victors.’^([33](#33))  In 1253 in his campaign against Ranthambhor also
Balban appears to have captured many prisoners.^([34](#34))  In 1259, in
an attack on Hariyana (the Shiwalik hills), many women and children were
enslaved.^([35](#35))  Twice Balban led expeditions against Kampil,
Patiali, and Bhojpur, and in the process captured a large number of
women and children.  In Katehar he ordered a general massacre of the
male population above eight years of age and carried away women and
children.^([36](#36))

The process of enslavement during war went on under the Khaljis and the
Tughlaqs.  Alauddin had 50,000 slaves^([37](#37)) some of whom were mere
boys,^([38](#38)) and surely many captured during war.  Firoz Tughlaq
had issued an order that whichever places were sacked, in them the
captives should be sorted out and the best ones (fit for service with
the Sultan) should be forwarded to the court.^([39](#39))  Soon he was
enabled to collect 180,000 slaves.^([40](#40)) Ziyauddin Barani’s
description of the Slave Market in Delhi (such markets were there in
other places also) during the reign of Alauddin Khalji, shows that fresh
batches of slaves were constantly replenishing them.^([41](#41))

Muhammad bin Tughlaq became notorious for enslaving women, and his
reputation in this regard spread far and wide, so that Shihabuddin Ahmad
Abbas writes about him thus: ‘The Sultan never ceases to show the
greatest zeal in making war upon the infidels… Everyday thousands of
slaves are sold at a very low price, so great is the number of
prisoners.”^([42](#42))  Ibn Battuta’s eyewitness account of the
Sultan’s arranging the enslaved girls’ marriages with Muslims on a large
scale on the occasion of the two Ids, confirms the statement of
Abbas.^([43](#43))  Such was their influx that Ibn Battuta writes: “At
(one) time there arrived in Delhi some female infidel captives, ten of
whom the Vazir sent to me.  I gave one of them to the man who had
brought them to me, but he was not satisfied.  My companion took three
young girls, and I do not know what happened to the
rest.”^([44](#44))  Thousands of non-Muslim women^([45](#45)) were
captured in the minor yearly campaigns^([46](#46)) of Firoz Tughlaq, and
under him the Id celebrations were held on lines similar to those of his
predecessor.^([47](#47))  In short the inflow of such captives never
ceased, and it need hardly be stated that in the hands of their Muslim
masters the slaves, whether captured or purchased, became Musalman
sooner or later. 

The numbers thus captured and converted during the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries cannot be ascertained.  But from the details given
by the chroniclers, it appears that enslavement during war brought the
largest number of converts and, as years passed by, they and their
progency seem to have formed the bulk of the Muslim population.  Only
two instances may suffice to show how this agency contributed to the
rapid rise of Muslim numbers.  Bashir Sultani was originally a Hindu
slave.  He converted to Islam and became an important nobleman (Imadul
Mulk) under Firoz Tughlaq.  He purchased 4,000 slaves.^([48](#48)) 
Later on they were all manumitted and married, and could have produced
other thousands of Muslims in a single generation.  Khan-i-Jahan Maqbul
too was originally a Hindu.  He converted, became Prime Minister, and
collected 2,000 women in his harem.  How many slaves he had is not
known, but for such a high dignitary’s household of two thousand, at
least a few thousand slaves would have been required.  The point to note
is that all these women and slaves, if not originally Muslim, would have
embraced Islam in course of time.

**Proselytizing Activity of the Government**

It was not during expeditions and wars alone that conversions were
effected.  For increasing the number of their co-religionists, Muslim
rulers made free use of the governmental machinery in peace time.  This
was done not only by the sultans of Delhi, but by all Muslim rulers - of
Bengal, Kashmir, the Deccan - wherever Muslim rule was established. 
Another step was the building and maintenance of mosques, Khanqahs and
Sarais from government funds.  The buildings were often constructed on
the sites of Hindu shrines and from materials obtained by demolishing
them.  These mosques, besides being houses of worship and centres of
Islamic learning, often provided asylum to the needy and the indigent,
who could be potential converts.  Sometimes conquests were undertaken
with a “missionary” motive.^([49](#49))  Some rulers like Sikandar
Butshikan of Kashmir (1394-1417) just compelled their subjects to
embrace Islam.^([50](#50))

An important and effective means of obtaining converts was economic
temptation or pressure.  Ibn Battuta writes that Sultan Qutbuddin
Mubarak Shah Khalji (1316-1320) used to encourage Hindus to accept Islam
by presenting a convert with a robe of honour and a gold
ornament.^([51](#51))  In Bengal the landlords and Rajas who could not
deposit land revenue by a certain date had to convert to
Muhammadanism.^([52](#52))  Under Frioz Tughlaq (1351-88) the state
openly became an agency of conversion.  Shams Siraj Afif says that he
ordered his Amils to convert Hindus to Islam.^([53](#53))  Firoz Tughlaq
himself writes that he rescinded the Jiziyah to lure people to become
Muhammadans, and this measure brought him groups of converts “day by day
from every quarter.”^([54](#54)) And so were Indian Muslims made.

Contemporary sources do not supply any figures of the converted in this
way.  But the number of converts was perhaps not small.  Ibn Battuta’s
assertion that Qutbuddin Mubarak Shah’s system of proselytization
provided a convenient handle to his enemies to murder him by introducing
into the palace a large number of Hindus declaring them to be possible
converts, shows that Qutbuddin was accustomed to converting large
numbers.^([55](#55))

**Voluntary Conversions**

Side by side the efforts of the Muslim ruling classes was the
proselytizing activity of the Sufi Mashaikh.  It is, however, not known
to what extent the Sufis were interested in the work of conversion, and
this problem will be taken up in some detail at a later stage.  Here it
would suffice to point out that not many reliable references to their
proselytizing activity are available in genuine hagiological
works.  They may have helped those who showed any inclination to become
Muslims.  Occasionally they resorted to force also to convert
people.^([56](#56))

Closely related to the work of missionaries is the question of voluntary
conversions.  There are some references in the chronicles about
individual Hindus accepting Islam because of dissatisfaction with their
own faith.  Al Biladuri mentions such a case.  “The son of (a) king fell
sick, and he desired the ministers of the temples to pray to the idol
for the recovery of his son… But… the youth died.  Then the king
attacked the temple, destroyed… the idol, and slew the ministers.  He
afterwards invited a party of Muhammadan traders who made known to him
the unity of God… and (he) became a
Musalman.”^([57](#57))  *Tarikh-i-Tahiri* mentions the case of the
younger brother of Dalu Rai, the ruler of Sind, who, of his own accord,
became a Musalman and got married at Mecca.^([58](#58))  Similarly one
hoping through conversion to obtain his object of love, succession to
property., etc, would have voluntarily embraced Islam.  Some, whose
relatives had converted but who were not prepared to cut themselves off
from them, too would have followed suit.  These are solid assumptions,
often backed by references in Persian chronicles.

The ‘groups’ which converted to get relief from the Jiziyah, referred to
by Firoz Tughlaq, obviously belonged to the poor, economically
vulnerable sections.  The few caste groups which converted to Islam did
so because of professional and vocational compulsions.  Such conversions
took place mostly in urban areas, especially among artisans, mechanics,
handicraftsmen. The Zamorin ordered some fishermen of Malabar to convert
to Islam in order to man his warships.^([59](#59))  Some urban tailors
also converted.  The inter-dependence of cotton-carders, weavers
(*dhunia, julaha*) and tailors would have encouraged the former to
embrace Islam.  Beggars accepting cooked food from Muslims would have
become Musalmans automatically.  Butchers would have become Musalmans
because their vocation found a ready and sympathetic clientele among
Muhammedans.

**Muslim Losses**

Side by side the rise in Muslim numbers through immigration and
conversion, there was decimation of Muslim population also.  Muslim
rulers had to struggle hard to preserve and expand their territory not
only against Hindu Rajas but also against rebel Muslim governors and
adventurers.  There were wars against Hindu rulers for extension of
Muslim political power and there were wars of succession and military
campaigns against defiant Muslim governors.  Withal foreign invaders had
to be kept in check All these processes entailed loss of Muslim lives.

A glance at a few historical events can give an idea of this loss. 
During the first year of their conquest the Muslims had captured Ajmer,
Hansi, Kuhram, Sarsuti, Baran, Meerut, Kol and Ranthambhor.  But in 1193
the Chauhan prince Hariraja, “collected a Rajput force and besieged
Ranthambhor where, earlier in the year, Aibak had placed a garrison
under Qivam-ul-Mulk”.^([60](#60))  The Chauhans also occupied Ajmer.  In
1194 Aibak is stated to have crossed the Jumna a second time to capture
Kol, but the next year again he had to proceed to the relief of its
garrison.  On his return to Delhi in 1195 “news arrived of fresh trouble
in Ajmer,” which was again besieged by the Rajputs in 1195 and Aibak had
to fight hard for its relief; and it could be saved only by the timely
arrival of reinforcements from Ghazni.^([61](#61))  But a little later,
in Ghazni itself Yaldoz was creating trouble for the Delhi Sultan.  Such
troubles recurred constantly; as a consequence of which there was loss
of Muslim numbers.  The best instances of such losses are found in the
east where Bakhtiyar Khalji’s ambition to conquer “Tibet and China”
destroyed his whole army,^([62](#62)) or in the west where a Hindu king,
after defeating a Muslim army shorly after the initial Turkish conquest,
openly regarded himself as restoring to India its original name of
*Aryavarta* by killing off the *mlechchhas*.^([63](#63))

Sultan Iltutmish’s accession (1210) was resisted by Delhi *Jandars*, and
in the battle he “put most of their horsemen” to the sword.  His wars
with Yaldoz and Qubacha again must have meant depletion of Muslim
numbers (fighting on both sides) continually.  In his attack on Malwa -
Vidisha, Ujjain etc., again some Muslim soldiers would have perished. 
During his attack on Nagda, the capital of the Guhilots, he was driven
away by its ruler Kshetra Singh, with heavy losses.  But the most
interesting fact is that Kalinjar, Gwalior, Ranthambhor and even Badaon
and Kanauj, which had been captured earlier, had to be reconquered by
him.^([64](#64)) Obviously the Muslim garrisons in these places had been
destroyed by the Rajputs.  Minhaj Siraj makes mention of a Hindu Raja of
Avadh, Bartu (?) by name, “under whose hands and sword (in 1226) more
than 120,000 Musalmans had received martyrdom”.^([65](#65)) The figure
may be inflated, but the fact is important.  Raziyah’s rule was full of
bloodshed.  Armies of Delhi, Lahore, Bhatinda and Sirhind were involved
in war.  Karmatians had created trouble in Iltutmish’s reign: in
Raziyah’s reign a thousand of them openly attacked the Muslims in the
Jama Masjid, killed many of them and then were themselves killed. 
Ranthambhor had once again to be evacuated during her reign.  Since
perhaps during the period of the early sultans there was not muh
Indianisantion of the army, the losses in war may have been mainly of
the Muslims.  Alauddin Masu’d Shah had acquired the habit of seizing and
killing his nobles^([66](#66)) (and certainly other Muslims too).  In
Nasiruddin’s reign two attempts on Ranthambhor (1248, 1259) seem to have
been made without success^([67](#67)) but surely entailing loss of
Muslim soldiers.  In wars in Avadh, Narwar, Gwalior, Chanderi, Malwa
etc., again, many Muslims would have lost their lives.

Add to these losses the Mongol killings in India.  In 1241 the Mongols
under Tair Bahadur captured Lahore, “slaughtered the Muhammadans and
made their dependents captive”.^([68](#68))  Hasan Qarlugh wrested
Multan in 1245 and “the whole of Sindh was lost to the
Mongols.”^([69](#69))  It was recovered by Ulugh Khan (Balban) but the
next year the Mongols^([70](#70)) again arrived under Sali Bahadur.  By
1254, the territory up to and including Lahore had been taken by them. 
During Balban’s reign the Mongol pressure increased all the more.  His
son, the Prince Martyr, lost his life fighting them.  So great was the
loss on this occasion, that according to Amir Khusrau, “in Multan, in
every house there was some dead to be wept for.”^([71](#71))  Vigorous
Mongol attacks.^([72](#72)) continued right up to the first decade of
the fourteenth century; and this alone can give an idea of the losses
suffered by Muslim (and Hindu) population.

Meanwhile fighting at home never ceased.  Balban did not mount any major
attacks on neighbouring rulers, but even so his campaigns against the
rebellious Bengal and Mewat would have only added to the depletion of
Muslim numbers.  Barani says that the Mewatis had killed a hundred
thousand of his personal troops.^([73](#73))  Jalaluddin Khalji’s
accession was attended by loss of Muslim lives.  What Ranthambhor meant
to him (and had surely meant to his predecessors too), is candidly
confessed by him.  He had marched to it in 1291, but recoiled from
attacking it because he feared that its capture would entail great loss
of Muslim lives.^([74](#74))  With murdering Mongols he purchased
peace.  Although Alauddin Khalji rarely suffered defeat, yet there is no
doubt that Muslim soldiers lost their lives in good numbers in the
Bengal campaign, at Ranthambhor and Chittor and against the recurring
terrific Mongol invasions.^([75](#75))  The rebellions of Ikat Khan,
Haji Maula and Umar and Mangu Khan too would have killed many Muslims. 
The massacres of neo-Muslims under Balban and Alauddin (30,000 under
Alauddin only) would have added to the depreciation of Muslim numbers,
and so also in Ghayasuddin Tughlaq’s expeditions to Warangal, Jajnagar,
Tirhut, and Bengal.

Muslim blood was shed most recklessly under Muhammad bin Tughlaq.  Many
of his schemes were costly in terms of human life.  In the ‘Qarachal’
venture 100,000 soldiers are said to have perished.  Many of these, if
not all, would have been Muslims.  A modern historian recounts
twenty-two rebellions during his reign, twenty of which were of Muslim
nobles or governors, and the details point to loss of Muslim lives on
both sides, rebel as well as royalist.^([76](#76))  During the transfer
of the capital, according to the same scholar, it were mainly Muslims
who were asked to go from Delhi to Devagiri, and it is they who suffered
and died in the exodus.^([77](#77))  Ibn Battuta and Ferishtah credit
this Sultan with a love for shedding blood.  Not a little of this blood
was Muslim.

Under Muhammad Tughlaq’s successor Firoz Tughlaq, Shams Siraj Afif
notices a demographic recovery.^([78](#78))  When he wrote about it, he
was naturally thinking in terms of his co-religionists also.  But after
Firoz’s death civil wars and other disorders began to decimate Muslim
numbers.  Most of the 180,000 slaves were done away with by his son
Nasiruddin Muhammad Shah.^([79](#79))  Muhammad Bihamad Khani gives
vivid details of how with the weakening of the Sultanate, Muslim forces
were repeatedly defeated and destroyed by even local rulers like Adharan
and Sumer, and how Muslims were ousted from Chandwar, Bhongaon, Bercha,
Kalpi and many other places, of course with great losses in
men.^([80](#80))  As the fourteenth century closed, Timur arrived to
kill indiscriminately, not only Hindus but also Muslims.^([81](#81)) 
Muslim numbers would also have contributed their share to famines,
pestilences etc. commonly recurring in India.

**Natural Growth of Muslim Population**

These contradictory scenes in Muslim demography apart, about one thing
one can be sure.  While the overall demographic trend of India showed a
decline, the Muslim population showed only an upward tendency.  It is
true that many a time statistical victories through conversions were
scored off by losses in wars, yet an overall rise in Muslim population -
sometimes slow, at others accelerated - is clearly discernible.

The rise seems to be slow between 1200 and 1300, and rapid between 1300
to 1400.  Historical facts vouch for this behaviour.  Up to the end of
the thirteenth century, government effort towards proselytization is
hesitant.^([82](#82)) For example, when some Ulema approached Iltutmish
and suggested to him to confront the Hindus with a choice between Islam
and death, Nizam-ul-Mulk Junaidi, the Wazir, replied: “But at the moment
in India… the Muslims are so few that they are like salt (in a large
dish).  If the above orders are to be applied… the Hindus might combine…
and the Muslims would be too few in number to suppress (them).  However,
after a few years when in the Capital and in the regions and the small
towns, the Muslims are well established and the troops are larger, it
will be possible to give Hindus, the choice of ‘death’ or
‘Islam’.”^([83](#83))  Iltutmish, Balban and Alauddin Khalji were
practical administrators, and but for the captives and converts obtained
by them during wars, they did not act as royal missionaries.  Besides,
with the Hindus politically strongly entrenched right up to the end of
the thirteenth century, Muslim proselytizing activity had to be
cautious.  Alauddin subdued the major Hindu powers.  With their
submission and extension of Muslim political power to most parts of the
country Hindu vulnerability to proselytization increased.  Therefore,
between 1300 to 1400, under Qutbuddin Mubarak, Muhammad and Firoz
Tughlaq, conversions were effected at an accelerated pace, and
immigrants also arrived in larger numbers.

In brief till about the end of the thirteenth century, Muslims in India
were only like ‘salt in a large dish’.  The main reason for this
phenomenon was that during the whole century there was little Muslim
territorial expansion.  To what had been acquired by 1206, nothing
substantial was added till about 1300, and all the energies of the
Sultanate were concentrated on preserving their acquisitions rather than
expanding territorially.  Such a situation was discouraging both to
proselytization and even immigration.  Even in the capital city of Delhi
and its environs the Muslims were few, a fact which probably made Barani
suffer from an incurable Hindu-phobia.^([84](#84))  From the time of
Alauddin Khalji, however, Muslim population in India began to grow a
little faster due to the spreading of the Muslim rule to almost the
whole of India after 1300, and it is rightly claimed that the
establishment of the Vijayanagar Empire in the South was effected with a
view to preserve Hinduism from the onslaughts of Islam.  But
contemporaneously the Bahmani kingdom of the South was also founded and
it took to proselytising work usual with a Muslim regime.

By the close of the fourteenth century, the situation was like this. 
Kashmir’s introduction to Islam had started since the days of Mahmud of
Ghazni.  Sind and Punjab were being effectively Islamised by rulers and
Mongol invaders.  In Gujarat, Deccan and Malwa also, because of the
campaigns of local Muslim rulers against Hindu chiefs, the number of
Muslims had risen.  By the last years of the century, in the heartland
of Muslim power, Muslim population of Delhi and its adjoining regions
rose greatly, a fact which prompted Afif to write “from the qasba of
Indrapat (present Indraprastha Estate) to the Kaushik-i-Shikar (present
Delhi University area), five kos apart all the land was occupied…… There
were eight public mosques, and one private mosque…  The public mosques
were each large enough to accommodate 10,000 suppliants”.^([85](#85)) 
This clearly indicates a fairly large Muslim population in the capital
city.

There is yet another, though indirect and not unimpeachable, evidence
for this rise.  Alauddin Khalji had abolished the jagir system, lest
local officials should turn contumacious.  But by the time of Firoz
Tughlaq the number of dependable Muslims (or Muslims of a few
generations) had increased, and he could safely entrust jagirs to
them, “and during the forty years of his reign he devoted himself to
generosity and the benefit of Musalmans, by distributing villages and
lands among his followers” in lieu of salary.^([86](#86))

**Indian Muslims around CE 1400**

So, between C.E. 1200 and 1400 especially in the fourteenth century,
Muslim population had grown at an accelerated pace.  The agencies which
contributed to this growth are, well-known.  Historical facts giving an
idea of this rise too are on record.  But the quantum or percentage of
rise during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries is not possible to
estimate with any amount of accuracy for want of specific
data.  However, it has been estimated by me elsewhere that there were
more than thirty lakh Muslims in India around the year 1400
C.E.^([87](#87))  These Indian Muslims were not a coalesced lot.  The
Musalmans of Gujarat, Malabar or Bihar had little communication among
themselves.  The interests of merchants were different from the other
classes.  Even in the Central region of Delhi-Agra Muslims had broken up
into groups of vested interests.  In theory all Muslims are equal; in
practice some have always been more equal than the others.  Foreign
Muslims tried to dominate over Indian Muslims.  At the top were the
Ulema or the learned, nobles and army commanders.  They were all
foreigners or descended from migrant Muslims.  It was from the Ulema
class that the high officers, of government as well as religious
institutions were chosen.  Their presence was indispensable to a Sultan,
who was generally uneducated, if not unlettered.  They assisted him in
the interpretation and execution of the law.  It was through these men
that the regime systematized the religious and social life of the Muslim
community just as it organized the extension and administration of
Muslim dominions in India through the nobility.

The nobility laid the foundation of Muslim rule in India.  It was also
sustained by the endeavours and exertions of foreign warriors and
nobles.  These foreign nobles belonged to Turkic, Persian, Arab, Afghan,
Mongol, Abyssinian and Egyptian stocks but were known by the generic
title “Turk”.  They constituted the ruling oligarchy of the early
Sultanate.  They were army commanders-cum-civil administrators, officers
in charge of provinces and districts and holders of other similar
appointments of various grades and ranks.  Many of them had risen from
humble beginnings; some of them were originally slaves.  But conquest of
Indian kingdoms had proved to be very lucrative.  So greatly had they
benefited during campaigns and wars, and so great was their need to hold
and administer the newly acquired territories, that they all became men
of power and influence.  They were known by the generic term Turks and
they insisted on monopolizing all key posts and important positions, and
maintaining their racial and exotic identity.  This attitude was also
shared by their children and children’s children, who though born in
India, psychologically felt that they were Turks of foreign stock.  On
the other hand the foreign Muslims treated the Indian Muslim converts
with contempt.  They were so class conscious that Ziyauddin Barani, who
was born in India but belonged to a family of nobles, credits the Turks,
both in his *Tarikh-i-Firoz Shahi* as well as *Fatawa-i-Jahandari*, with
all possible virtues and the Indian Muslims with all kinds of vices.

The Indian converted Muslims manned the subordinate occupations.  The
socially rejected tradesmen were weighers, camel and donkey drivers,
changers, falconers, cuppers, leather-workers and tanners, geomancers,
jugglers, and barbers.^([88](#88))  The menials included scavengers,
entertainers, funeral workers.  Wrestlers, clowns, players, story
tellers, and singing women, moving about in the streets, irregularly
employed, knocking about for a living, associated with vice and begging,
were part of this low class.^([89](#89))  Tailors, weavers and
carpenters were a little better off.  Somewhere in between can be placed
saddlers, bow-makers, blacksmiths, rope-makers, butchers, wool-dealers,
bakers, gardeners, domestic slaves, beggars, labourers and pedlars of
all kinds.

These professions were almost exclusively manned by backward classes
neo-converts.  Conversion to Islam did not change their status, and
foreign Muslims looked down upon them.  The foreigners especially were
not prepared to treat them on equal terms at all.  To add insult to
injury, the chronicler Ziya Barani, a confirmed believer in the racial
superiority of the so-called Turks and baseness of the Indian Muslims,
recommends: “Teachers of every kind are to be sternly ordered not to
thrust precious stones down the throats of dogs… that is, to the mean,
the ignoble, the worthless.  To shopkeepers and the low born they are to
teach nothing more than the rules about prayer, fasting, religious
charity and the Hajj pilgrimage along with some chapters of the Quran
and some doctrines of the faith without which their religion cannot be
correct and valid prayers are not possible.  They are to be instructed
in nothing more.  They are not to be taught reading and writing for
plenty of disorders arise owing to the skill of the low-born in
knowledge…”^([90](#90))  “The low-born, who have been enrolled for
practising the baser arts and the meaner professions, are capable only
of vices…”^([91](#91)) Indeed all neo-Muslims were called by the generic
but contemptuous term *julaha*.  Surely all the converts could not have
come from the weaver caste, but the word *julaha* became synonymous with
the despised low-born Indian Muslim convert.

On the other hand the foreign Muslims (or Turks) “alone are capable of
virtue, kindness, generosity, valour, good deed, good works,
truthfulness, keeping of promises… loyalty, clarity of vision, justice,
equity, recognition of rights, gratitude for favours and fear of God. 
They are, consequently, said to be noble, free born, virtuous,
religious, of high pedigree and pure birth.  These groups, alone are
worthy of offices and posts in the government… Owing to their actions
the government of the king is strengthened and adorned.” On the other
hand the “low-born” (Indian) Muslims are capable only of vices -
immodesty, falsehood, miserliness, misappropriation, wrongfulness, lies,
evil-speaking ingratitude,…shamelessness, impundence… So they are called
low-born, bazaar people, base, mean, worthless, plebian, shameless and
of dirty birth”.^([92](#92))  Now neither the one could be so good nor
the other that bad, but Ziyauddin Barani rightly depicts the prevailing
attitudes and consequent tensions.  What worried him most was that the
Indian Muslims were appointed to “high offices and are successful in
their work… they will make people of their own kind their helpers,
supporters, colleagues.  They will not allow (Turkish) nobles and
free-born men and men of merits to come anywhere near the affairs of the
government.”^([93](#93))

In short, there was a constant and bitter struggle of wit and influence
for power going on between the “foreign” Turks and Indian Muslims -
Indian Muslims both high and low.  Although the claim of nobility of
birth by purchased slaves makes little sense, the Turks felt that they
belonged to blue blood and as founders of Muslim rule in India, they
deserved special consideration.  It was their right to keep to
themselves all high offices, for they possessed merit and were superior
to the *julahas*.  The Indian Muslims knew that the Turks were good
fighters, but for administrative work the indigenous Muslims were better
suited if not indispensable.  Muhammad bin Qasim and Mahmud Ghaznavi
used to employ Hindus in administration and army.  But with the
permanent establishment of Muslim rule in India and the growth of Muslim
population, the policy of the early sultans was to keep the Hindus
excluded from offices and appoint only Muslims.  Consequently, many
ambitious Hindus converted to Islam to obtain offices.  They were
originally Brahmans or Kshatriyas or of other high classes and perhaps
belonged originally to *raja, zamindar* or warrior families.  Such
converts had good chances of entering official positions because
isolation from original homes and communities made them all the more
reliable servants.  They had intelligence and experience on account of
their being sons of the soil.  They carried with them their caste
pride.  In short, the Indian Muslim officers did not feel inferior to
the Turks.  While the poor sections of the neo-Muslims could bear any
humiliation at the hands of the Turks, the higher class Indian Muslims
hit back.

In this strife, the foreign Muslims had an edge.  They were closer to
the sultan and wielded influence with him.  They were ever doing
research on the ancestry of Indian Muslim officers, and informing the
king about their origins and genealogy with a view to denigrating them
and attempting at the removal of those who had ‘infiltrated’ into it. 
Ziyauddin Barani derives a cynical pleasure in writing about the
exclusion and expulsion of low-born Muslims from state employment.  He
says that Iltutmish dismissed thirtythree persons from government
service by one stroke of the pen on account of their low birth.  He also
writes that the Vazir Nizamul Mulk Junaidi had appointed one Jamal
Marzuq as the *Mutsarrif* (Superintendent) of Kannauj.  The sultan not
only cancelled the appointment of Marzuq, he even went into the
antecedents of Nizamul Mulk himself on the representation of Malik
Qutbuddin Hasan the Barbak and Malik Izzuddin Salari the Vali-i-Dar, who
had some personal score to settle with the Vazir.  Nizamul Mulk is
highly praised by Muhammad Ufi, who dedicates his book the
*Jami-ul-Hikayat* to the Vazir.  This shows that he was high born.  But
it was not difficult for vested interests to prove that the Vazir’s
grandfather had descended from the *julaha* class.  It is said that the
latter lost the confidence of the sultan.  But not his office. 
Obviously, the sultan dared not remove him.  Barani wrongly writes that
no Indian Muslim could be retained on an *iqta* or appointed to the post
of *khwajgi, mutsarrifi* or *Mir Muharriri*.  It is true that Balban
also made detailed enquiries about the families of all his officers.  He
refused to grant audience to a low-born officer (*Amir-i-Bazariyan*) for
“granting him an interview would reduce the status of the king in the
eyes of the common people and diminish the prestige of the
throne”,^([94](#94)) and removed one Kamal Maiyher from the *khwajgi* of
Amroha.  The situation never changed, and Francois Bernier, late in the
seventeenth century, talks of originally “real Mongols”, “White men,
foreigners”.  He also says “that children of the third and fourth
generation, who have the brown complexion... are held in much less
respect than new comers, and are seldom invested with official
situations: they consider themselves happy, if permitted to serve as
private soldiers in the infantry or cavalry.”^([95](#95))  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) Minhaj Siraj, *Tabqat-i-Nasiri*, pp. 238, 242, 247, 249,
256, 258, 262, 276, 281.

^([2](#2a)) *Tarikh-i-Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah*, ed. Sir Denison Ross,
(London, 1927), p. 33.

^([3](#3a)) Ferishtah, *op. cit.*, I, p.84. Also p. 66.

^([4](#4a)) Minhaj, *op. cit.*, pp.157-60.

^([5](#5a)) Ferishtah, I, p. 66.

^([6](#6a)) *Ibid.*, p. 67

^([7](#7a)) Ibid.

^([8](#8a)) *Loc. cit.*

^([9](#9a)) A.B.M. Habibullah *op. cit.*, pp. 95,97.

^([10](#10a)) Ferishtah, I, p. 73.

^([11](#11a)) Ferishtah, I, p.75. Also Habibullah, *op. cit.*, p.272.

^([12](#12a)) Thus fifteen *mohallas* (localities) were colonized in
Delhi.  These were named as Abbasi, Sanjari, Khwarizm Shahi, Delmi,
Alvi, Atabaki, Ghori, Chingezi, Rumi, Sunquri, Mosuli, Samarqandi,
Kashgari, and Khitai. Ferishtah, I, p. 75.

^([13](#13a)) Ziyauddin Barani, *Tarikh-i-Firoz Shahi*, (Calcutta, 1862)
pp.57-58.

^([14](#14a)) Ferishtah, *op. cit.*, I, p.70.

^([15](#15a)) *Ibid.*, p. 85.

^([16](#16a)) Barani, *op.cit.*, p.218. Isami, *Futah-us-Salatin*, pp.
205-06.

^([17](#17a)) *Ibid.*, p.462.

^([18](#18a)) Ibn Battuta, *Rehla*, Trs, Mahdi Husain (Baroda, 1953),
pp.14-15.

^([19](#19a)) Yahiya Sarhindi, *Tarikh-i-Mubarak Shahi*, pp.107-108.

^([20](#20a)) Abdul Karim, *Social History of the Muslims in Bengal*,
Asiatic Society of Pakistan (Dacca, 1959), p.147.

^([21](#21a)) Lal, *Twilight of the Sultanate*, p.132.

^([22](#22a)) Yahiya Sarhindi, *op.cit.*, pp.107-108.

^([23](#23a)) Lal, *History of the Khaljis*, p.250.

^([24](#24a)) M. Mujeeb, *The Indian Muslims* (London, 1967), pp.67-68.

^([25](#25a)) Lal, *Khaljis*, p. 247.

^([26](#26a)) Yahiya, p.129. Ferishtah, I, p.147.

^([27](#27a)) Alberuni, II, pp. 162-163.

^([28](#28a)) Ibn Asir, *Kamil-ut-Tawarikh*, p.250.

^([29](#29a)) *Ibid.*, p.251.

^([30](#30a)) *Tarikh-i-Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah, op. cit.*, p.20 has
*“jauq jauq ghulam har jins”*.

^([31](#31a)) Ferishtah, I, p. 66.  Also Minhaj, *op. cit.*, p.175.

^([32](#32a)) Minhaj, E and D, II, p348.

^([33](#33a)) *Ibid.*, 367.  Also Ferishtah, I, 71.

^([34](#34a)) *Ibid.*, p. 371.

^([35](#35a)) *Ibid.*, pp. 380-81

^([36](#36a)) Barani, op. cit., p. 59, Ferishtah, I, p.77.

^([37](#37a)) Shams Siraj Afif, *Tarikh-i-Firoz Shahi*, Bib., Ind., Text
(Calcutta, 1890), p. 272.

^([38](#38a)) Barani, op.cit, p.318. Lal, *Khaljis, op.cit.*, pp.214-15.

^([39](#39a)) Afif, op. cit., p. 267.

^([40](#40a)) *Ibid.*, p.270.

^([41](#41a)) Barani, *op. cit.*, pp.314-15.

^([42](#42a)) *Masalik-ul-Absar*, op. cit, p. 580.

^([43](#43a)) “First of all, daughters of Kafir (Hindu) Rajas captured
during the course of the year, come and sing and dance.  Thereafter they
are bestowed upon Amirs and important foreigners.  After this daughters
of other Kafirs dance and sing… the Sultan gives them to his brothers,
relatives, sons of Maliks etc.  On the second day the *durbar* is held
in a similar fashion after Asr.  Female singers are brought out… the
Sultan distributes them among the Mameluke Amirs.  On the third day
relatives of the Sultan are married and they are given rewards.  On the
sixth day male and female slaves are married.  On the seventh day he
(the Sultan) gives charities with great liberality.”

Ibn Battuta, *op. cit.*, p. 63.  Hindi translation by A.A. Rizvi in
*Tughlaq Kalin Bharat*, part I, Aligarh, 1956, p. 189.

^([44](#44a)) Ibn Battuta, *op. cit.*, p.123.

^([45](#45a)) Afif, op. cit., p.265 has *“chandin hazar aurat musturat
va makhdarat musalmanan nasib mikardand”*.  Also see pp. 119-20.

^([46](#46a)) *Ibid.*, p.180.

^([47](#47a)) *Ibid.*, p. 360.

^([48](#48a)) *Ibid.*, p. 144.

^([49](#49a)) Amir Khusrau, *Khazain-ul-Futuh*, English trs. by Mohammed
Habib under the title *Campaigns of Alauddin Khilji* (Bombay, 1933),
p.80.

^([50](#50a)) Ferishtah, *op. cit.*, II, p. 341.

^([51](#51a)) Ibn Battutah, Voyages, ed. C. Defremery and B.R.
Sanguinetti (Paris, 1857), Ill, pp.197-98. Also Lal, *Khaljis, op.
cit.*, p. 305.

^([52](#52a)) Satya Krishna Biswas, *Banshasmriti* (Bengali), Calcutta,
1926, pp.6-10.

^([53](#53a)) Afif, *op. cit.*, pp. 268-69.

Also Ishwari Prasad, *Qaraunah Turks*, p.331.

^([54](#54a)) *Fatuhat-i-Firoz Shahi* of Firoz Tughlaq, E and D, III, p.
386.

^([55](#55a)) Lal, *Khaljis*, op.cit., p.305; Ferishtah, *op.cit.*, I,
p.127.

^([56](#56a)) For instance Raju Qattal’s efforts to convert Nahawan, the
Darogha of Uchch; the latter’s resistance and murder. Jamali,
*Siyar-ul-Arifin* (Delhi, 1311 H.), pp.159-60. Also Ferishtah, *op.
cit.*, II, pp.417-18.

Also see K.R. Qanungo, *Historical Essay* (Agra, 1968), p.151 for
proselytizing efforts of the militant mashaikh in Bengal and Richard
Maxwell Eaton, *Sufis of Bijapur* (1300-1700), Princeton, 1978, for the
Deccan.

^([57](#57a)) Biladuri, *Futuh-ul-Buldan, op.cit.*, pp.129-30.

^([58](#58a)) E and D, I, pp. 258-59.

^([59](#59a)) Titus, *op. cit.*, p. 39.

^([60](#60a)) Habibullah, op. cit., p. 63.  Fakhr-i-Mudabbir, op. cit,
p.22.

^([61](#61a)) Habibullah, 64-67.

^([62](#62a)) Minhaj, *op. cit.*, pp. 152-157.

^([63](#63a)) R.C. Majumdar, “Study of Indian History” in the *Journal
of The Bombay Branch of the Asiatic Society of Bengal*, 1957, p. 150.

^([64](#64a)) Habibullah, *op. cit.*, pp.100-104.

^([65](#65a)) Minhaj E and D, II, p.329. Also . D.C. Ganguly in *The
Struggle For Empire*, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan (Bombay), p.55.

^([66](#66a)) *Ibid.*, Minhaj, p. 345.

^([67](#67a)) *Ibid.*, pp. 349,368-69.

^([68](#68a)) Minhaj, pp.. 340-41.

^([69](#69a)) Habibullah, *op.cit.*, p. 213.

^([70](#70a)) *Ibid.*, p. 215.

^([71](#71a)) Wahid Mirza, *Life and Works of Amir Khusrau* (Calcutta,
1935), p. 63.

^([72](#72a)) Habibullah, *op. cit.*, pp.216-25.

^([73](#73a)) Barani, *op. cit.*, p.57.

^([74](#74a)) *Ibid.*, p.213.

^([75](#75a)) Lal, *Khaljis, op. cit.*, p.144, n.66.

^([76](#76a)) Mahdi Husain, *Tughlaq Dynasty* (Calcutta, 1963),
pp.195-257.

^([77](#77a)) *Ibid.*, pp.144-64, esp.149.

^([78](#78a)) Afif, *op. cit.*, pp.95, 99, 264-65, 321.

^([79](#79a)) Muhammad Bihamad Khani, *Tarikh-i-Muhammadi*, 425b, trs.
Rizvi, op. cit., p.233.

^([80](#80a)) *Ibid.*, fols. 418b-419b, and corresponding pp.228-29 in
Rizvi.

^([81](#81a)) Lal, *Twilight, op. cit.*, pp.17-43, 320.

^([82](#82a)) Barani, pp. 42-44.

^([83](#83a)) Ziyauddin Barani, *Sana-i-Muhammadi*, Medieval India
Quarterly, I, pt. III, pp. 100-105.

^([84](#84a)) Barani, pp.41-42, 44 and 216-17.  Similar sentiments are
expressed on pp.72-75.

^([85](#85a)) Afif., p.135.

^([86](#86a)) Afif, *op. cit.*, p. 95.

^([87](#87a)) K.S. Lal, *Growth of Muslim Population*, pp. 125-26.

^([88](#88a)) Ira Mervin Lapidus, *Muslim Cities in the Later Middle
Ages* (Cambridge, Mass, 1967), p. 83.

^([89](#89a)) *Loc. cit.*

^([90](#90a)) Barani, *Fatawa-i-Jahandari*, p. 49.

^([91](#91a)) *Ibid.*, p.98

^([92](#92a)) *Loc. cit.*, p. 98.

^([93](#93a)) Barani, *Fatawa-i-Jahandari*, pp. 97, 98, 99.

^([94](#94a)) For detailed reference see Lal, K.S., *Early Muslims in
India* (New Delhi, 1984), pp.129-132.

^([95](#95a)) Bernier, *Travels in the Mogul Empire*, p.209.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)   [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
