+++
title = "06 Chapter 4 Growth under the Mughals"

+++
**Chapter 4**  
**Growth under the Mughals**

By the time Akbar the Great (1556-1605) embarked upon the policy of
reuniting these kingdom under his imperial banner, Muslim population was
rising all over the country.  Still, despite all the exertion of the
Muslims at proselytization, Hindu resistance to it was also admirably
effective.  Sind and Punjab no doubt had a sizeable Muslim
population.  But at the beginning of the sixteenth century, northern
Sind (north of the River Indus) had, according to Portuguese accounts, a
local Hindu as its ruler or governor.^([1](#1))  In Gujarat, Malwa, and
Khandesh Muslims were growing in numbers ever since Alauddin Khalji had
conquered these kingdoms, but mostly in the cities and seaports.  In the
interior the Hindus predominated.  However, the notices of some
foreigners show that Muslim population in Gujarat had risen
considerably.  The people of Cambay were both Moors and Hindus, wrote
Barbosa^([2](#2)) and according to the impression of Pires, the Hindus
had been reduced to “almost the third part of the
kingdom.”^([3](#3))  On the Malabar coast, according to Portuguese
estimates, the Muslims comprised about twenty percent of the
population.^([4](#4))  The Bahmani kingdom had a large number of Muslims
which went on growing with time.  In Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, Golkunda,
Bidar, and Berar, the successor kingdoms of Bahmani, large number of
foreign Muslims swelled the ranks of the indigenous.  Writing on April,
7, 1561, C. Rodrigues remarks that in Bijapur “the Moors are as
innumerable as insects.”^([5](#5))  Another region to which this epithet
could be applied was Bengal.  Even so the Muslims were not in a majority
even in these parts.  In the Vijayanagar empire there were a few Muslim
contingents of soldiers and some Muslim citizens, but south of the river
Krishna the Muslim numbers were microscopic.  In the rest of the country
Hindu population predominated.  The Haryana, Delhi, Agra, and western
U.P. regions formed the nucleus, first of the Sultanate of Delhi and
then of the Mughal Empire.  It was no enemy territory where warfare for
conquest would have brought converts; its revenues in kind fed the
capital cities of Delhi and Agra; and its aggressive Zamindars were left
in restrained peace.  Consequently this region remained largely Hindu. 
Here the small minority of Muslims was introduced as a result of early
Turkish victories and Muslim immigrants were added largely under the
Saiyyads and Lodis.  Rajputana was Hindu; Muslims there were in
insignificant numbers, because there Muslim rule could never get a
foothold.  Indeed when Father Pinheiro and his caravan were going from
Cambay to Akbar’s court at Lahore through Ahmedabad, Patan and
Rajasthan,^([6](#6)) in the course of the journey they passed through
numerous large cities which were devastated, “especially the mosques
therein.”^([7](#7))  In the east, according to Fitch, Banaras was a
great city peopled exclusively by Hindus.^([8](#8))  He also says that
the inhabitants of Kuch Bihar were entirely Hindu.^([9](#9))  The vast
majority of the population of Orissa too was Hindu; and Muslim were very
few.^([10](#10))  Similar was the case with Gondwana and Central India.

About the percentage of Muslims in the total population no precise
information can be obtained from the contemporary records.  Babur’s
statement that most of the inhabitants were Hindus, conveys only a
general impression.  Two facts are, however, certain.  First, it is
widely recognised that the majority of Muslims were converts from
Hinduism.  Secondly, the largest number of conversions took place under
the Turks and Afghans who ruled between C. 1300 and 1556.

There is one contemporary source which gives precise information about
the proportion of Muslims in the total population, but it is not
reliable.  The *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*,^([11](#11)) an autobiographical
memoir of Jahangir, mentions that on one occasion he inquired from his
father why all inhabitants of India could not be made Musalmans, and
Akbar is reported to have said: “My dear child… with all of God’s
creatures, I am at peace; why should I permit myself, under any
consideration, to be the cause of molestation or aggression to any one? 
Besides, are not five parts in six of mankind either Hindus or aliens to
the faith; and were I to be governed by motives of the kind suggested in
your inquiry, what alternative can I have but to put them all to
death?  I have thought it therefore my wisest plan to let these men
alone.”^([12](#12))

Jahangir is supposed to have repeated this ratio at another place.  “Of
the whole population of Hindustan it is notorious that five parts in six
are composed of Hindus, the adorers of images, and the whole concerns of
trade and manufacture… are entirely under the management of these
classes.  Were it, therefore, ever so much my desire to convert them to
the true faith, it would be impossible, otherwise than through excision
of millions of men… but the massacre of a whole people can never be any
business of mine.”^([13](#13))

These statements, attributed to Jahangir, about the proportion of Muslim
population could not have been easily brushed aside but for the fact
that they appear to be obviously wrong.  From what we know of Akbar and
Jahangir, such sentiments and statements cannot be attributed to them. 
Whosoever be the writer of the *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*, he cannot delude
us because, as will be seen later, Muslims were not one-sixth of the
Hindu population even as late as the year 1800.  By 1600 Muslim numbers
may not have risen beyond 15 million.  In that year the total population
of India has been estimated at 140 millions.  Muslims would have formed
about one-ninth to one-tenth of India’s total population.^([14](#14))

During the first quarter of the seventeenth century, Jahangir, by and
large, continued to follow Akbar’s policy of *sulehkul*.  Perhaps a few
cases of forcible conversions might have been brought to his notice so
as to prompt him to issue, in the sixth year of his reign, a royal order
prohibiting the provincial governors from converting any one forcibly to
Islam.^([15](#15))  Jahangir also discouraged making of eunuchs in
Bengal for being presented to the court^([16](#16)) (for service in the
Mughal harem and ultimately becoming Muhammadans).  But he was not
against peaceful encouragement to conversions.^([17](#17))  Some
prisoners were also offered pardon if they turned Musalman.^([18](#18))

In one respect alone Jahangir deviated from the policy of his father: he
did not permit people to embrace Hinduism even of their own free
will.  He severely punished Kaukab, Sharif and Abdul Latif who, under
the influence of a Sanyasi, showed inclination for Hinduism.^([19](#19))
This policy would have stopped any erosion of Muslim numbers.  Besides,
while on a visit to Kashmir, when he learnt that the Hindus and Muslims
intermarried freely, “and both give and take girls (he ordered that)
taking them is good but giving them, God Forbid”.^([20](#20))  And any
violation of this order was to be visited with capital
punishment.^([21](#21))  This indeed was in accordance with the Islamic
law.  As per the Shariat law a Muslim may marry a Jewess, or a
Christian, or a Sabean, but “a marriage between a Musalman and… a Hindu
is invalid”.  Similarly, it “a female Muslim cannot under any
circumstances marry a non-Muslim”.^([22](#22))  So, Jahangir was being
unnecessarily fussy, because, whether a Muslim married a Hindu girl or a
Hindu married a Muslim girl, in course of time all of them used to
become Muhammadan.  Shahjahan’s orders in this regard were that the
Hindus could keep their Muslim wives only if they accepted
Islam.  Consequently, during his reign, 4,000 to 5,000 Hindus converted
to Islam in Bhadnor alone.^([23](#23))  Seventy such cases were found in
Gujarat and 400 in the Punjab.^([24](#24))  The policy of converting
such “families” would have contributed to the growth of Muslim numbers.

Shahjahan was even otherwise interested in making converts.  Professor
Sri Ram Sharma has collected facts and figures of Hindus converted to
Islam from the works of Qazvini, Lahori, Salih, Mohsin Fani, Khafi Khan,
etc. during Shajahan’s reign and has thus saved me the labour of doing
the same.  The following is the summary of what he says.  “Early in his
reign Shahjahan had appointed a Superintendent of converts to Islam,
thus setting up a department for the special purpose of making
converts.  The one common practice was to make terms with the
criminals…  The Hindus of the Punjab, Bhimbar, Bhadauri and Sirhind…
were all offered remission of their sentences provided they accepted the
‘true faith’.  When the war with the Portuguese started, of the 400
prisoners taken a few became Muslims.  The rest were kept in prison with
orders that whenever they expressed willingness to embrace Islam, they
were to be converted, liberated and given daily
allowances.^([25](#25))  An order was issued in the seventh year of his
reign that if a Hindu wanted to be converted to Islam, his family should
not place any obstacles in his way…  Under Shahjahan, apostasy from
Islam had again become a capital crime.”^([26](#26))

Some other practices discontinued by Akbar were revived by Shahjahan. 
Forcible conversion during war became common in his reign.  “When Shuja
was appointed governor of Kabul (he carried on) a ruthless war in the
Hindu territory beyond the Indus… Sixteen sons and dependants of Hathi
were converted by force.  The sword of Islam further yielded a crop of
Muslim converts… The rebellion of Jujhar Singh yielded a rich crop of
Muslim converts, mostly minors.  His young son Durga and his grandson
Durjan Sal were both converted to become Imam Quli and Ali
Quli^([27](#27))…  Most of the women had burnt themselves… but such as
were captured - probably slave girls and maids - were converted and
distributed among Muslim Mansabdars^([28](#28))…  The conquest of
Beglana was followed by conversion of Naharji’s son… who now became
Daulatmand.”^([29](#29))

Akbar had prohibited enslavement and sale of women and children of
peasants who had defaulted in payment of revenue.  He knew, as Abul Fazl
says, that many evil hearted and vicious men either because of
ill-founded suspicion or sheer greed, used to proceed to villages and
mahals and sack them.^([30](#30)) But under Shahjahan conditions
worsened.  Now peasants were compelled to sell their women and children
to meet the revenue demand.^([31](#31))  Manrique writes that the
peasants “are carried off… to various markets and fairs (to be sold),
with their poor unhappy wives behind them carrying their small children…
all crying and lamenting…”^([32](#32))  According to Qazvini,
Shahjahan’s orders in this regard were that captives were not to be sold
to Hindus as slaves,^([33](#33)) and under Muslim customers they could
only become Musalman.

Under Shahjahan, therefore, active steps were taken to swell the number
of Muslims.  He is praised by all contemporary Persian chroniclers as a
great Muslim king who was anxious to restore the prestige of Islam.  But
proselytization to Islam as such could not be extensive under
Shahjahan.  He was not a royal missionary like Sultan Firoz Tughlaq,
Sikandar Butshikan, Jalaluddin of Bengal, Mahmud Beghara of Gujarat or
the Emperor Aurangzeb.  In spite of certain deviations, the catholic
spirit of Akbar’s government had not been lost under Jahangir and
Shahjahan.^([34](#34))  Dara Shukoh was Shahjahan’s favourite son, and
his nearness to the throne would have imparted an unorthodox colour to
administration.

Indeed, it appears that from about the middle of the sixteenth to the
middle of the seventeenth century, conversions to Islam were not done on
a very large scale.  Bernier, who was in India towards the closing years
of Shahjahan’s and early years of Aurangzeb’s reign found India a
country of vast majority of Hindus.  He even goes on to say: “The great
Mogol is a foreigner in Hindustan, he finds himself in a hostile
country, or nearly so; a country containing hundreds of Gentiles to one
Mogol, or even to one Mahometan.”^([35](#35))  Being a foreigner,
Bernier might not have been able to quite distinguish between Hindus and
Muslims.  In any case, as Beni Prased points out, “he (Bernier) wrote
from mere observation and made no systematic
calculation.”^([36](#36)) Nevertheless, Bernier’s impression is similar
to the observations of men like Timur and Babur and many other foreign
writers.^([37](#37))  What is of importance about Bernier’s assertion is
that in spite of some conversions in the countryside, the demographic
complexion of the society in which he lived and moved had not perhaps
registered any appreciable change in the Hindu-Muslim proportion since
the days of Babur.

But with the coming into power of Aurangzeb a spate of conversions
followed.  ‘The proselytizing activity of Aurangzeb seems to have
started about the year 1666 (the year of Shahjahan’s death in prison),
and remained unabated till the end of his life.”^([38](#38))  He tried
his utmost to raise the number of Muslims by all possible means.

In April 1667, four revenue collectors (*qanungos*), who had been
dismissed for various faults, were reinstated on their accepting the
Muhammadan faith.^([39](#39))  Aurangzeb’s declared policy of *“Qanungo
basharte Islam”*[⁴⁰](#40) (Qanungoship on the condition of conversion to
Islam) brought many converts and many Muslim families in Punjab still
retain the letter of reinstatement on conversion or fresh appointment of
Muslims in place of Hindu Qanungos who were retrenched because they
would not convert.^([41](#41))  Such cases belong to places from the
Punjab to Bengal which shows that the policy was followed throughout the
length and breadth of the county.^([42](#42))  Government appointments
and promotions on conversion, too, were of frequent occurrences.  Nam
Dev was, on conversion, appointed to the command of 400; and Shiva
Singh, a grandson of Raja Kishan Das of Amroha was, on becoming
Musalman, appointed Musharaf of Imtiazgarh. The News Letters mention
conversion of Nek Ram, who rose to acquire the title of a Raja, and
Dilawar, who is spoken of as a commander of 1000.

Tempting offers were given to high and low to embrace Islam.  Even Rajas
and Zamindars could not resist such temptation.  A brother of the
Zamindar of Dev Garh converted to Muhammadanism and became Islam
Yar.  He was given the Zamindari, superseding the existing chief.  Some
others like Zorawar Singh and Shyam Singh of the same estate followed
Suit.^([43](#43))  Devi Chand, a Zamindar of Manoharpur, who had been
dismissed from his mansab, was restored to it on becoming Musalman. 
There ‘are many other similar cases.^([44](#44))  Shankarji, the
Zamindar of Pataudi, and Fateh Singh son of Raja Ram the Jat leader, and
the son of Gokal Jat were converted, the last one after his father’s
death.  Bishan Narayan, son of Raja Shiv Narayan of Kuch Bihar, was
admitted to Islam while Aurangzeb’s armies were busy in an expedition
against his father.  Kondaji, uncle of Netoji was also converted in the
tenth year of the reign.  The Raja of Palamau was offered better terms
if he would accept Islam.  Manucci mentions the case of three Rajas, who
got appointments at the imperial court on conversion.^([45](#45))  These
are individual instances, but many loyal servants and subjects of the
Rajas and Zamindars would have followed suit and embraced Islam when
their masters became Musalman.

The poor converted more easily and in larger numbers.  Of the
temptations given for conversion were an audience with the Emperor, a
robe of Honour, and a daily allowance which generally ranged from four
annas to seven rupees^([46](#46)); even four annas was a high amount in
those days.  A Deccanese was converted to Islam and given Rs.
2000.^([47](#47)) Obviously economic inducement was a great temptation
for the poor.  Criminals were given remission from sentence if they
converted to Islam.  The *Maasir-i-Alamgiri* mentions a case in which a
Hindu clerk killed the seducer of his sister, but escaped execution by
embracing Islam.^([48](#48))  There were many more similar
cases.^([49](#49))  In September, 1681, an order was issued that all
prisoners who would accept Islam were to be set at liberty.^([50](#50)) 
The practice was so common that no other specific cases need be
mentioned.

Imposition of the Jiziyah brought a better crop of converts.  We have
seen that under Firoz Tughlaq the strict imposition of Jiziyah had
compelled many people to become Musalmans.  Akbar had abolished it, but
under Aurangzeb this “economic pressure” was revived.  Manucci notes
that the Jiziyah was instituted “to force the Hindus to become
Muhammedans, to obtain relief from the insults of the
collectors…”^([51](#51)) Aurangzeb “was of the opinion that he had found
in this tax an excellent means of succeeding in converting
them”.^([52](#52))  Customs duties on the Hindu traders were increased;
on Muslims abolished.^([53](#53))  If the economic stress could make
some people convert just for a stipend of four annas a day, how many
more would have accepted Islam on account of the compulsions of the
Jiziyah.

The enslavement of women and children too was a common phenomenon now. 
The practice was revived under Shahjahan; it had not probably been
abolished completely earlier.  An interesting piece of information
supplied by Manucd should suffice here.  He gives a long list of women
dancers, singers and slave-girls like Hira Bai, Sundar Bai, Nain-jot
Bai, Chanchal Bai, Apsara Bai, Khushhal Bai, Kesar Bai, Gulal, Champa,
Chameli, Saloni, Madhumati, Koil, Menhdi, Moti, Kishmish, Pista etc.,
etc., and adds: “All the above names are Hindu, and ordinarily these…’
are Hindus by race, who had been carried off in infancy from various
villages or the houses of different rebel Hindu princes.  In spite of
their Hindu names, they are, however, Mohamedans”.^([54](#54))  It
appears that the number of such converts was so large that even their
Hindu names could not be changed to Islamic.^([55](#55))  The policy of
enslavement and conversion was also followed by others of smaller note. 
Sidi Yaqut of Janjira once took a Maratha fort after granting quarter to
the garrison.  Seven hundred persons came out.  Notwithstanding his
word, “he made the children and pretty women slaves, and forcibly
converted them to Islam… but the men he put to death.”^([56](#56))

Thus Aurangzeb’s proselytizing zeal resulted in good number of
conversions.  He seems to have employed all the means at his disposal to
raise Muslim population.  In the dispute about estates between two
brothers or relatives, the Raja or Zamindar who embraced Islam was given
the property.  Other kinds of pressures or temptations brought other
Rajas into the fold of Islam.^([57](#57))  Criminals were set free if
they became Muslims.  Economic pressure of Jiziyah and inducement of
jobs brought in may more converts.  Enslavement too was a contributory
factor.  Then there was sheer force - force by the king, his nobles and
local officers.  There are references in the reports forwarded by
Kotwals and Faujdars about their efforts and achievements in making
converts in their jurisdiction.  The forcible conversion of Frontier
Tribes by Aurangzeb is a well-known fact.  “Popular Hindu and Sikh
tradition ascribes mass conversions by force to Aurangzeb’s
reign.”^([58](#58))  Christians too were forcibly converted to
Islam.^([59](#59))  Both official and non-official sources point to a
high rate of conversion, much above the normal.  Naturally Aurangzeb
seems to have been satisfied with his achievements.  Manucci says that
just before the emperor died, he said: “I die happy for at least the
world will be able to say that I have employed every effort to destroy
the enemies of the Muhammedan faith.”^([60](#60))

Although the actual addition to Muslim numbers because of Aurangzeb’s
all-embracing campaign for proselytization is difficult to compute, yet
his pronouncements, his enthusiasm, his collection of day-to-day
information about conversions, his personally instructing the
neo-converts in the tenets of Islamic faith, and his ultimate
satisfaction at his success together with the information contained in
contemporary writings, do show clearly that addition to Muslim
population during his reign was substantial.

After Aurangzeb’s death the spate of conversions abated.  The Royal
Princes got busy in wars of succession, the chief nobles in capturing
power or carving out independent kingdoms.  From the description of wars
during the early part of the eighteenth century, aimed at succession or
independence, it appears that they resulted in Muslim losses mainly,
because “the descendants of Aurangzeb could not persuade one (Rajput) to
strike a blow in defence of his throne.”^([61](#61))  Repeated appeals
made by the contending parties that Muslim lives should not be wasted in
futile warfare, is not without significance.^([62](#62)) It is at least
obvious that in such wars Hindu captives or converts could not be
obtained.

Invasions of Nadir Shah and Ahmad Shah Abdali added to the loss in
Muslim numbers.  Disgruntled Muslim nobles and religious leaders used to
implore foreign invaders to attack India.  Babur was invited and so were
Nadir Shah and Ahmad Shah Abdali.  Such Indian Muslims had little
consideration for the overall interests of the countrymen as a
whole.  These invaders killed more Hindus than Muslims; but of course
Muslims were also killed in large numbers.  The effects of Nadir’s march
through the Punjab, his massacre at Delhi which cost thousands of Muslim
lives,^([63](#63)) and Abdali’s sack of the Punjab not less than eight
times between 1748 and 1769,^([64](#64)) on Indian and especially Muslim
demography need not be stressed.  Even Delhi, the imperial capital,
could not recover from the shocks right up to the end of
thecentury.^([65](#65)) 

However, during this period a good number of Afghans had migrated to
India, compensating to some extent the loss of Muslim population.  In
the region comprising the modern districts of Bijnor, Moradabad, Badaon,
Bareilly, Shahjahanpur, Rohilla Afghans had started settling in the
seventeenth century.^([66](#66))  “Sometime during the reign of
Shahjahan, Daud Zai Afghans (had) settled in this tract and founded the
important town of Shahjahanpur.” But in the eighteenth century, while
the rise of Nadir Shah scattered the Afghans in their own country and
many of them came to India, the disturbed political state of India and
the anxiety of the different leaders to secure military assistance of
the warlike Afghans provided the necessary openings which the Afghans
well utilized.^([67](#67))  Thus the displacement from Qandhar and the
country around by Nadir Shah and the pull exercised by the political
vacuum caused by the rapid decline of the Mughal empire resulted in the
immigration of a goodly number of Afghans.^([68](#68))  By the middle of
the eighteenth century Najibuddaulah, a Yusufzai Rohilla Nawab in India,
declared on the eve of the battle of Panipat (1761) that he could depend
upon the support of 150,000 Afghans who were in India.^([69](#69))

But for the compensating immigration, the resources of the Mughal empire
in the eighteenth century rapidly declined and economic temptations
could not be offered to obtain converts.  Jiziyah was officially
abolished in 1719-20.^([70](#70))  It was only a formal recognition of
the fact that it could not be collected after Aurangzeb’s
death.^([71](#71))  In independent Muslim states, which had been
fighting against Aurangzeb or had emerged with the decline of the Mughal
empire, the effort was to seek the goodwill of the Hindus rather than to
annoy them with any campaign for proselytization.^([72](#72))

Moreover, the Hindus - Jats, Marathas, Sikhs, and Rajputs - had gathered
strength.  By 1719 when the Faujdari of Surat was held by Raja Jai Singh
and the Subedaris of Ahmedabad and Ajmer, including Jodhpur, by Ajit
Singh, “the two Rajas held all the country from thirty kos of Delhi… to
the shores of the sea at Surat.”^([73](#73))  The power of the Rajputs
can be guaged from certain acts of Ajit Singh.^([74](#74))  In the
Punjab, Banda Bahadur’s activities were continued by his successors
until the Sikhs became masters of the Punjab, and they in place of
permitting any further erosion of Hindu numbers, converted people to
their own creed, ‘sometimes by force.’^([75](#75))  The power of the
Marathas already established in the South, began to be extended to the
North, so that by the middle of the eighteenth century, Rustam Ali, who
was compelled to “travel from city to city in search of employment and
subsistence”, writes in his *Tarikh-i-Hind* (composed C.E. 1741-42) that
“from the day he left Shah Jahanabad (Delhi), and travelled through the
country of idolatry, it was here (at Bhopal) only that he found Islam to
be predominant.”^([76](#76)) 

In these circumstances, the spate of conversions to Islam slackened. 
Some stray efforts at conversion no doubt continued to be made even
during the eighteenth century, but without much success.  For instance
when in 1716 Banda Bahadur with his 740 followers was given by Farrukh
Siyar the choice between Islam and death, they all died to a man rather
than become Musalman.^([77](#77))  Similarly, according to T.W. Arnold,
Tipu Sultan issued an order to the people of Malabar to become
Musalmans, “and early in 1789 (he) prepared to enforce his proclamation
with an army of more than twenty thousand men… Thousands of Hindus were
accordingly circumcised and made to eat beef; but this monarch himself
perished, early in 1799… Most of the Brahmans and Nayars who had been
forcibly converted subsequently disowned their new
religion.”^([78](#78)) However, Tipu Sultan declared that his conversion
campaign had been very successful and that on a single occasion, within
twentyfour hours he caused swelling in the ranks of the faithful by
50,000.  All along his invasion route in Kerala, over 500 Hindu temples
were desecrated by his armies in Cannanore, Calicut and Mallapuram
districts.  Some of the ruins are still extent.  However, from all the
evidence available, it appears that Muslim population did not register
rise in the eighteenth century through proselytization.  On the
contrary, there was perhaps a recession even in its natural growth due
to disturbed political conditions in which Muslim numbers seem to have
suffered a shrinkage.

To conclude: while the total population of India from 1000 to 1800 had
registered rise and fall by turns, Muslim population had shown only a
constant rise.  In 1000 Muslim numbers in India were microscopic.  In
1200 they were perhaps about three to four hundred thousand.  By 1400
their number had risen probably to 3.2 million and they formed about
1.85 percent of the total population.  In 1600 they were probably 15
million.  And from the 1:9 to 1:10 Muslim-Hindu ratio in 1600 the
proportion of Muslims to Hindus had gone up to about 1:7 by the year
1800.  When Bishop Heber wrote his journal (1826), his inquiries pointed
to a Muslim-Hindu ratio of 1:6.^([79](#79)) Edward Thornton’s Gazetteer2
published in 1854 also gives the ratio of 1:6. Thus at about the middle
of the ninteenth century, the Muslim-Hindu ratio stood approximately at
1:6. This would make the Muslims 16 per cent of the total population. 
In 1800 this percentage was obviously less - 15 or even 14.  The total
population estimated for C.E. 1800 is 170 millions.^([80](#80))  Muslims
who were 15 percent of the total would have been about 25 millions.  By
the end of the nineteenth century, the ratio had changed to 1:5, and
Stanely Lanepoole, whose *Medieval India* was first published in 1903,
rightly observes: “The population of India in the present day is over
three hundred millions, and every sixth man is a
Muslim.”^([81](#81))  The total population of India, according to 1901
Census was 283,867,584 (including persons in the N.W. Frontier Province)
and Muslims numbered 62,861,542.^([82](#82)) Therefore, approximately
every sixth person was a Muslim and the ratio stood at 1:5.  And since
Muslim numbers in proportion to the Hindus have increased progressively
through decades and centuries, a ratio of 1:6 for the middle of the
nineteenth and 1:7 for the year 1800 is not only a fair estimate but
almost a correct figure for which evidence is available in Thornton’s
Gazetteer and its authentic sources.^([83](#83))  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Lach, I, p.420, referring to the authority of Pires.

[²](#2a) Barbosa, *op. cit.*, I, p.40.

[³](#3a) Pires, *op. cit.*, cited in Lach, I, p.390.

[⁴](#4a) Lach, *op. cit.*, I, pp.368-69.

[⁵](#5a) Lach, I, p.444.

[⁶](#6a) Smith, *Akbar the Great Mogul*, p.188.

[⁷](#7a) Peruschi in Lach, I, p.462.

[⁸](#8a) Richard Hakluyt, *The Principal Navigations, Voyages,
Traffiques, and Discoveries of the English Nation* (Glasgow, 1903-05),
V, p.477.

[⁹](#9a) Lach, I, p.481.

[¹⁰](#10a) Barbosa, *op. cit.*, I, pp. 132-33.

[¹¹](#11a) “Memoirs of the Emperor Jahangueir, written by himself, and
translated from a Persian Manuscript” by Major David Price (London,
1829), p.15. Calcutta Edition (Bangabasi Press, 1906), pp.21-22.

This work, according to Sir Henry Elliot, does not comprise the real
*Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri* or *Memoirs of Jahangir*.  He also points out a
number of exaggerations in which the *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi* indulges (E
and D, VI, pp. 256-264), and adds that “some parts at least… must be
ranked in the same class” as fiction. (E and D, VI, p.257).

Dr. Beni Prasad, writing on the *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi* says: “The name
of the author is unknown.  On several points it is fuller than the
genuine memoirs.  But the work as a whole is a fabrication.” *History of
Jahangir*, pp. 387-88.

[¹²](#12a) *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi* (Calcutta Edition), pp. 21-22.

[¹³](#13a) Ibid., pp. 41-41.

[¹⁴](#14a) For this conclusion see K.S.Lal, *Growth of Muslim Population
in Medieval India*, p.143.

[¹⁵](#15a) *Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri*, or Memoirs of Jahangir, I, p105.

[¹⁶](#16a) *Ibid.*, I, pp.150-151.

[¹⁷](#17a) Aziz Ahmad, *Studies in Islamic Culture…*, p.83.

[¹⁸](#18a) Sri Ram Sharma, *The Religious Policy of the Mughal
Emperors*, pp.61-62.

[¹⁹](#19a) *Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri*, I, p.171.

[²⁰](#20a) *Ibid.*, II, p.181.

[²¹](#21a) *Loc. cit.*

May be it was because of this that Akbar discouraged all kinds of
intercommunal marriages. Badaoni, *Muntakhab-ut-Tawarikh*, II, p.413.
*Also Ain-i-Akbari*, Blochmann, I, p.220.

[²²](#22a) Hughes, *Dictionary of Islam*, p.318 and Ram Swarup,
*Understanding Islam through Hadis*, p.59.

[²³](#23a) Qazvini, *Badshah Nama*, pp. 444-45; Lahori, *Badshah Nama*,
2 vols. (Calcutta 1876); Khafi Khan, *Muntakhab-ul-Lubab*. I, p.510. 

[²⁴](#24a) Sharma, *op. cit.*, pp.88-89 and Sharma, *Conversion and
Re-conversion to Hinduism* (D.A.V. College Historical series No.2 n.d.)
also Qazvini, p.562.

[²⁵](#25a) Also Lahori, *op. cit.*, I, p.534.

[²⁶](#26a) Sharma, *op. cit.*, pp.90-91.

[²⁷](#27a) Lahori, I, ii, p.133.

[²⁸](#28a) *Ibid.*, p.139. Khafi Khan, cp. cit., I, pp.522-23.

[²⁹](#29a) Sharma, *op. cit.*, p.91.

[³⁰](#30a) *Akbar Nama*, trs. H. Beveridge, 3 vols (Calcutta, 1948), II,
p.451.

[³¹](#31a) Manucci, *Storia do Mogor*, 4 vols., II, p.451.

[³²](#32a) Manrique, *Travels of Frey Sebastian Manrique*, 2 vols, II,
p.272. Also see Bernier, *Travels in the Mogul Empire*.

[³³](#33a) Qazvini, *op. cit.*, p.405.

[³⁴](#34a) Bernier, *op. cit.*, p.306.

[³⁵](#35a) *Ibid.*, p.209.

[³⁶](#36a) Beni Prasad, ‘India in 1605 A.C.’ *Modern Review* (Calcutta,
January 1921), pp.15-22, p.17n.

[³⁷](#37a) Early in the seventeenth century, Muhammad Sharif Hanafi, the
author of *Majalis-us-Salatin* (composed C.E.1628) and a much travelled
man, carried the same impression about the Southern region of the
country.  Writing about Carnatic he says: “All the people… are
idolaters.  There is not a single Musalman.  Occasionally a Musalman may
visit the country deputed by Nizam Shah, Adil Shah or Kutb Shah, but the
natives are all infidels.” E. and D., VII, p.139.

[³⁸](#38a) S.R. Sharma, *op. cit.*, p.165. Professor Sharma has again
come to my rescue by collecting facts and figures of conversions from
the original sources of Aurangzeb’s reign including News Letters
(*Akhbarat*) and royal correspondence.  Sharma pp.165-174. Since it is a
matter of facts and figures and not of “interpretation”, or opinion,
there need be no hesitation in accepting them.

[³⁹](#39a) Sharma *op. cit.*, p.165.

[⁴⁰](#40a) K.R. Qanungo, *Historical Essays*, p.ii.

[⁴¹](#41a) J.N. Sarkar, *Aurangzeb*.

[⁴²](#42a) Sharma, *op. cit.*, pp.169-173.

[⁴³](#43a) *Ibid.*, p.166.

[⁴⁴](#44a) *Loc. cit.*

[⁴⁵](#45a) Manucci, II, p. 436.

[⁴⁶](#46a) Sharma, p.170.

[⁴⁷](#47a) *Alamgir Nama*, p.567 cited in Sharma p.173.

[⁴⁸](#48a) *Mustaad Khan*, Maasir-i-Alamgiri Eng. trs. Jadunath Sarkar
(Calcutta, 1947), p.73.

[⁴⁹](#49a) Sharma, *op. cit.*, pp.170-172. Rizqullah mentions the case
of a thief who converted to Islam and was given charge of a city. 
*Waqiat-i-Mushtaqi*, fols. 13b-14a.

[⁵⁰](#50a) News Letter of even date, cited in Sharma, p.166.

[⁵¹](#51a) Manucci, *op. cit.*, II, 234.

[⁵²](#52a) *Ibid.*, III, pp.288-89, also IV, p.117. Also most Persian
chroniclers.

[⁵³](#53a) *Ibid.*, II, p.415.

[⁵⁴](#54a) *Ibid.*, II, pp.336,337-338. Also Lal, *The Mughal Harem*,
pp. 29-32; 165-67. For instances of enslavement by Aurangzeb see Khafi
Khan E and D. VII, pp.300, 371.

[⁵⁵](#55a) See K.S. Lal, *The Mughal Harem* (New Delhi, 1988),
pp.167-169.

[⁵⁶](#56a) Khafi Khan, *op. cit.*, II, p.228.

[⁵⁷](#57a) Manucci, *op. cit.*, II, p.436.

[⁵⁸](#58a) Sharma, p.168.

[⁵⁹](#59a) Manucci, *op. cit.*, II, p.404.

[⁶⁰](#60a) *Ibid.*, IV, p.398.

[⁶¹](#61a) C.H.I., IV, p.358.

[⁶²](#62a) Eg. Khafi Khan, *op. cit.*, pp.396, 452, 496, 542.

[⁶³](#63a) C.H.I., IV, p.361 and n.2.

[⁶⁴](#64a) Shaikh Abdur Rashid, *Najibuddaullah, His Life and Times*,
(Cosmopolitan Publishers, Aligarh, 1952), Introduction, pp.xlix-li. Also
see Irvine, *Indian Antiquary*, Vol. 36, 1907, pp.46ff.

[⁶⁵](#65a) W. Francklin. *The History of the Reign of Shah-Aulum*,
pp.200-201.

[⁶⁶](#66a) Jadunath Sarkar, *Fall of the Mughal Empire, op. cit.*, I,
pp.27-28.

[⁶⁷](#67a) Abdur Rashid, *Najibuddaulah, op. cit.*, Intro. xxxii, Iiii.

[⁶⁸](#68a) *Ibid.*, liii-iv.

[⁶⁹](#69a) *Ibid.*, lxxvi.

[⁷⁰](#70a) Khafi Khan, p.479.

[⁷¹](#71a) *Ibid.*, pp.462, 516, 524, also *Kanz-ul-Mahfuz*, E and D,
VIII, p.39.

[⁷²](#72a) Khafi Khan, *op. cit.*, p325.

[⁷³](#73a) *Ibid.*, p.485.

[⁷⁴](#74a) “Maharaja Ajit Singh took back the Maharani, his daughter who
had been married to Farrukh Siyar, with all her Jewels… he made her
throw off her Musalman dress, dismissed her Muhammadan attendants and
sent her to her native country… In the reign of no former Emperor had
any Raja been so presumptuous as to take his daughter after she had been
married to a king and admitted to the honour of Islam.” Khafi Khan, *op.
cit.*, p.483.

Probably this is not an isolated case of reconversion to Hinduism.

[⁷⁵](#75a) Khafi Khan, *op. cit.*, p.419.

[⁷⁶](#76a) E and D, VIII, p.58.

[⁷⁷](#77a) C.H.I., IV, *op. cit.*, p.335.

Some people would have been converted during the invasions of Nadir Shah
and Ahmad Shah Abdali.  Muhammad Aslam in his *Farhat-un-Nazirin* says
that during the Third Battle of Panipat (1761) about 90, 000 persons,
“male and female, were taken prisoner and obtained eternal happiness by
embracing the Muhammadan faith”, *op. cit.*, p.171… But not only is he
not supported by any other contemporary historians, the very incidents
of the war militate against such large-scale conversions.

[⁷⁸](#78a) Arnold, *The Preaching of Islam*, pp.261 ff cited in Titus,
*Islam in India and Pakistan*, p.33.

[⁷⁹](#79a) Heber’s *Narrative of a Journey*.  Also see J.M. Datta,
Modern Review, January, 1918, pp.33-34.

[⁸⁰](#80a) Lal, *Growth of Muslim Population… op. cit.*, p.15.

[⁸¹](#81a) S. Lanepoole, *Medieval India*, p.1.

[⁸²](#82a) See Census Report for 1901 and Kingsley Davis *The Population
of India and Pakistan*, p.179, Table 77.

[⁸³](#83a) Robert Orme’s estimates are low both for the Muslim
population as well as for the total population of India.  His assessment
of the Hindu-Muslim proportion also does not seem to be correct.  What
he writes is this: “From these origins time has formed in India a nation
of near ten million of Mohamdans whom the Europeans call Moor, to them
under the authority of the Great Mogul, the greatest part of Hindustan
is now subject; but although the reigning nation, they are outnumbered
by the Indians ten to one.” Robert Orme, *A History of the Military
Transactions of the British Nation in Indostan*, 3 vols. 4th ed.
(London, 1803), I, p.24.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)  [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
