+++
title = "11 Chapter 6 Factors which Checked Islamization of India"

+++
**Chapter 6**  
**Factors which Checked Islamization of India**

Now, if the components of growth of Muslim population were many, Muslim
losses comparatively few, and fecundity among them high, the problem
that needs investigation is why Muslims have remained a minority in this
country and why India, unlike many other countries in the medieval
period, could not be completely converted to Islam.

**Vastness of the Country**

The vastness of the country and its natural and political division into
regions and kingdoms made the task of its complete subjugation and
conversion extremely difficult.  In fact throughout the medieval period
at no time was the whole of India under direct Muslim rule.  Even in the
regions where Muslim rule was firmly established it was thought
expedient to leave the countryside alone.  Victories provided the Muslim
ruling class the luxuries of the city cultured life, and their interest
in rural areas remained confined merely to the collection of land
revenue.  In the words of Kingsley Davis, “although there were mass
conversions, the country was too vast, the invaders too few, and the
volume of immigration too small to change the social complex… India,
therefore, never became a Muslim nation, but remained simply a Hindu
country in which Muslims were numerous”.^([1](#1))  Henry Blochmann puts
it more explicitly.  He writes: “The invaders were few and the country
was too large and too populous.  The waves of immigration from Turan
were few and far between, and deposited on Indian soil adventurers,
warriors, and learned men, rather than artisans and colonists.  Hence
the Muhammadans depended upon the Hindoos for labour of every kind, from
architecture down to agriculture and the supply of servants.  Many
branches they had to learn from the Hindoos, as, for example, the
cultivation of indigeneous produce, irrigation, coinage, medicine, the
building of houses, and weaving of stuffs suitable for the climate, the
management of elephants, and so forth.”^([2](#2))

**Hindu ‘Protestant’ Movement**

Another reason for India remaining a Hindu majority country was the
resistance of the people to conversion to Islam.  Before the advent of
Islam India had seen the birth and growth of many religions and sects
like Shaivism, Vaishnavism, Jainism, Buddhism, Shankara’s neo-Hinduism,
etc.  People had freely ‘converted’, ‘reconverted’ and at times
conformed to more than one religious belief at one and the same time. 
For all this was a matter of conviction brought about by peaceful
methods.

But the Hindus could not have liked being converted by conquerors and
rulers by force.  In fact, as seen in Sind after the return of Muhammad
bin Qasim and in Karnataka after the death of Tipu Sultan, many Hindus,
who were converted to Islam, returned’ to their former faith on the
first opportunity.  Harihar and Bukka, converted to Islam by Muhammad
bin Tughlaq, reverted to Hinduism and founded the kingdom of Vijayanagar
to resist the expansion of Muslim power in the South.  Although any
return of converts to the Hindu fold was frowned upon by the Muslim
rulers, and some Brahmins encouraging converts to return to Hinduism
were put to death by Firoz Tughlaq and Sikandar Lodi,^([3](#3)) yet
there did exist some mechanism which facilitated return of converted
Hindus back into their old religion.  Else, with what actually happened
in medieval times, Hindus would have been completely submerged under the
onslaught of unmitigated proselytization.  The Hindus did not believe in
converting others to their faith, but the tenacity of the Hindu social
order “lapped away at any instrusive system as the sea laps away at a
sand bank”.^([4](#4))  Yet in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries in
particular there were conversions on such large scale throughout the
country, that for once “the bleeding soul of the Hindus” rose in
revolt.^([5](#5)) The Bhakti saints were the leaders of the Hindu
‘protestant’ movement.^([6](#6))

It must be said at the outset that there is no recorded evidence to show
that the Bhakti saints of the fifteenth century made any *deliberate*
attempt to put a stop to conversions to Islam, or to reconvert people to
Hinduism.  Still there is good deal of circumstantial evidence to show
that their reform movement did help check Muslim proselytizing
activity.  It. is significant that the socio-religious reformers
associated with the Bhakti movement of the fifteenth century were all
Hindus.  There is some doubt about Kabir’s parentage, but then, “the
whole background of Kabir’s thought is Hindu”.^([7](#7))  Indeed Kamal,
the son of Kabir, who “probably had greater leaning towards Islamic ways
of thinking”, is remembered in the *Adigrantha* by the disparaging line:
“the family of Kabir foundered when Kamal the son was born”.^([8](#8))

A striking feature of the Bhakti movement was that it gave to the
backward class Hindus a respectable position in the society.  Indeed
some of the leaders of this movement like Sain, Raidas, and Dhanna
belonged to the lowest classes of Hindu social order.  Because of this
‘revolution’ in which the lowest classes of people, even the
untouchables, had not only got an equal status with the highest, but
were even revered as saints,^([9](#9)) there could have been no
incentive for the low classes of people to renounce their faith, if they
ever had any before “because of Hindu tyranny,” and go over to
Islam.  As Aziz Ahmad puts it, “like other Bhakti poets his (Kabir’s)
denunciation of the caste-system was as much an inspiration of Muslim
example as a response to its pull of conversion.”^([10](#10))  When
Kabir denounced caste and ritual of the Hindus, he also denounced the
superstitions and rituals of the Muslims: or, conversely, the idea is
best expressed in the words of his disciple Naudhan (whom Sikandar Lodi
executed): Islam was true, but his own religion was also
true.^([11](#11))  This was an open challenge to Muslim propagandism and
proselytization.  No wonder that Bhakti reformers were disliked by some
Sufi Mashaikh, who looked upon them as competitors.^([12](#12))  For,
under the influence of these saints many Muslims were converted to
Bhakti Hinduism.  Namdeva,^([13](#13)) Ramdas, Eknath, Ramanand, Kabir,
Nanak and Chaitanya and several other saints had Muslim disciples, many
of whom converted to the Hindu Bhakti cult.  Chaitanya openly converted
Muslims to Bhakti Hinduism.^([14](#14))  The *Bhaktamala* relates many
instances of conversions that Pipa effected.

The effects of the mission of the socio-religious reformers with regard
to conversion of people to Hinduism were significant.  They themselves
had adhered to peaceful methods but not their followers in later years. 
Kabir’s disciples spread out throughout North India and the Deccan.
Jiwan Das was the founder of the Satnami sect which took up arms against
the Mughals.  The Sikh disciples of Nanak’s successor Gurus, for varied
reasons, fought against the Mughals and many times converted people by
force.  So did the Marathas.  Manucci and Khafi Khan both affirm that
the Marathas used to capture Muslim women “because (adds Manucci) the
Mahomedans had interfered with Hindu women in (their)
territories.”^([15](#15))  Chaitanya’s influence in Bengal as of Nanak
in the Punjab is still great.  According to Abdul Majid Khan it is
because of Chaitanya’s influence that large-scale conversions to
Hinduism took place at the end of the eighteenth and beginning of
nineteenth century.^([16](#16))

Thus whether it was their motive or mission or not, the work of the
Bhakti reformers helped in checking conversions to Islam and reclaiming
many converted Hindus back to their former faith.

**Caste System**

The Caste System also contributed its mite to the preservation of Hindu
social order, indirectly checking proselytization.  Some modem writers
think that it was the degraded status of low caste Hindus and the social
democracy of Islam that were responsible for large-scale conversions to
Muhammadanism in medieval times.  Many others give the caste system all
the credit for saving India from becoming Islamised.

But neither caste was so oppressive nor Muslim society so democratic. 
Within the framework of the caste system some sort of vertical and
horizontal mobility was always permitted.  There was also a sense of
pride in belonging to one’s caste whether high or low.  However, for any
error caste did not fail to punish, and sometimes even ostracized the
delinquent whether or not the act of omission or commission was due to
his own fault.  In a few such cases conversion was a welcome way out. 
Therefore some conversions would have taken place because of the rigid
caste rules although contemporary accounts are silent on this point.  On
the contrary this very rigidity served as a bulwark against
proselytization and to this contemporary accounts bear witness.  To the
majority caste was synonymous with religion, and so there was a general
reluctance and often resistance to conversion to Islam both by the high
and the low caste Hindus.

Let us study the case of the lowest classes first.  Alberuni writes at
length on the caste system.  About the lowest castes, or the so low as
to be casteless, he has this to say:

“After the Sudra follow the people called *Antyaja*, who render various
kinds of services, who are not reckoned amongst any caste, but only as
members of certain craft or profession.  There are eight classes of
them, who freely intermarry with each other, except the fuller,
shoemaker, and weaver, for no others would condescend to have anything
to do with them.  These eight guilds are the fuller, shoemaker, juggler,
the basket and shield maker, the sailor, the fisherman, the hunter of
wild animals and of birds, and the weaver… These guilds live near the
villages and towns… but outside them.

“The people called Hadi, Doma (Domba), Candala, and Badhatau (*sic*) are
not reckoned amongst any caste or guild.  They are occupied with dirty
work, like the cleaning of the villages and other services.  They are
considered one sole class, and distinguished only by their occupations…
They are considered like illegitimate children… they are degraded
outcastes…

“Of the classes beneath the castes, the Hadi are the best spoken of,
because they keep themselves from everything unclean… the Doma… play on
the flute and sing.  The still lower classes practice as a trade killing
and the inflicting of judicial punishments...”^([17](#17))

Vis-a-vis Alberuni’s list of backward castes in the medieval period, is
the Table^([18](#18)) of backward castes in modern times prepared on the
basis of U.P. Census Report of 1931:

The Table clearly shows that most of the lowest castes included in
Alberuni’s list from Chamar downwards have not only continued to remain
Hindu, but, even their caste subdivisions have multiplied.  Alberuni has
been quoted at length, not because his study of the caste-structure in
India is precise, but because he provides the clue to the non-conversion
of low caste Hindus to Islam.  His notice shows that (a) the
caste-system denied equality to the low classes, (b) that it was based
on craft or profession, and (c) that it was hierarchical.

**Table**  
**Showing Some Hindu Low Castes of U.P.**

[TABLE]

Caste-system was bad, but it had two redeeming features.  One was that
since the low classes were ‘distinguished only by their occupations’ and
they intermarried, there was occupational and vocational mobility and
also perhaps some sort of social Sanskritization.  Another is that it
had (and has) an hierchical structure, and even low caste people feel
proud of being superior to some other lower castes.  Thus a Teli feels
himself superior to an Ahir. an Ahir to a Chamar, a Kahar to a Pasi, and
so on. In Bengal, the land of mass conversions, caste pride among low
caste Hindus was as pronounced as elsewhere.  About the Dom, sometimes
also called Chandala, H.H. Risley says that he will eat the leavings of
others, but “no Dom will touch the leavings of a Dhobi, nor will he take
water… or any sort of food or drink from a man of that caste… Pods or
Chasi, a fishing, cultivating and landholding caste of lower Bengal will
eat the leavings of Brahman, but Vaishnava Pods abstain from all kinds
of flesh.  Rajbansi, a synonym for Koch, wear sacred thread in
Bihar.”^([19](#19))

In fact the lower class people are more particular about ‘caste
preservation’ than even the higher caste ones, and “the Hadi… keep
themselves free from everything unclean.” A significant point to note is
that even the lowest classes had an importance of their own in Hindu
society.  In Hindu marriage, for example, the cooperation and services
of Nai, Dhobi, Kumhar, Kahar etc. were and are as important as that of
the Brahmin Purohit.  The higher castes depended as much on the lower as
the lower on the higher.  All castes and non-castes were an essential
part of the Hindu social and economic order.  Therefore, and in spite of
the discrimination, low caste people have been as unwilling to convert
as the high.  That is how most of Alberuni’s *Antyaja*, as the Census
Table above shows, have not converted - the fuller (Dhobi), shoemaker
(Chamar), Juggler (Nat), Fisherman (Kachhi, Macchua), hunters and bird
catchers (Gadariya), Doma (basket-maker, street dancer, singer).  That
there are, about 60 million ‘untouchable’ Hindus to-day is the greatest
proof of their ancestors’ unwillingness to convert in medieval times.

There is also recorded contemporary evidence of the unwillingness of the
backward people to voluntarily convert to Islam.  Mahmud of Ghazni used
to convert people by force, but his contemporary Alberuni (eleventh
century) nowhere mentions voluntary conversions of Hindus.  Writing
about the backward class Hindus called Govis (now called Paraiyar) Marco
Polo (thirteenth century) says: “Nothing on earth would induce them to
enter the place where Messer St. Thomas is - I mean where his body
lies… Indeed, were even twenty or thirty men to lay hold of these Govis
and to try to hold them in the place where the Body of the Blessed
Apostle of Jesus Christ lies buried they could not do it.”^([20](#20)) 
This is the testimony about the South.  About North, Shaikh Nizamuddin
Auliya (fourteenth century) at many places admits that Hindus “do not
embrace Islam”, and that “the heart of these people is not changed
through sermord”.^([21](#21)) In the seventeenth century Manucci wrote
that the backward caste people were proud of their caste and were
reluctant to convert.^([22](#22))  Caste gave them freedom and dignity
of the kind which no other system did.

In short, contemporary evidence does not speak of low caste as a factor
contributing to conversions to Islam.  The presence of a large number of
vocational groups among Muslims is due to the fact, mentioned earlier,
that Muslim regime and society provided people with new avenues of
employment.  Those who lacked resources of self-defence during war or
those who could not make both ends meet without a change of religion,
converted.  Among these surely the people of low caste predominated. 
But caste system as such had little to contribute to conversions.

Conversions of high caste Hindus were also few.  Hindu religion and
philosophy were ancient, vast and deep, and Hindu intellectuals.
intelligentsia and high castes were proud, as Alberuni points out, of a
highly developed philosophy of their own.  He writes that “The Hindus
believe that there is no country but theirs. no nation like theirs, no
king like theirs, no religion like theirs, no science like
theirs.”^([23](#23))  It was no easy matter to induce such people to
convert.^([24](#24))  It is true that prospects of employment under
Muslim government would have provided some incentive for conversion even
to high caste people, and a few instances of conversion for acquiring
economic and status benefits are on record.^([25](#25))  But in the
early medieval period job opportunities being limited and high offices
being monopolised by Turks or Muslims of foreign extraction,
infiltration of and competition by Hindu converts in government service
was resented.  Cases of Imad-ud-din Rahyan, Nasiruddin Khusrau and
Ain-ul-Mulk Multani are instances in point.  They are referred to with
contempt by the Turkish ruling class.  Minhaj Jurjani asserts, rather
bluntly, that “Turks of pure lineage and Tajiks of noble birth could not
tolerate (Imad-ud-din of)… the tribes of Hind to rule over
them”.^([26](#26))  Thus the attitude of the foreign-extraction Muslims
repeatedly expressed in the diatribe of Muslim chroniclers who usually
call them “low born” would have discouraged Hindus to convert even for
the allurement of jobs.

In the Mughal period Hindus began to be appointed to high posts but for
getting these there was no need to convert.  Power sharing by the
Mughals was not due to liberal Islam.  It was prompted by exigencies of
the situation, and in the power-equation conversion stood ruled
out.  Manucci states that under Aurangzeb three Rajas embraced Islam
against promises and temptations offered by the emperor, but later they
regretted their conversion and remained unhappy^([27](#27)) because
Hindu converts to Islam commanded little respect.^([28](#28))  Needless
to add that lower Hindu castes could not get equality with the other
Muslims in the “democratic” Muslim social order.  They carried their
caste and social status with them even after their conversion and high
class Muslims would not mix or even eat with them if modern practices
are any indication for the medieval.^([29](#29))

From the modem census figures it appears that not many high caste people
voluntarily converted to Islam in medieval times.  Bohras, Khojas,
Ismailis and Mopilahs were, by and large, converted by peaceful methods
from high caste Hindus except perhaps the Mopilahs.  But their
statistics in modem times show how small their numbers would have been
in medieval.  According to the census of 1921 there were about 5 million
Shias; a little over one million Mopilahs; 382,000 Labbes; 153,363
Bohras; and 146,000 Khojas in India (now India and
Pakistan).^([30](#30))  Keeping in view the patronage Persian officers
had in Muslim courts in India, it is certain that a good number would
have come from outside in the medieval period.  But even with local
converts and with centuries of growth in numbers their small figures in
modem times point only to a few voluntary conversions in medieval
times.  The 1931 Census Report of U.P. presents the following picture of
Muslim and Hindu high castes.^([31](#31))

**Table**  
**Showing High Castes of Hindus and Muslims**

|                 |                     |                                                                     |
|-----------------|---------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  Castes         | Per cent of Members | Caste Per cent of Total Religious Membership falling in each caste. |
| *Muslim Castes* |                     |                                                                     |
| Shaikh          | 100.0               | ?                                                                   |
| Saiyyad         | 100.0               | 4.2                                                                 |
| Mughal          | 100.0               | 0.8                                                                 |
| Pathan          | 100.0               | 21.4                                                                |
| Rajputs         | 4.4                 | 2.2                                                                 |
| *Hindu Castes*  |                     |                                                                     |
| Brahman         | 99.4                | 10.9                                                                |
| Rajput          | 94.2                | 8.5                                                                 |
| Vaishya         | 92.7                | 2.8                                                                 |

It is probable that not all high caste Muslims are of foreign
extraction, but the percentage of high caste Hindus clearly indicates
that their ancestors were disinclined to convert in medieval times so as
to bring out the above picture in modem times.

**Akbar’s Regulations**

It has been seen in the earlier chapter that the largest number of
converts were obtained during wars through enslavement.  Many people
embraced Islam to escape death; and captive women and children “used to
be converted to Islam”.^([32](#32))  But early in his reign (1562) The
Mughal emperor Akbar (1556-1605) abolished the custom of enslaving
helpless people in times of war.^([33](#33))  These humanitarian but
revolutionary steps would have put a check on large-scale conversions. 
Akbar did not give any economic inducements for conversion.  On the
contrary he removed all modes of economic pressure which sometimes led
to conversions.  He abolished the Jiziyah in 1564.  Firoz Tughlaq is
witness to the fact that its strict enforcement brought many converts to
Islam.  Akbar was determined to see this tax go, and probably finding
that it still lingered in some places issued, in 1579, another
declaration reiterating its abolition.^([34](#34))  Earlier in 1563 he
had abolished the Pilgrim Tax on the Hindus.^([35](#35))

Thus in Akbar’s time, because of the above mentioned and several other
similar measures, conversions to Islam by force, through enslavement, or
economic pressure, seem to have been restricted.  Even the Mullas and
Mashaikh could not have received any encouragement from the government
for the work of proselytization.  The hope “of obtaining *mawajib* and
*ghanaim*” (rewards and booty) was perhaps still there, but for this
conversion was not necessary as posts were thrown open to all without
prejudice to religion or creed.  Besides the effect on Muslim numbers of
the conversions that might still have taken place, was offset by Akbar’s
order permitting such Hindus as had been forcibly converted to Islam to
reconvert to their original faith.^([36](#36))  All restrictions on
Hindu worship and building of temples were also lifted.^([37](#37)) 
Although contemporary accounts are silent as to the numbers that went
back to Hinduism as a result of this permission; yet the facts that
Jahangir severely punished those who adopted Hinduism of their own free
will, Shahjahan once again made apostasy from Islam a capital crime, and
Aurangzeb did his best at Muslim proselytization, show that people were
taking advantage of Akbar’s order.  Probably Akbar had only removed
obstructions in a practice which was probably always prevalent, but his
measures removed pressure on the Hindus to embrace Islam.  Obviously
conversions should have become rather scarce.

**Christian Missionaries**

The arrival of Christian missionaries also helped check Muslim
proselytization.  Vasco da Gama landed in India in 1498.  In 1510 the
Portuguese captured Goa, in 1531 Diu, and in 1534 Daman.  In the
triumphal entry into Goa, “the clergymen were at the head of the
procession.”^([38](#38))  Muslim proselytizing activity not only
received a check but a challenge at the hands of these Christian
missionaries.

It is exceedingly interesting to note that the agencies of conversion to
the Semetic religions, Islam and Christianity, were, the same -
inter-communal marriages, force and enslavement, and missionary
endeavour.  Portuguese missionary activity was well organised and quite
effective.  In Goa, Albuquerque encouraged his soldiers to marry in the
families of Turkish officers.^([39](#39))  To promote mixed marriages,
Portuguese with Indian wives as well as neoconverts, were treated as a
privileged class for appointment to petty offices.^([40](#40))  Force
was also openly used for obtaining converts.^([41](#41))  “In 1560, the
year the Inquisition was set up, 13,092 Hindus were forcibly converted. 
In 1578, the… missionaries pulled down 350 temples and converted 100,000
people.”^([42](#42))  Similar, and in some cases worse, treatment was
meted out to Muhammadans.  Consequently by 1583 Goa had by and large
become Christian, while Salsette had a Christian population of 8,000. 
After Goa, Cochin was the next Mission Centre.  By 1570 there were more
than twenty-five Christian stations in Travancore and about 15,000
converts.  In 1600 Mission Centres in Travancore had risen to fifty. 
Converts on the Fishery Coast alone are estimated from 90,000 to
130,000.^([43](#43)) Christian Missions made successful efforts in
converting low caste people.  Appreciative of the attitude of the Indian
people, Henrique advised Loyola: “It is better in India to baptize all
those of one caste than different individuals taken from various
castes”.^([44](#44))

In times of famine they bought children, and even .men and women, and
sold them at high prices, but “Portuguese under pain of severe
punishments, are forbidden to sell heathen slaves to Muslims, since
heathens are converted more easily to Christianity under Portuguese and
to Islam under Muslim ownership.”^([45](#45))

The capture of Goa by the Portuguese was facilitated by Hindu
cooperation.  Some Hindu chiefs of Goa invited Albuquerque to help them
relieve “the Hindu population from the fanatical oppression of Adil
Shah’s governor at Goa.”^([46](#46))  In the Vijayanagar empire
relations were generally good between Hindus and Christians, who were
united if for no other reason, by the common hostility to
Muslim.^([47](#47))  All this facilitated Christian missionary activity
in the South.  In the North, the Mughal Emperor Akbar invited Portuguese
missions and permitted Jesuit Fathers to convert people to
Christianity.  They had their Mission Centres in as important places as
Lahore, Delhi, and Agra.^([48](#48))

It hardly need be asserted that wherever the Portuguese went, the Muslim
proselytizing endeavour received a severe blow.  Muslim numbers even
were depleted.  Barbosa gives a graphic account of Rander in Gujarat
with its rich Muslim merchants, their high style of living, and their
richly decorated mansions.  Danvers narrates its destruction by the
Portuguese.  Muslim trade and population were so adversely affected by
arrival of the Portuguese that Barbosa laconically comments: “Now (the
Muslims that) there are do not live independently.”^([49](#49))  What
Barbosa says about Malabar, may be said about India as a whole.  Barbosa
contends that the coming of Portuguese alone prevented Malabar from
becoming a. Moorish state.^([50](#50))  It may as well be said that the
coming of European nations and the establishment of British rule
prevented India from becoming a Muslim land.

**Muslim Cult of Violence**

It was not only because of Hindu and Christian attitudes and actions
that rise of Muslim population received a check; aggression and violence
which was their natural trait even remained directed against themselves
too.  Of the ten Sultans of the so-called Slave Dynasty (1206-1290), at
least six were deposed, poisoned or murdered.  In each such case many
Muslim lives were lost.  Many dynasties changed during the Sultanate
period.  With every change of dynasty, scions of Muslim royalty,
nobility and commoners were killed with abandon.  The Khalji royal
family was completely liquidated in 1320.  The princes and slaves of the
Tughlaqs were systematically massacred after the death of Firoz Tughlaq
in 1388.  Sword was the ultimate arbiter in Muslim political
life.  Writing about the warfare among the states into which Bahmani
kingdom had been divided, Nuniz says: ‘There is little faith among the
Moors and they bite one another like dogs, and like to see one after the
other destroyed”.^([51](#51))  Mughal princes rebelled and more often
than not fought pitched battles with parents.  Shahjahan waded through
blood to the throne.  Aurangzeb killed all his brothers with great loss
of Muslim lives.  After his death in 1707, centrifugal forces were let
loose in northern India.  The Mughal princes got busy in wars of
succession, and in one battle alone, fought between Shah Alam and Azam
Tara, “one hundred and eighty thousand horsemen lay dead”, without
speaking of the “infantry or the elephants”.^([52](#52))  Too much
violence and aggressiveness on the part of the Muslims turned out to be
a death-wish.  As if killings among themselves were not enough, they
invited the enmity of Jats, Sikhs and Marathas which resulted in great
Muslim losses.  They all directed their wrath against Delhi.  “It is
significant that the chief gateway of every Maratha fortress is Delhi
Gate.”^([53](#53))  Nadir Shah and Ahmad Shah Abdali killed their
co-religionists without compunction.

The surest evidence of the decline of Muslim Population in the
eighteenth century is to be found in the decline of the three Capitals
of the Muslim empire - Lahore, Delhi and Agra.

Lahore was ever very populous.  Monserrate and Finch had written about
its large population late in the sixteenth century.  According to Sujan
Rai in the time of Shahjahan its population increased
daily.^([54](#54))  To Bernier Delhi (in 1663) was as great as Paris in
beauty, extent and inhabitants.^([55](#55))  Sujan Rai enumerates people
of almost all nationalities as living in Delhi.^([56](#56))  Fatehpur
Sikri had been gradually abandoned after 1585 and most of its
inhabitants seem to have shifted to Agra, so that Coryat (1612-17) found
it larger than Rome.  Manrique, who visited Agra in 1640, estimated its
population at 660,000 inhabitants, “besides the large number of
strangers who continually fill ninety caravanserais and other private
houses.”^([57](#57))  Thus the population of Agra rose from over two
lacs at the close of the sixteenth century to about seven lacs by the
middle of the seventeenth century.  And this was the position after the
plague of 1616-24 had earlier devastated the city.  In the seventeenth
century the population of Sikri-Agra-Sikandara had probably touched the
million mark.^([58](#58))

But internal wars and external invasions, had a devastating effect on
Muslim population.  W. Francklin, who travelled through the major parts
of northern India between 1793 and 1796,^([59](#59)) and wrote an
eye-witness account of Delhi, says that ever since the massacre of Nadir
Shah, Delhi was “but very thinly populated.” About the close of the
eighteenth century, when he wrote, “the Bazars of Delhi are at present
but indifferently furnished, and the population of late years miserably
reduced.”^([60](#60))  The population of the cities of the Punjab was
decimated by the invasions of Abdali.  No wonder that in the eighteenth
century no foreign or Indian writer compares the population of
prestigious Muslim cities with those of London, Paris, Rome,
Constantinople or Cairo.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Davis, *op. cit.*, p.191.

[²](#2a) Blochmann, “A Chapter from Muhammadan History” in *The Calcutta
Review*, No. civ. 1871 cited in Bernier, p.40 n.

[³](#3a) Afif, *op. cit.*, pp. 379-81.  Dorn, *Makhzan-i-Afghani*,
(London, 1829), pp.65-66. Ferishtah, op. cit., I, p.182. Also Lal,
*Twilight, op. cit.*, p.191.

[⁴](#4a) K. Davis, *op. cit.*, p.195.

[⁵](#5a) *Indian Heritage*, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Vol. I (Bombay,
1955), p.227.

[⁶](#6a) Kabir declared : “I have come to save the devotees.  I was sent
here  because the world was seen in misery.” Tara Chand, *op. cit.*,
pp.150-151. 

[⁷](#7a) G.H. Westcott, *Kabir and the Kabir Panth* (Cawnpore, 1907),
p.118. “The contrast,” observes Ahmad Shah, “of Kabir’s intimate Hindu
thought, writings and ritual with the purely superficial knowledge of
Moslem belief revealed in the Bijak is too striking to be ignored.”
Ahmad Shah, *Bijak of Kabir* (Hamirpur, 1917), p.40.

[⁸](#8a) Tara Chand, *op. cit.*, pp.182, 185.

[⁹](#9a) *Ibid*, pp.179, 181.

[¹⁰](#10a) Aziz Ahmad, *op. cit.*, p.146.

[¹¹](#11a) Dorn, *History of the Afghans*, I, 65; Ferishtah, I, 182.

[¹²](#12a) S.A.A. Rizvi, *op. cit.*, pp.57-58.

[¹³](#13a)  M.G. Ranade, *Rise of the Maratha Power* (Publications
Division, Delhi, 1961), p.75.

[¹⁴](#14a) D.C. Sen, *Chaitanya and His Age* (Calcutta, 1922), p.14.
Abdul Karim, *op. cit., Social History of the Muslims in Bengal*,
pp.150, 202-204.

M.T. Kennedy, *The Chaitanya Movement* (Calcutta, 1925), p.213. Tara
Chand, *op. cit.*, p.219.

D.C. Sen, *History of Bengali Literature*, pp.228-29.

Indian Heritage, *op. cit.*, I. p.249.

[¹⁵](#15a) Manucci, *op. cit.*, II, p.119.

Khafi Khan, *op. cit.*, II, pp.115-18.

[¹⁶](#16a) Abdul Majid Khan, *Research about Muslim Aristocracy, op.
cit.*, pp.23-25.

[¹⁷](#17a) Alberuni, *op. cit.*, I, pp.101-102.

[¹⁸](#18a) Complied from the Census Report of India, 1931, Vol. 18
(United Provinces), Part 2.

[¹⁹](#19a) H.H. Risley. *The Tribes and Castes of Bengal*, Bengal
Secretariat Press, (Calcutta, 1891).

[²⁰](#20a) H. Yule and H. Cordier, *Ser Marco Polo*, 2 vols. (New York,
1903), II, p.341.

[²¹](#21a) Amir Hasan Sijzi, *Fawaid-ul-Fuad* (Delhi, 1865), pp. 150,
195-97.

[²²](#22a) Manucci, *op. cit.*, III, p.173. Also II, p.238.

[²³](#23a) Alberuni, I, p.22.

[²⁴](#24a) See the way of Raja Man Singh’s refusal to convert in M.
Mujeeb, *op. cit.*, p.360.

[²⁵](#25a) Sadharan of Thaneshwar married his sister to Firoz Tughlaq,
accompanied him to Delhi, and later became Wajahat-ul-Mulk
(distinguished man of the State).

Sikandar bin Muhammad, *Mirat-i-Sikandari* (Bombay, 1308 H), pp.5-8.
Also S.C.Misra, *Rise of Muslim Power in Gujarat*, pp.137-39, and Mahdi
Husain, *Tughlaq Dynasty*, p. 408.

[²⁶](#26a) Minhaj, Raverty, *op. cit.*, p .829

[²⁷](#27a) Manucci, *op. cit.*, II, p.436.

[²⁸](#28a) *Ibid.*, p.451.

[²⁹](#29a) A.K. Nazmul Karim, “Muslim Social Classes in East Pakistan”,
*op. cit.*, pp.120-130,138-143.

Also E.A. Gait, *Census of India Report*, 1901, VI, pp.439-442, and
*Ibid.* II, p.544.

[³⁰](#30a) Also Titus, *op. cit.*, pp.40, 41, 87, 99, 103, 106.

[³¹](#31a) Adopted from the Table prepared by Kingsley Davis, *op.
cit.*, p.165, complied from Census of India Report, 1931, Vol.18 (United
Provinces), part 2.

[³²](#32a) S.R. Sharma, *The Religious Policy of the Mughal Emperors*,
p.21.

[³³](#33a) Du Jarric, *Akbar and the Jesuits*, pp.152-59. Oral orders
for the abolition of this practice were given much earlier.

See Du Jarric, pp. 28, 30, 67, 70, 87, 92.

[³⁴](#34a) R.P. Tripathi, *Some Aspects of Muslim Administration*,
p.318.

[³⁵](#35a) *Akbar Nama*, II, p.190.

Smith, *op. cit.*, pp. 47-48.

[³⁶](#36a) Badaoni, *op. cit.*, 11, 317.

[³⁷](#37a) Du Jarric. *op. cit.*, p.75.

[³⁸](#38a) R.P. Rao, *Portuguese Rule in Goa*, p.34.

[³⁹](#39a) T.B. Cunha, *Goa’s Freedom Struggle*, p.11.

[⁴⁰](#40a) Rao, *op. cit.*, p.31.

[⁴¹](#41a) *Ibid.*, p.42.

[⁴²](#42a) *Ibid.*, p.44.

[⁴³](#43a) Lach, *Asia in the Making of Europe*, I, pp. 264, 265, 271.

[⁴⁴](#44a) Henrique to Loyola from Bombay, October 31, 1548.  J. Wicki
(ed.) *Documenta Indica* (Rome, 1960), III, p.599, cited in Lach, I,
p.443.

[⁴⁵](#45a) Lach, I, pp.239,487.

[⁴⁶](#46a) Rao, *op. cit.*, p.29.

[⁴⁷](#47a) Lach, *op. cit.*, I, p.370, on the authority of Danvers.

[⁴⁸](#48a) Smith, *op. cit.*, pp.189-190, 209-210.

[⁴⁹](#49a) Barbosa, *op. cit.*, II, p.78.

[⁵⁰](#50a) *Ibid.*, p.74.

[⁵¹](#51a) Cited in Robert Sewell, *A Forgotten Empire*, Publication
Division (Delhi, 1962), p.326.

Also H.K. Sherwani, *The Bahamanis of the Deccan* (Hyderabad, n.d.)
p.51.

[⁵²](#52a) Manucci, *op. cit.*, IV, p.403.

[⁵³](#53a) C.H.I. IV, p.397.

[⁵⁴](#54a) Sujan Rai, *Khulasat-ul-Tawarikh*, ed. Zafar Hasan (Delhi,
1918), p.81. Also Thevenot, *Indian Travels of Thevenot and Careri*, ed.
S.N. Sen, (New Delhi, 1949). p.85, and Manucci, *op. cit.*, II, p.186.

[⁵⁵](#55a) Bernier, *op. cit.*, p.282.

[⁵⁶](#56a) *Khulasat-ul-Tawarikh, op. cit.*, p.5.

[⁵⁷](#57a) Manrique, *op. cit.*, II, p.151.

[⁵⁸](#58a) In comparison the population of London in 1593-95 was 152,479
and in 1666, 460, 000 (*Ency. Brit*. XI Ed., XVI, p.965). The population
of Paris in 1590 has been estimated at 200,000 and under Louis XIV (d.
1715) at 492, 600 (*Modern Cyclopaedia*, London, 1901, VI, p.305.).
Shahajahan probably transferred the capital to Delhi from Agra (1649)
because of too much congestion in the latter.  *Arch. Sur. Rep.*
1911-12, p.2, and contemporary authorities cited therein.

[⁵⁹](#59a) W. Francklin, *The History of the Reign of the Shah-Aulum*,
(Allahabad, 1915: First published 1798), Preface, p.i.

[⁶⁰](#60a) *Ibid.*, pp.199-200.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)   [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
