+++
title = "07 CHAPTER V SLAVE-TAKING DURING MUSLIM RULE"

+++
**CHAPTER V**  
**SLAVE-TAKING DURING MUSLIM RULE**

Slavery forms an integral part of the history of Islam. The Turks
practised it on a large scale before they entered India as invaders.
Slaves were abducted or captured by marauders (Subuktigin, Balban), they
were sold by jealous or needy relatives (Iltutmish), and they were
purchased by slave-traders to be sold for profit (Aibak). These methods
were known to Muslim rulers in India. All these and many other methods
were employed by them and their nobles in making slaves in India. The
phenomenon and its application was shocking to the Hindu mind; the
Muslims, however, thought otherwise. According to Ibn Khaldun, the
captives were “brought from the House of War to the House of Islam under
the rule of slavery, which hides in itself a divine providence; cured by
slavery, they enter the Muslim religion with the firm resolve of true
believers…”^([1](#1)) Muslims took pride in enslaving people; the
feelings of Hindu victims were just the opposite.

Qutbuddin Aibak entered upon a series of conquests. He dispatched
Ikhtiyaruddin Bakhtiyar Khalji to the East and himself concentrated in
Hindustan proper. He captured Kol (modern Aligarh) in 1194. There “those
of the garrison who were wise and cute were converted to Islam, but
those who stood by their ancient faith were slain with the
sword.”^([2](#2)) Surely, those who embraced Islam during or immediately
after the battle were ‘cute’ and wise, because by this initiative on
their part they were counted as free-born Muslims as against those who
fought, were captured in battle, and then enslaved. T.P. Hughes gives
the legal position: “If a captive embraced Islam on the field of battle
he was a free man; but if he were made captive, and afterwards embraced
Islam, the change of creed did not emancipate him.” Women captives were
invariably taken prisoner. “Atiyat-ul-Qurazi relates that, after the
battle with the Banu Quraizah, the Prophet ordered all those who were
able to fight to be killed, and the women and children to be
enslaved.”^([3](#3))

Both these traditions were followed in India. In 1195 when Raja Bhim was
attacked by Aibak 20,000 slaves were captured, and 50,000 at Kalinjar in
1202. “The temples were converted into mosques,” writes Hasan Nizami,
“and the voices of the summoners to prayer ascended to the highest
heavens, and the very name of idolatry was annihilated.”^([4](#4)) Call
to prayer five times a day with a loud voice carried an invitation and a
message - join us, or else.  People “could refuse this invitation or
call at their own peril, spiritual and physical. As His followers became
more powerful, the peril became increasingly more physical.”^([5](#5))
This process helped in the conversion of captives. Murry Titus
pertinently remarks that “we may be sure that all those who were made
slaves were compelled to embrace the religion of the masters to whom
they were allotted.”^([6](#6)) Farishtah specifically mentions that
during the capture of Kalinjar “fifty thousand *kaniz va ghulam*, having
suffered slavery, were rewarded with the honour of Islam.” Thus
enslavement resulted in conversion and conversion in accelerated growth
of Muslim population.

Minhaj Siraj assigns twenty (lunar) years to Qutbuddin’s career in
Hindustan from ‘the first taking of Delhi’ up to his death, both as a
commander of Sultan Muizzuddin and as an independent
ruler.^([7](#7)) During this period Aibak captured Hansi, Meerut, Delhi,
Ranthambhor and Kol.^([8](#8)) When Sultan Muizzuddin personally mounted
another campaign against Hindustan, Aibak proceeded as far as Peshawar
to meet him, and the two together attacked the Khokhar stronghold in the
Koh-i-Jud or the Salt Range. The Hindus (Khokhars) fled to the highest
in the mountains. They were pursued. Those that escaped the sword fled
to the dense depth of the jungle; others were massacred or taken
captive. Great plunder was obtained and many slaves.^([9](#9)) According
to Farishtah three to four hundred thousand Khokhars were converted to
Islam by Muizzuddin;^([10](#10)) but this figure is inflated. More than
a hundred years later, Amir Khusrau refers to Khokhars as a non-Muslim
tribe, and the way they were constantly attacked and killed by Sultans
Iltutmish and Balban confirms Khusrau’s contention.^([11](#11)) Minhaj
also says that “the Khokhars were not annihilated in this affair
(Muizzuddin-Aibak attack) by any means, and gave great trouble in after
years.”^([12](#12))

Under Aibak most of Hindustan from Delhi to Gujarat, and Lakhnauti to
Lahore, was brought under the sway of the Turks. In his time a large
number of places were attacked and many more prisoners were captured
than for which actual figures are available. Figures of slaves made
during campaigns of Kanauj, Banaras (where the Muslims occupied “a
thousand” temples),^([13](#13)) Ajmer (attacked thrice), Gujarat, Bayana
and Gwalior are not available. Similar is the case with regard to Bihar
and Bengal. About the end of the twelfth or the beginning of the
thirteenth century, Ikhtiyaruddin Bakhtiyar Khalji marched into Bihar
and attacked the University centres at Nalanda, Vikramshila and
Uddandpur.^([14](#14)) The Buddhist monks and Brahmans mistaken for
monks were massacred and the common people, deprived of their priests
and teachers, became an easy prey to capture and enslavement. But no
figures of such captives are known. Ibn Asir only says that Qutbuddin
Aibak made ‘war against the provinces of Hind… He killed many, and
returned with prisoners and booty.”^([15](#15)) In Banaras, according to
the same author, “the slaughter of the Hindus was immense, none was
spared except women and children,”^([16](#16)) who would have been
enslaved as per practice. Habibullah writes that Muslim sway extended
from Banaras through the strip of Shahabad, Patna, Monghyr and Bhagalpur
districts,^([17](#17)) and repeated references to the presence of
Muslims in this tract from the early times indicates that taking of
slaves and conversion was common in the region. Fakhr-i-Mudabbir informs
us that as a result of the Turkish achievements under Muizzuddin and
Aibak, Eleven poor (Muslim) householder became owner of numerous
slaves.”^([18](#18))

The narratives of contemporary and later chroniclers should not lead us
to the conclusion that taking of Hindus as slaves was a child’s play.
There was stiff resistance to Muslim conquest and Muslim rule. Besides,
the Sultans of Delhi had always to deal with a number of problems
simultaneously. Most of the time of Sultan Iltutmish (1210-1236) was
spent in suppressing his Turkish opponents, Qutbi and Muizzi Amirs in
Delhi and rivals Yaldoz and Qubacha in Punjab and Sindh. He also faced
the threat of invasion from the Mongol conqueror Chingiz Khan and the
Khwarizmi Prince Jalaluddin Mangbarni fleeing before Chingiz. Therefore
it was only sixteen years after his accession that he could march
against Ranthambhor in 1226. During this period many Hindu kingdoms
subdued by Aibak were becoming independent. Mandor near Jodhpur was
attacked a little later. Here “much booty fell into the hands” of the
victors, which obviously included slaves also.^([19](#19)) The year 1231
witnessed his invasion of Gwalior where he “captured a large number of
slaves”. In 1234-35 he attacked Ujjain, broke its temple of Mahakal, and
as usual made captives “women and children of the
recalcitrants.”^([20](#20)) But most of his compatriot Muslims were not
satisfied with the Sultan’s achievements in the sphere of slave-taking
and converting the land into Dar-ul-Islam all at once.

It is true that foreign Muslims - freemen and slaves were flocking into
Hindustan and this development was of great significance for the
Sultanate. Adventurers and job seekers were flocking into Hindustan, the
new heaven of Islam. More importantly, because of the Mongol upheaval,
as many as twenty-five Muslim refugee princes with their retinues
arrived at the court of Iltutmish from Khurasan and Mawaraun
Nahr.^([21](#21)) During the reign of Balban fifteen more refugee rulers
and their nobles and slaves arrived from Turkistan, Khurasan, Iraq,
Azarbaijan, Persia, Rum (Turkey) and Sham (Syria).^([22](#22)) Their
followers comprised masters of pen and of sword, scholars and Mashaikh,
historians and poets. The pressure of these groups on the Sultan for
Islamization of Hindustan would have been great. In 1228 C.E. Iltutmish
received a patent of investiture from Al-Mustansir Billah, the Khalifa
of Baghdad, in recognition of his enormously augmenting the prestige of
the Muhammadan government in India. This was a booster as well as a
further pressure. No wonder, the capital city of Delhi looked like
Dar-ul-Islam and its ruler the leader of the eastern world of
Islam.^([23](#23)) But since the whole country was not conquered and
converted, it did not amuse the Ulama and the Mashaikh.

*Slave-taking a matter of policy*

Some Ulama therefore approached the ‘pious’ Sultan Iltutmish to rule
according to the Shariat and confront the Hindus with choice between
Islam and death. Muslims had set up their rule and so the country had
become Dar-ul-Islam. Any opposition to it was an act of rebellion. The
Hindus who naturally resisted Muslim occupation were considered to be
rebels. Besides they were idolaters (*mushrik*) and could not be
accorded the status of Kafirs, of the People of the Book - Christians
and Jews. For them the law provided only Islam or death. Islamic
jurisprudence had crystallized over the last five centuries. Besides the
evolvement of the four schools of Islamic jurisprudence, Shaikh
Burhauddin Ali’s *Hidayah* (530-596 H./1135-1199 C.E.), the Compendium
of Sunni Law, based on the Quran and the Hadis, was also readily
available in the time of Iltutmish. Muslim scriptures and treatises
advocated jihad against idolaters for whom the law advocated only Islam
or death.

In such a situation the answer of the Sultan to the Ulama was: “But at
the moment in India… the Muslims are so few that they are like salt (in
a large dish)… However, after a few years when in the capital and the
regions and all the small towns, when the Muslims are well established
and the troops are larger… it would be possible to give Hindus, the
choice of death or Islam.”^([24](#24)) Such an apologetic plea was not
necessary to put forward. The fact was that the Muslim regime was giving
a choice between Islam and death only. Those who were killed in battle
were dead and gone; but their dependents were made slaves. They ceased
to be Hindus; they were made Musalmans in course of time if not
immediately after captivity.

There was thus no let up in the policy of slave-taking. Minhaj Siraj
writes that Ulugh Khan Balban’s “taking of captives, and his capture of
the dependents of the great Ranas cannot be recounted”. Talking of his
war in Avadh against Trailokyavarman of the Chandela dynasty (Dalaki va
Malaki of Minhaj), the chronicler says that “All the infidels’ wives,
sons and dependents… and children… fell into the hands of the
victors.” In 1253, in his campaign against Ranthambhor also, Balban
enslaved many people. In 1259, in an attack on Haryana, many women and
children were enslaved.^([25](#25)) Twice Balban led expeditions against
Kampil, Patiali, and Bhojpur, and in the process enslaved a large number
of women and children. In Katehar he ordered a general massacre of the
male population of over eight years of age and carried away women and
children.²⁶ In 658 H. (1260 C.E.) Ulugh Khan Balban marched with a large
force on a campaign in the region of Ranthambhor, Mewat and Siwalik. He
made a proclamation that a soldier who brought a live captive would be
rewarded with two silver *tankahs* and one who brought the head of a
dead one would get one silver *tankah*. Soon three to four hundred
living and dead were brought to his presence.^([27](#27)) Like Balban
other slave commanders of Iltutmish, or the “Shamsia Maliks of Hind”
were marching up and down the Hindustan, raiding towns and villages and
enslaving people. This was the situation prevailing from Lakhnauti to
Lahore and from Ajmer to Ujjain. The Hindus used to reclaim their lands
after the Muslim invaders had passed through them with fire and sword,
and Turkish armies used to repeat their attacks to regain control of the
cities so lost. But the captives once taken became slaves and then
Musalmans for ever. The exact figures of such slaves have not been
mentioned and therefore cannot be computed. All that is known is that
they were captured in droves. Only one instance should suffice to convey
an idea of their numbers. Even in the reign of a weak Sultan like
Nasiruddin, son of Iltutmish, the ingress of captives was so large that
once he presented *forty beads of staves* to our chronicler Minhaj Siraj
to send to his “dear sister” in Khurasan.^([28](#28))

*Enslavement under the Khaljis*

The process of enslavement during war gained momentum under the Khaljis
and the Tughlaqs. In two or three generations after Iltutmish the
Muslims were digging their heels firmly into the country. Their
territories were expanding and their armies were becoming larger. All
the time, the desire to convert or liquidate the idolaters remained ever
restless. Achievements in this regard of course depended on the
strength, resources and determination of individual Muslim rulers. For
example, although Jalaluddin Khalji was an old and vacillating king,
even he did not just remain content with expressing rage at the fact of
not being able to deal with the Hindus according to the law.^([29](#29))
During six years of his reign (June 1290 -July 1296), he mounted
expeditions and captured prisoners. While suppressing the revolt of
Malik Chhajju, a scion of the dynasty he had ousted, he marched towards
Bhojpur in Farrukhabad district and ruthlessly attacked Hindus in the
region of Katehar (later Rohilkhand). During his campaign in Ranthambhor
he broke temples, sacked the neighbouring Jhain and took booty and
captives, making “a hell of paradise”.^([30](#30)) Later on Malwa was
attacked and large quantity of loot, naturally including slaves, was
brought to Delhi.^([31](#31)) His last expedition was directed against
Gwalior.^([32](#32))

Jalaluddin’s nephew and successor Alauddin Khalji (1296-1316) turned out
to be a very strong king. He marched against Devagiri in 1296. On his
way through Gondwana and Khandesh he took prisoners a large number of
Mahajans and cultivators, and ransomed them for wealth.^([33](#33)) At
Devagiri he enslaved a number of the Raja’s relatives, and Brahmans and
Mahajans. He put them in shackles and chains and paraded them in front
of the fort to pressure the besieged king. After victory, he released
many of the captives because of compulsions of the situation. He was
only a prince who had marched to the Deccan without the Sultan’s
permission. But his taking of slaves in large numbers was in consonance
with the policy of Muslim sultans and gave a foretaste of what was to
follow during the course of his reign.

After ascending the throne, Alauddin Khalji embarked upon a series of
conquests. He turned out to be the greatest king of the Sultanate period
(cir. 1200-1500), and his success as regards capture of slaves was
stupendous. He started by seizing the families and slaves of his
brothers and brother-in-law.^([34](#34)) In 1299 he despatched a large
army for the invasion of Gujarat. There all the major towns and cities
like Naharwala, Asaval, Vanmanthali, Surat, Cambay, Somnath etc. were
sacked. There the temples were broken, wealth looted and large numbers
of captives of both sexes captured, including the famous Malik
Kafur^([35](#35)) and the Vaghela king’s consort Kamala
Devi.^([36](#36)) In the words of Wassaf, the Muslim army in the sack of
Somnath “took captive a great number of handsome and elegant maidens,
amounting to 20,000, and children of both sexes… the Muhammadan army
brought the country to utter ruin, and destroyed the lives of
inhabitants, and plundered the cities and captured their
offspring…”^([37](#37)) In 1301 Ranthambhor was attacked and in 1303
Chittor.  In the invasion of Chittor, 30,000 people were massacred in
cold blood and obviously females and minors of their families were
captured.^([38](#38)) Slaves were also taken in large numbers in the
expeditions to Malwa, Sevana and Jalor (1305-1311); these will be
referred to again in the course of this study. Maybe the number of
captives obtained from Rajasthan was not that large knowing the bravery
and chivalry of the Rajputs and their prevailing customs of Jauhar and
Sati. But the highly successful Deccan campaigns of Malik Kafur must
have supplied a large corps of captives. Besides, Alauddin did not
confine to obtaining Hindu slaves. During the invasion of the Mongol
Saldi (1299), the commanders of the Sultan captured 1,700 of his
officers, men and women and sent them as slaves to Delhi.^([39](#39))
During the raid of Ali Beg, Tartaq and Targhi (1305), 8,000 Mongol
prisoners were executed and their heads displayed in the towers of the
Siri Fort which were then under constructions.^([40](#40)) The women and
children accompanying the Mongol raiders Kubak and Iqbalmand were sold
in Delhi and the rest of Hindustan. “The Mongol invaders were certainly
infidels,” says Mahdi Husain. This enslavement was as beneficial to
Islam as that of the Hindus. Muslims were not enslaved because they were
already Muslim.^([41](#41))

Sultan Alauddin’s collection of slaves was a matter of successful
routine. Under him the Sultanate had grown so strong that, according to
Shams Siraj Afif, in his days “no one dared to make an
outcry.”^([42](#42)) Similar is the testimony of the Alim and Sufi Amir
Khusrau. In *Nuh Sipehr* he writes that “the Turks, whenever they
please, can seize, buy or sell any Hindu.”^([43](#43)) No wonder, under
him the process of enslavement went on with great vigour. As an example,
he had 50,000 slave boys in his personal service ^([44](#44)) and 70,000
slaves worked continuously on his buildings.[⁴⁵](#45) We must feel
obliged to Muslim chroniclers for providing such bits of information on
the basis of which we can safely generalize. For instance, it is Barani
alone who writes about the number of slaves working on buildings and
Afif alone who speaks about the personal ‘boys’ of Sultan Alauddin who
looked after his pigeons. Ziyauddin Barani’s detailed description of the
Slave Markets in Delhi and elsewhere during the reign of Alauddin
Khalji, shows that fresh batches of captives were constantly arriving
there.^([46](#46))

*Enslavement under the Tughlaqs*

All sultans were keen on making slaves, but Muhammad Tughlaq became
notorious for enslaving people. He appears to have outstripped even
Alauddin Khalji and his reputation in this regard spread far and wide.
Shihabuddin Ahmad Abbas writes about him thus: “The Sultan never ceases
to show the greatest zeal in making war upon infidels… Everyday
thousands of slaves are sold at a very low price, so great is the number
of prisoners”.^([47](#47)) Muhammad Tughlaq did not only enslave people
during campaigns, he was also very fond of purchasing and collecting
foreign and Indian slaves. According to Ibn Battuta one of the reasons
of estrangement between Muhammad Tughlaq and his father Ghiyasuddin
Tughlaq, when Muhammad was still a prince, was his extravagance in
purchasing slaves.^([48](#48)) Even as Sultan, he made extensive
conquests. He subjugated the country as far as Dwarsamudra, Malabar,
Kampil, Warangal, Lakhnauti, Satgaon, Sonargaon, Nagarkot and Sambhal to
give only few prominent place-names.^([49](#49)) There were sixteen
major rebellions in his reign which were ruthlessly
suppressed.^([50](#50)) In all these conquests and rebellions, slaves
were taken with great gusto. For example, in the year 1342 Halajun rose
in rebellion in Lahore. He was aided by the Khokhar chief Kulchand. They
were defeated. “About three hundred women of the rebels were taken
captive, and sent to the fort of Gwalior where they were seen by Ibn
Battutah.”^([51](#51)) Such was their influx that Ibn Battutah writes:
“At (one) time there arrived in Delhi some female infidel captives, ten
of whom the Vazir sent to me. I gave one of them to the man who had
brought them to me, but he was not satisfied. My companion took three
young girls, and I do not know what happened to the rest.”^([52](#52))
Iltutmish, Muhammad Tughlaq and Firoz Tughlaq sent gifts of slaves to
Khalifas outside India. To the Chinese emperor Muhammad Tughlaq sent,
besides other presents, “100 Hindu slaves, 100 slave girls, accomplished
in song and dance… and another 15 young slaves.”^([53](#53))

Ibn Battutah’s eye-witness account of the Sultan’s gifting captured
slave girls to nobles or arranging their marriages with Muslims on a
large scale on the occasion of the two Ids, corroborates the statement
of Abbas. Ibn Battutah writes that during the celebrations in connection
with the two Ids in the court of Muhammad bin Tughlaq, daughters of
Hindu Rajas and those of commoners, captured during the course of the
year were distributed among nobles, officers and important foreign
slaves. “On the fourth day men slaves are married and on the fifth
slave-girls. On the sixth day men and women slaves are married
off.”^([54](#54)) This was all in accordance with the Islamic law.
According to it, slaves cannot many on their own without the consent of
their proprietors.^([55](#55)) The marriage of an infidel couple is not
dissolved by their jointly embracing the faith.^([56](#56)) In the
present case the slaves were probably already converted and their
marriages performed with the initiative and permission the Sultan
himself were valid. Thousands of non-Muslim women^([57](#57)) were
captured by the Muslims in the yearly campaigns of Firoz Tughlaq, and
under him the id celebrations were held on lines similar to those of his
predecessor.^([58](#58)) In short, under the Tughlaqs the inflow of
women captives never ceased.

Similar was the case with males, especially of tender and young age.
Firoz Tughlaq acquired them by all kinds of methods and means, so that
he collected 180,000 of them.^([59](#58)) Shams Siraj Afif, the
contemporary historian, writes that under Firoz, “slaves became too
numerous” and adds that “the institution took root in every centre of
the land”. So that even after the Sultanate broke up into a number of
kingdoms, slave-hunting continued in every “(Muslim) centre of the
land.”^([60](#60))

*Sufferings of the enslaved*

This is the version of the slave-capturing victors. The humiliation and
suffering of the victims finds no mention in Muslim chronicles.
Sustained experience of grief and pain and loss of dignity and
self-respect used to turn them into dumb driven animals. The practice
and pattern of breaking the spirit of the captives under Aibak,
Iltutmish and Balban, indeed throughout the medieval period, was the
same as during the days of the Khaljis and the Tughlaqs. Only one case
may be cited as an instance. Balban, when he was Ulugh Khan Khan-i-Azam,
once brought to Delhi (in about 1260) two hundred fifty 'Hindu leading
men and men of position” from Mewar and Siwalik, bound and shackled and
chained. During the expedition he had proclaimed that a royal soldier
would be rewarded with two silver *tankahs* if he captured a person
alive and one *tankah* if he brought the head of a dead one. They
brought to his presence 300 to 400 living and dead everyday. The
reigning Sultan Nasiruddin ordered the death of the leading men. The
others accompanying them were shaken to the bones and completely tamed.
Depiction of their suffering is found in an Indian work - *Kanhadade
Prabandha*. Written in ‘old Rajasthani or old Gujarati’, it was composed
in mid-fifteenth century and records the exploits of King Kanhardeva of
Jalor against Alauddin’s General Ulugh Khan who had attacked Gujarat in
1299 and taken a number of prisoners. In the Sorath (Saurashtra) region
“they made people captive - Brahmanas and children, and women, in fact,
people of all (description)… huddled them and tied them by straps of raw
hide. The number of prisoners made by them was beyond counting. The
prisoners’ quarters (*bandikhana*) were entrusted to the care of the
Turks.” The prisoners suffered greatly and wept aloud. “During the day
they bore the heat of the scorching sun, without shade or shelter as
they were \[in the sandy desert region of Rajasthan\], and the shivering
cold during the night under the open sky. Children, tom away from their
mother’s breasts and homes, were crying. Each one of the captives seemed
as miserable as the other. Already writhing in agony due to thirst, the
pangs of hunger… added to their distress. Some of the captives were
sick, some unable to sit up. Some had no shoes to put on and no clothes
to wear. …Some had iron shackles on their feet. Separated from each
other, they were huddled together and tied with straps of hide. Children
were separated from their parents, the wives from their husbands, thrown
apart by this cruel raid. Young and old were seen writhing in agony, as
loud wailings arose from that part of the camp where they were all
huddled up… Weeping and wailing, they were hoping that some miracle
might save them even now.”^([61](#61)) The miracle did happen and
Kanhardeva was successful in rescuing them after a tough fight.

But the description provides the scenario in which the brave and the
strong, the elite and the plebeian, were made captives and their spirit
broken. That is how Timur was enabled to massacre in one day about
100,000 of captives he had taken prisoner on his march to Delhi. They
had been distributed among his officers and kept tied and shackled. That
is how Maulana Nasiruddin Umar, a man of learning in Timur’s camp, “slew
with his own sword fifteen idolatrous Hindus, who were his captives”. If
the prisoners could ‘break their bonds’, such a carnage could not have
been possible. Prisoners were often brought to Timur’s presence with
hands bound to their necks.^([62](#62)) Jahangir (1605-27) also writes
that “prisoners were conducted to my presence yoked
together.”^([63](#63)) Most of them were kept yoked together even when
they were sent out to be sold in foreign lands or markets in India.

The captives, on their part, clung together and did not separate from
one another even in their darkest hour. Nor were they permitted an
opportunity to do so under Islamic law which the victors always observed
with typical Muslim zeal. The *Hidayah* lays down that “if the
Mussulmans subdue an infidel territory before any capitation tax be
established, the inhabitants, together with their wives and children,
are all plunder, and the property of the state, as it is lawful to
reduce to slavery all *infidels*, whether they be *Kitabees, Majoosees*
or *idotters*.”^([64](#64)) The *Hidayah* also lays down that “whoever
slays an infidel is entitled to his private property,”^([65](#65)) which
invariably included his women and children. That is how a large number
of people were involved, whether it was a matter of taking captives,
making converts, or ordering massacres. About women and children of a
single family of a slain infidel, or of droves of slaves captured in an
attack on a region or territory Fakhre Mudabbir furnishes information
on, both counts during the campaigns of Muhammad Ghauri and Qutbuddin
Aibak. He informs us that during their expeditions *ghulams* of all
descriptions (*har jins*) were captured in groups and droves (*jauq
jauq*) so that even a poor householder (or soldier) who did not possess
a single slave (earlier) became the owner of numerous
slaves…”^([66](#66))

In short, the captives swam or sank together so that if they were
captured they were taken in large numbers. A manifest example of this
phenomenon is that during a rebellion-suppressing expedition of Muhammad
bin Tughlaq in the Deccan (1327), all the eleven sons of the Raja of
Kampil (situated on the River Tungbhadra, Bellary District), were
captured together, and made Muslims.^([67](#67)) Generally, able bodied
men and soldiers were massacred, and their helpless women and children
were made prisoners in large numbers or groups.^([68](#68)) Even in
peace times people of one or more villages or groups acted in unison.
When Firoz Shah Tughlaq proclaimed that those who accepted Islam would
be exempted from payment of Jizyah, “great number of Hindus presented
themselves… Thus they came forward day by day from every
quarter…”^([69](#69)) Similarly, from the time of entering Hindustan, up
to the time of reaching the environs of Delhi, Amir Timur had “taken
more than 100,000 infidels and Hindus prisoners…”^([70](#70)) Timur
massacred them all, but the fact that people could be made slaves in
such unbelievably large numbers was due to their keeping together
through thick and thin, howsoever desperate the situation. Nobody knew
the reality better than Ibn Battuta who travelled in India extensively.
During his sojourn he found villages after villages
deserted.^([71](#71)) Nature’s ravages or man’s atrocities might have
made them flee, or more probably they would have been enslaved and
converted, or just carried away. But the fact of habitations being
completely deserted shows that large groups suffered together and did
not forsake one another in times of trial and tribulation. This factor
swelled the number of slaves.

*Special Slaves of Firoz Shah Tughlaq*

By the time of Firoz Shah Tughlaq, the institution of slavery had taken
root in every region of Muslim domination. The Sultanate of Delhi was
now two hundred years old and well entrenched. The need of slaves for
all kinds of errands was great. So that slaves were ever needed in
hundreds, and slave-taking did not remain confined to their capture
during wars. Firoz Tughlaq resorted to some other methods of acquiring
slaves. One of these was akin to the famous Dewshrime widely practised
in the Ottoman Empire.

The practice of Dewshrime (Greek for ‘collecting boys’), “is the name
applied to the forcible pressing of Christian children to recruit the
janissary regiments… of the Turkish Empire… mainly in the European parts
with a Christian population (Greece, Macedonia, Albania, Serbia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and Bulgaria).”^([72](#72)) These Christians, Jews and
Gypsies turned Muslims were trained to fight against their own erstwhile
brethren. “Instituted by Urkhan in 1330, it formed for centuries the
mainstay of the despotic power of the Turkish sultans, and was kept
alive by a regular contribution exacted every four years (or so), when
the officers of the Sultan visited the districts over and made a
selection from among the children about the age of seven. The Muhammadan
legists attempted to apologise for this inhuman tribute by representing
these children as the fifth of the spoil which the Quran assigns to the
sovereign.”^([73](#73))

Sultan Firoz commanded his great fief-holders and officers to capture
slaves whenever they were at war, and to pick out and send the best for
the service of the court. The fifth part of slaves captured in war in
India were always despatched to the ruler (or Caliph) ever since the
days of Muhammad bin Qasim. Firoz Tughlaq desired slaves to be collected
in the Dewshrime fashion. Great numbers of slaves were thus collected,
and when they were found to be in excess, the Sultan sent them to
Multan, Dipalpur, Hissar Firozah, Samana, Gujarat, and all the other
feudal dependencies.”^([74](#74))

The policy of Delhi Sultanate of leaving the bare minimum to the peasant
helped in Firoz’s ‘Dewshrime’. Under Muslim rule, a substantial portion
of the agricultural produce was taken away by the government as taxes
and the people were left with the bare minimum for subsistence in order
to impoverish them because it was thought that “wealth” was the source
of "rebellion and disaffection.”^([75](#75)) This policy was in practice
throughout the medieval period, both under the Sultans and the Mughals.
Conditions became intolerable by the time of Shahjahan as attested to by
Manucci and Manrique. Peasants were compelled to sell their women and
children to meet the revenue demand. Manrique writes that “the peasants
were carried off… to various markets and fairs (to be sold), with their
poor unhappy wives behind them carrying their small children all crying
and lamenting, to meet the revenue demand.” Bernier too affirms that
“the unfortunate peasants who were incapable of discharging the demand
of their rapacious lords, were bereft of their children Who were carried
away as slaves.”^([76](#76)) As in the Ottoman Empire, Christians and
Jews turned Muslim were trained to fight their erstwhile brethren, so
also in India in the medieval period Hindus captured and converted were
made to fight their erstwhile brethren in Muslim wars of conquest.
Trained or accustomed to fighting their own people, these converts to
Islam are posing various kinds of problems in the present-day India and
Eastern Europe.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Ibn Khaldun; *Ibar*, trs. by Bernard Lewis in *Islam*, 98.

[²](#2a) Hasan Nizami, *Taj-ul-Maasir*, E.D., H, 222.

[³](#3a) *Dictionary of Islam*, 597.

[⁴](#4a) Hasan Nizami, *Taj-u-Maasir*, E.D., II, 231.  Farishtah, I, 62.

[⁵](#5a) Ram Swarup, Introduction to the Reprint of William Muir’s *The
Life of Mahomet*, New Delhi, 1992, 9.

[⁶](#6a) Titus, *Islam in India and Pakistan*, 31.

[⁷](#7a) Minhaj, 523 n. Also Farishtah, I, 63.

[⁸](#8a) Ibid., 528.

[⁹](#9a) Minhaj 483-84.

[¹⁰](#10a) Farishtah, I, 59-60.

[¹¹](#11a) Amir Khusrau, *Tughlaq Nama*, Aurangabad text, 128.

[¹²](#12a) Minhaj, 484n.

[¹³](#13a) Farishtah, I, 58.

[¹⁴](#14a) Opinions differ on the date of this raid. Ishwari Prasad,
*Medieval India*, 138, places it probably in 1197; Wolseley Haig, C.H.1,
III, 45-46, a little earlier than this, and Habibullah, 70 and 84, in
1202-03.

[¹⁵](#15a) Ibn Asir, *Kamil-ut-Tawarikh*, E.D., II, 250.

[¹⁶](#16a) Ibid,, 251.

[¹⁷](#17a) Habibullah, op.cit., 147.

[¹⁸](#18a) *Tarikh-i-Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah*, 20.

[¹⁹](#19a) Minhaj, 611.

[²⁰](#20a) Farishtah, I, 66.

[²¹](#21a) Farishtah, I, 73; Minhaj, 598-99.

[²²](#22a) Farishtah, I, 75. Also Habibullah, 272.

[²³](#23a) Barani, 57-58; Farishtah, I, 75; Habibullah, 294-95.

[²⁴](#24a) Ziyauddin Barani, *Sana-i-Muhammadi*, trs. in Medieval India
Quarterly, (Aligarh), I, Part III, 100-105.

[²⁵](#25a) Minhaj 680, 683, 391, 828; E.D., II, 348, 367, 371, 380-81,
Farishtah, I, 73.

[²⁷](#27a) Farishtah, I. 73.

[²⁸](#28a) Minhaj, 686; 675 n.5, 719-868,

[²⁹](#29a) Barani, 216-17.

[³⁰](#30a) Khusrau, *Miftah-ul-Fatuh*, Aligarh text, 1954, 35-36;
Barani, 213.

[³¹](#31a) Khusrau, *Miftah-ul-Fatuh*, 38-39; Farishtah, I, 94.

[³²](#32a) Barani, 222-23; Farishtah, I, 95-97.

[³³](#33a) Farishtah, I, 95-96.

[³⁴](#34a) Barani, 249; Farishtah, I, 102: Badaoni, Ranking, I, 248.

[³⁵](#35a) Isami, 243; Barani, 251-52.

[³⁶](#36a) For detailed references see Lal, *Khaljis*, 69-71.

[³⁷](#37a) Wassaf, Bk.  IV, 448. Also trs. in E.D. III, 43.

[³⁸](#38a) *Khazain*, Habib trs., 49; Lal, *Khaljis*, 101.

[³⁹](#39a) Barani, 253-54; Farishtah, I, 103: Futuh, 241.

[⁴⁰](#40a) Farishtah, I, 114-15; Barani, 320; *Khazain*, Habib, 28;
Wassaf, IV, 526-27. The walls of the towers popularly known as Chor
Minar in modern Hauz Khas Enclave are pierced with 225 holes. In
medieval India apertures on the walls of towers were used by Muslims not
only as windows but also to display heads of captured and executed
prisoners. The custom was to cut off their heads and stick them into
those holes, to be seen by everybody. During wars, only the heads of
chiefs were displayed; those of common soldiers were simply piled into
pyramids.

[⁴¹](#41a) For references Lal, *Khaljis*, 146-48.

[⁴²](#42a) Afif, 37-38.

[⁴³](#43a) Trs, in E.D., III, 561. Also in his *Ashiqa*, ibid., 545-46.

[⁴⁴](#44a) Afif, 272.

[⁴⁵](#45a) Barani, 341.

[⁴⁶](#46a) Barani, 318; Lal, *Khaljis*, 214-15.

[⁴⁷](#47a) *Masalik-ul-Absar*, E.D., III, 580.

[⁴⁸](#48a) Ishwari Prasad, *Qaraunh Turks*, 39-40 citing Battutah, Def.
and Sang., II, 212-14.

[⁴⁹](#49a) *Qaraunah Turks*, 96, 126, 129-30, 173.

[⁵⁰](#50a) Mahdi Husain *Tughlaq Dynasty*, 195-257.

[⁵¹](#51a) *Qaraunah Turks*, 148 citing Battutah, Def. and Sang, III,
332.

[⁵²](#52a) Battutah, 123.

[⁵³](#53a) *Qaraunah Turks*, 138-39.

[⁵⁴](#54a) Battutah, 63; Hindi trs. by S.A.A. Rizvi in *Tughlaq Kalin
Bharat*, part I, Aligarh 1956, 189.

[⁵⁵](#55a) Hamilton, *Hedaya*. I, 161.

[⁵⁶](#56a) Ibid., 174.

[⁵⁷](#57a) Afif, 265. also 119-120.

[⁵⁸](#58a) Ibid., 180.

[⁵⁹](#59a) Ibid., 267-73.

[⁶⁰](#60a) Ibid., 270-71.

[⁶¹](#61a) Padmanabh, *Kanhadade Prabandh*, trs.  Bhatnagar, 11, 16, 18.

[⁶²](#62a) Yazdi, *Zafar Nama*, II, 92-95; *Mulfuzat-i-Timuri*, trs. 
E.D., III, 436, 451.

[⁶³](#63a) *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*, 165. This was the fate of the
captives throughout the medieval period and therefore there is no need
to cite any more instances.

[⁶⁴](#64a) *Hedaya*, Hamilton, II, 213.

[⁶⁵](#65a) Ibid., 181.

[⁶⁶](#66a) *Tarikh-i-Fakkruddin Mubarak Shah*, ed.  Denison Ross, 20.

[⁶⁷](#67a) Battutah, 95.  For details see Ishwari Prasad, *Qarunab
Turks*, 65-66; Mahdi Husain, *Tughlaq Dynasty*, 207-208.

[⁶⁸](#68a) Barani, 56; Afif, 119-120; Lal, *Growth of Muslim
Population*, 106, 113-16, 211-217 for copious references from Muslim
chronicles.

[⁶⁹](#69a) *Fatuhat-i-Firoz Shah*, E.D., III, 386.

[⁷⁰](#70a) *Mulfuzat-i-Timuri*, E.D., III, 435-36; Z.N. Yazdi II, 192,
*Rauzat-us-safa*, VI, 109.

[⁷¹](#71a) Battuta, 10, 20, 155-56.

[⁷²](#72a) *Encyclopaedia of Islam*, First ed., 1913-38, II, 952.

[⁷³](#73a) Arnold, *The Preaching of Islam*, 150; Quran, 8:42. Bernard
Lewis, *Islam*, 22627 also traces its origin to the fourteenth century.

[⁷⁴](#74a) Afif, 267-73.

[⁷⁵](#75a) Barani, *Tarikh* 2, 16-17, 287, 291, 430, and
*Fatawa-i-Jahandari*, 46-48; Afif, E.D., III, 289-90.

[⁷⁶](#76a) Manucci, II. 451; Manrique, II, 272; Bernier, 205.  For
details see Lal, *Legacy*, 24955.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


