+++
title = "09 CHAPTER IX LOSS OF PRIVILEGES PORTRAYED AS PRIVATION"

+++
**CHAPTER IX**  
**LOSS OF PRIVILEGES PORTRAYED AS PRIVATION**

A British scholar and civil servant, W.W. Hunter, wrote the book, The
Indian Musalmans: Are They Bound in Conscience to Rebel against the
Queen?, which was published in 1871. It was reviewed by Alfred Lyall who
was soon to succeed as the Lieutenant Governor of the North West
Province (later on known as U.P.). Lyall had warned that “what Hunter
had said will be overheard by Indian Muslims; they will be encouraged to
think of themselves as ‘an oppressed people or a persecuted
sect’.”^([1](#1))

The warning was only a thin veneer. What Hunter had written was meant to
be ‘overheard’ by the ‘Indian’ Muslims. His book had been written at the
instance of Lord Mayo, the then Viceroy of India. It was intended to
make it easy for the residues of Islamic imperialism to revise their
stance vis-a-vis British imperialism without loss of face.  
 

**THE NEW POSTURE OF ISLAMIC IMPERIALISM**

The residues of Islamic imperialism were themselves in search of a new
posture which they could adopt in an adverse situation. The heroic mask
which they had donned earlier as Wahabis and Faraizis had paid no
dividends. The mask had been torn off their faces by the Sikh sword and
the British bayonet. The only ‘achievement’ they could claim was the
killing of some Hindu kãfirs, the slaughter of some cows, and the
desecration of some Hindu temples in the countryside of Bengal. At the
end of it all, they had nothing better to do than sit back in a mood of
self-pity, and lick their wounds at leisure.

The tip given by Hunter, therefore, came in handy and at the right time.
It was not long before the residues of Islamic imperialism started
dropping their mask of mujãhids, and donning the mask of martyrs. Ever
since, they have been parading themselves as a ‘poor and persecuted
minority’.

Hunter’s tip has also stood the test of time. Generation after
generation of Hindus, particularly Hindu intellectuals, have been
blackmailed by this sob-story about Muslim backwardness and poverty. In
fact, the sob-story has succeeded so well with the Hindus that the
Muslims themselves have come to believe in it. In the process, they have
carved out two separate states where they rule the roost, and from where
Hindus have been either hounded out or reduced to the status of
non-citizens. They are now reaching out to repeat the trick in what
remains of the ancient Hindu homeland.

We will deal with the ballyhoo about Muslim backwardness and poverty in
a subsequent chapter. Right now we want to take a peep behind the mask
of martyrdom in order to see the real face that has been secreted for
quite some time. That will take us back to the last quarter of the 19th
century when the residues of Islamic imperialism in U.P. first started
soliciting pity and sympathy for their “sorrowful plight”.  
 

**MUSLIMS INSIST ON COW-SLAUGHTER**

The opening wail of woe was heard when Hindus in U.P. decided to call a
halt to the open sale of beef in the bazars. Hindus had been helpless in
the matter of cow-slaughter so long as Muslims were at the centre of
power. Hindus were helpless even now about the British slaughtering of
cows in many military cantonments. But they thought that they could do
something about it in those towns where they were in a majority in the
newly constituted municipalities. So they started adopting resolutions
for a ban on open sale of beef in the bazars, and for moving the
slaughter-houses out of city precincts.

The Muslim response was not merely recalcitrant; it was positively
hostile. The Mullahs came out with fatwas that Id festivities could not
be completed without sacrificing cows. Muslim scholars pronounced that
the ‘prosperous’ Hindus were trying to deprive the ‘poor’ Muslims of the
only ‘wholesome food’ within the latter’s reach. All of them insisted
with one voice that cow-slaughter was a ‘established religious right’
which they could not and should not forego. They went much farther. Cows
meant for slaughter were taken out in processions through public
thoroughfares in order to show contempt for Hindu sentiments. This led
to some street riots in which some Hindus and some Muslims got killed.

The Muslim mass media raised a horrified howl of ‘Islam in danger’. The
‘majority’, they said, was not only out to ‘deprive’ the ‘minority’ of
its ‘religious rights’ of a long standing, but also bent upon a
‘massacre’ of the latter en masse. The howl was heard in other provinces
in some of which Muslims had stopped cow-slaughter after the collapse of
their political power. The Muslims in these provinces also rose in
revolt against Hindu ‘aggression’. They started reversing a settled
trend. The British power was there to provide protection. The British
courts had already given a decision that the government could not stop
cow-slaughter by law. As a result, there were more riots in more places
and more Hindus and Muslims got killed.

Hindus did not know how to meet this situation. They knew next to
nothing about Islam. Otherwise, they would have pointed out that
although Islam stood for a lot of slaughter - of animals as well as of
human beings - the poor cow was nowhere in the picture. They would have
quoted a hundred Islamic theologians who had recommended cow-slaughter
not to secure heaven for the mu’mins but to humiliate the ‘accursed’
Hindus. Cow-slaughter was not an obligatory religions rite in Islam,
conceding that Islam was a religion. On the contrary, it was an unequal
privilege enjoyed by Muslims as a corollary of their military power or,
conversely, a disability imposed on the zimmîs by an Islamic state. The
case for cow-protection, therefore, went by default because Hindu
society was not equipped to raise the issue to an ideological level.  
 

**NO MUSIC BEFORE THE MOSQUE**

Meanwhile, another explosive controversy was moving to the fore. That
was the matter of music before the mosque. A practice had prevailed
earlier in areas which were ruled by Muslims that while Muslim
processions could pass through purely Hindu localities, no Hindu
procession was permitted to pass before a mosque, even if the mosque
happened to be situated in a predominantly Hindu locality. Hindus were
in no position to question this practice during the days of Muslim rule,
and Muslims had taken it for granted. But now that Muslim rule was no
more, some Hindus started having strong doubts about the sanctity of
this practice. They started pointing out that Hindus were as good
citizens as the Muslims and should have equal rights in the matter of
public processions.

Once again, there was a horrified howl of ‘Islam in danger’. It was
pointed out by the Mullahs as well as Muslim scholars that Islam was a
‘religion of peace’ and that Muslims loved ‘peace’, particularly at the
time of prayers, unlike the Hindu dharam in which there was too much
ringing of bells and blowing of conches. Muslim musclemen threw an open
challenge that no disturbance of the ‘peace of Muslim prayers’ would be
permitted. Simultaneously, they started stocking the mosques with all
sorts of missiles. A select band of Muslim butchers started sharpening
their daggers and swords inside the same sanctuaries.

Hindus in some places persisted in taking out processions after
informing the police. But as soon as a procession passed before a
mosque, it was pelted with stones and other flying objects. Next, the
butchers rushed out and stabbed some processionists. And before the
police could intervene effectively, there was some bloodshed on both
sides. The riot spread very soon to the rest of the town. Again, some
Hindus and some Muslims got killed.

But once again, the Hindus lost the case by default. The Muslims needed
to be told that the practice of not permitting processions to pass
before a mosque had nothing to do with the ‘peace of Muslim prayers’.
Hindus could have quoted Caliph Umar and a hundred orthodox treatises
like the Hidãyah to point out that prohibition of non-Muslim public
celebrations, religious or otherwise, was one of the twenty-two
disabilities which an Islamic state had always imposed on the hated
zimmîs. Hindus under Muslim rule had not been permitted to celebrate
their festivities loudly even inside their homes, not to speak of
celebrating them on the streets. It was just another instance of an
unjust privilege usurped by Muslims in the period of their political
supremacy.

The Islamic state was no more. The British rule was supposed to be based
upon equality of all citizens before the law. Yet, the Muslims got away
with an unjust privilege acquired by them earlier. Those in charge of
law and order could not see the justice in the Hindu point of view. They
also enacted a law which prohibited music before a mosque. The law has
been retained on the statute book of an independent India where Hindus
are supposed to be in an overwhelming majority  
 

**UPROAR OVER URDU**

The national demand for cow-protection and passing of processions before
the mosques had challenged some unjust privileges which the residues of
Islamic imperialism had continued to retain in the name of their
‘religion’. These demands, however, were not likely to damage their
economic or social status in any manner. They could laugh in private at
their strategy of trouncing the Hindus and seeking mass Muslim support,
while pulling long faces in public. But the next thing that happened
looked like hitting them where it could really hurt. That was the
so-called Hindi Resolution passed by the Government of U.P. in April,
1900. The residues of Islamic imperialism now raised a howl as if
heavens had fallen.

So long as Muslim rule had prevailed in many parts of the country,
Persian had been the language of government and administration. All
public services had been the monopoly of Muslims, mostly of foreign
descent, except at the lowest levels where some Hindus were also allowed
to serve after learning Persian. The ranks of the foreign Muslim
fraternity had continued to be reinforced by fresh arrivals from all
over the Islamic world. The vast majority of natives, Hindus as well as
Muslim converts, had been helplessly dependent on scribes who knew
Persian, whenever and wherever they came in contact with the
administrative machinery.

The situation changed with the change of masters. The British replaced
Persian by English in the higher echelons and by Urdu at the lower
levels. The residues of Islamic imperialism had resented this change
also but got reconciled to it because their privileged position in
public services had not been affected. They began feeling uncomfortable
only when Urdu also started getting replaced by local languages like
Bengali, Marathi, Tamil and Telugu, etc. Muslims were not in a majority
in these provinces except in Bengal, where also there was hardly any
Muslim middle class and the Muslim peasantry had never known any
language other than its native Bengali.

Meanwhile, pressure of public opinion was building up in Bihar, the
Central Provinces and U.P., where Hindi, the mother tongue of the common
people, had all along received a step-motherly treatment. Urdu was
replaced by Hindi in the Central Provinces in 1872, and in Bihar in
1881. But the Government of U.P. continued to cold-shoulder Hindi due to
the influence of Sir Syed Ahmad Khan and his Aligarh lobby. It was only
after 1894, when Antony MacDonell became the Lieutenant Governor, that a
long-standing and just demand of the local people came up for an active
review. But even a sympathetic Governor could not go the whole hog in
favour of Hindi. He converted the language controversy into a
competition of rival scripts. Nagari script was now placed on par with
the Persian script, and both were made compulsory for all those who
aspired for government service at certain levels where English was not
essential.

It was only a small concession. The Muslims were still free to write
Urdu in Persian script. But even this small concession to the common
people was too much for the residues of Islamic imperialism. They raised
a strong protest that their ‘lofty language’ was being ‘brought down’ to
the level of ‘Hindî gandî. They pointed out that Hindus had been
learning Urdu all these years, and that it was only their ‘hatred’ for
Islam and the Muslims which was leading them to neglect it in future.
They added that next to Arabic and Persian, Urdu was the language of
their ‘religion and culture’, and that Urdu could be written only in the
Persian script. And they concluded that while the ‘prosperous and wily’
Hindus had many avenues of employment, the ‘poor and simple’ Muslims
were solely dependent on government patronage.

MacDonell was not impressed. He told the Muslims that they already had
their communal quota in terms of which a mere fourteen per cent of the
provincial population had monopolised thirty-seven-and-a-half per cent
of government jobs. But the Muslims were far from being mollified. They
became extremely agitated under the leadership provided again by the
Aligarh lobby. A pathetic couplet, composed by Mohsin-ul-Mulk, Secretary
of the Aligarh College, now started circulating among the Muslims all
over the province:

> *chal sãth ke hasrat dil-i-mahrûm se nikle,*  
> *ãshiq kã janaza hai zarã dhûm se nikle.*

(Walk with \[the bier\] so that the longing \[for love\] may not linger
in the hollowed heart. This is the funeral procession of your lover. Let
it proceed with some song and dance.)  
 

**URDU HAD REMAINED A FOREIGN LANGUAGE**

Before we pass on to the storm raised over Urdu by the residues of
Islamic imperialism, we should like to quote what Professor Aziz Ahmad
has said about this language. He writes: “The poets of Delhi, proud of
the ‘pure’ Urdu of the imperial camp, rejected the Dakani principle and
practice of borrowing extensively from the Indian languages, especially
if these borrowings were related to Hindu religion, culture and
world-view… In this process imagery was drawn exclusively from Persian
precedents, i.e., from the unseen and unexperienced sights, sounds and
smells of Persia and Central Asia, rejecting totally the Indian sights,
sounds and sensuous experience as materials regarded not sublime enough
for poetic expression… It was a desperate unconscious clinging to the
origins of the symbols of Muslim India’s cultural experience which had
begun abroad, and an instinctive fear of being submerged into the Hindu
cultural milieu. These modes of aesthetic appreciation, rooted so deeply
in the essence of universal Islamic culture, remained more or less
incomprehensible to the Hindu mind. Its reaction has been summed up by
\[S.K.\] Chatterjee: “Throughout the whole range of Urdu literature in
its first phase… the atmosphere of this literature is provokingly
un-Indian - it is that of Persia. Early Urdu poets never so much as
mention the great physical features of India - its Himalayas, its rivers
like the Ganges, the Jamuna, the Sindhu, the Godavari, etc; but of
course mountains and streams of Persia, and rivers of Central Asia are
always there. Indian flowers, Indian plants are unknown; only Persian
flowers and plants which the poet could see only in a garden. There was
a deliberate shutting of the eye to everything Indian, to everything not
mentioned or treated in Persian poetry… A language and literature which
came to base itself upon an ideology which denied on the Indian soil the
very existence of India and Indian culture, could not but be met with a
challenge from some of the Indian adherents of their national culture;
and that challenge was in the form of highly Sanskritized
Hindi’.”^([2](#2))  
 

**YET URDU WON A VICTORY**

This was the language which the residues of Islamic imperialism wanted
to impose upon the common people, Hindus and Muslim converts, till the
end of time. Some years earlier, they had organised a Mohammedan
Anglo-Oriental Defence Association of Upper India. Mohsin-ul-Mulk
converted this body into an Urdu Defence Association. It was decided to
call a conference of leading Muslims from all over North India to
discuss the Hindi Resolution and to draft a representation to the
Lieutenant Governor. Meanwhile, leading Muslims had spread out in the
district towns of U.P. to whip up a mass hysteria. The cries of ‘Islam
in danger’ were heard as far as Lahore in the Punjab, Dacca in Bengal,
Bombay in Maharashtra, and Madras in South India. Finally, a conference
was held at Lucknow in August, 1900. It was attended by 400 delegates
from the Punjab, Bombay Presidency, Central Provinces, U.P. and
elsewhere. The Mullahs, landlords, merchants, lawyers, journalists and
others who had flocked to the conference called upon the ‘Muslim masses’
to defend their ‘religion and culture’ with all their might.
Mohsin-ul-Mulk thundered: “Although we have not the might of the pen our
hands are still strong enough to wield the might of the sword.”

Nothing came out of the Hindi Resolution of the government. MacDonell
was soon succeeded by LaTouche who wrote to the Viceroy, Lord Curzon,
that MacDonell “went too far in acknowledging Hindi as a language”. For
a long time afterwards, no bilingual examinations were held and no
government orders were issued in the Nagari script. In fact, the number
of Muslims in government services increased in subsequent years.

The cat came out of the bag in October 1906 when the residues of Islamic
imperialism, who had held another conference in Lucknow in the
meanwhile, drew up a Memorandum to the Viceroy, Lord Minto. The
Memorandum was presented by a delegation of 35 Muslim notables led by
the Agha Khan. It was a prelude to the formation of the Muslim League,
later on in the same year. The Memorandum reminded the British rulers
that the Muslims had been the ruling class for a long time and requested
that the government “give due consideration to the position that they
\[Muslims\] occupied in India a little more than a hundred years ago”.
It insisted that the ‘political importance’ of the Muslim community be
conceded. Political importance, in turn, was spelled out in the
following words: “The political importance of a community to a
considerable extent gains strength or suffers detriment according to the
position that the members of that community occupy in the service of the
State.”

Professor Francis Robinson sums up the situation when he says that
“Aligarh College and the All India Muslim League were founded to
preserve a strong position, not to improve a weak one” and that “It was
the threat of becoming backward, rather than backwardness itself, which
encouraged U.P. Muslims to organize for politics, and their power in the
province helped them to do so with effect.”^([3](#3)) Backwardness in
this context meant becoming equal to the rest of their countrymen - a
prospect which the residues of Islamic imperialism have always dreaded
as worse than death.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Cited by David Lelyveld, op.cit., pp. 11-12.

[²](#2a) Aziz Ahmad, Studies In Islamic Culture, Oxford. 1964, pp.
252-55.

[³](#3a) Francis Robinson, Separatism Among Indian Muslims, Delhi, 1975,
p. 346.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


