+++
title = "12 CHAPTER XII PLEA FOR A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE"

+++
**CHAPTER XII**  
**PLEA FOR A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE**

Shri H.V. Seshadri has taken *The Tragic Story of Partition* to its
fatal finale in 1947. Each of his chapters is packed with facts,
insights, and interpretations such as make his book a substantial
contribution to the large literature on this controversial subject. The
only drawback in this otherwise well-documented study is the frequent
absence of dates on which the books from which he has quoted were
published, and the statements of leaders he has cited were made. Some of
the statements credited to some national leaders leave the impression as
if these leaders were able to see the precipice towards which our people
were being pushed. Absence of dates on which these statements were made,
helps in hiding the habit of our leaders to feel wise by hindsight.

We will not follow the trail of the tragedy farther than we have done.
Our object in writing these review articles was to highlight the
historical background against which this dismal drama was enacted in the
last three decades preceding Partition. Congressmen in general and
Communists in particular have joined hands with the residues of Islamic
imperialism in propagating the Big Lie that Partition was provoked by
‘Hindu communalism which was not prepared to concede even the minimum
democratic demands of the Muslim minority’, and which ‘vitiated the
atmosphere by wave after wave of Hindu revivalism’. On the other hand,
the facts of recorded history tell an entirely different story. These
facts lead only to one conclusion, namely, that the demand for Pakistan
was not a sudden development precipitated by ‘Hindu diehardism’. The
seeds of that demand were always there in the Muslim psychology of
separatism inspired by the ideology of Islam. What happened in the
‘twenties, the ‘thirties, and the ‘forties was that those seeds sprouted
rather fast in an environment made favourable by the confusion and the
cowardice prevailing in the nationalist ranks.  
 

**THE BASIC AND THE BIG MISTAKE**

The basic and the big mistake made by the national leadership was that
it could not conceive of a native nationalism which would march ahead
under its own impetus even if the Muslims were reluctant to participate
in it or remained hostile to it. The national leadership was all along
in a hurry to bargain with the British on the basis of Hindu-Muslim
unity, and consequently failed to give sufficient thought and attention
to the consolidation of genuine nationalist forces. The residues of
Islamic imperialism spotted this weakness of the national leadership
very soon, and exploited it to the hilt. Their price for co-operation
went on soaring in direct proportion to the nationalist solicitation for
it. The national leadership went on compromising the basic principles of
nationalism till it landed itself in the trap of the Khilafat agitation.
And the violence that followed that agitation frightened the national
leadership out of its wits. After that, the Muslim League had only to
threaten ‘dire consequences’ to make the national leadership shake in
its skin, and appease ‘the Muslim minority’ at any cost.

The national leadership could have avoided this calamitous course by
going to the sources of Muslim separatism and by identifying the
spearheads of this separatism as residues of Islamic imperialism rather
than as leaders of a bonafide minority. That needed a historical
perspective which the national leadership either did not possess, or did
not entertain when it was presented to it by the more perspective
analysts of the situation. The need for a historical perspective is as
great today as it was at that time because the same Muslim separatism is
still rampant in the guise of new slogans, and the same residues of
Islamic imperialism are rising again to stake their claims for unjust
privileges and unequal power. Their ultimate aim is to restore the power
of Islam in the India that has survived Partition. We will, therefore,
end this series by providing the historical perspective as we see it so
that the game of Islamic imperialism may be detected and defeated before
it is too late.  
 

**THE FOREIGN FRATERNITY**

Wave after wave of Muslims from Islamized lands abroad had poured into
India for several centuries in the wake of Islamic invasions. They were
the swordsmen, missionaries, and minions of Islamic imperialism. Most of
them had forced Hindu women into matrimony or concubinage and fathered a
prolific progeny on them. Some of them had also taken to Hindu mores and
manners to a certain extent, particularly in matters of song and dance
and other modes of entertainment. But in spite of everything, they had
remained a foreign fraternity in forcible occupation of a land which did
not belong to them except by right of conquest, and which they never
loved as their motherland. They had continued to despise and lord it
over not only their Hindu subjects but also the native converts whom
they had forced or lured into the fold of Islam. In fact, their contempt
for the native converts was deeper than that for their Hindu subjects.
They had all along looked down upon the native converts as *Ajlãf*
(low-born) and *Arzãl* (base-born) as compared to the *Ashrãf* (exalted)
which distinctive designation they had reserved for themselves.

Muslim rule in India was never a process of continuous expansion and
consolidation. It broke down again and again, and was re-established
every time by a fresh wave of Islamic invaders from abroad. But it fell
down finally and completely in the first half of the 18th century, and
could not be salvaged even by the invasions of Ahmad Shah Abdali whom
the *Ashrãf* had invited for putting down forces of national resurgence.
Almost all parts of the country which had once been under Muslim rule
passed under the sway of this or that Hindu power. The provincial Muslim
dynasties like those at Lucknow and Hyderabad could save themselves from
extinction only by entering into a subordinate alliance with the rising
power of British imperialism. It was the power of British bayonets and
not its own intrinsic strength which had preserved the privileged
position of an alien Muslim minority in several parts of the country.

The Vijayanagara Empire had effectively prevented the percolation of a
privileged Muslim class in large parts of South India. The Rajputs had
never permitted this class to plant itself in Rajasthan, Bundelkhand,
and Baghelkhand. Later on, the Marathas had taken care of this class in
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Central India, and Orissa. The Sikhs had done the
same in the Punjab, Kashmir, and the North-West Frontier Province. The
Jats had taken care of it around its imperial seats at Agra and Delhi.
Assam had all along remained out of its reach. It would have met the
same fate in U.P., Bihar, Bengal, and the territories ruled by the Nizam
but for the British intervention which gave it a new lease of life. It
was in these provinces that the residues of Islamic imperialism
regrouped themselves for a renewed bid not only for retaining their
unjust privileges, but also for restoring Muslim power in the rest of
India in course of time.  
 

**HINDUS COULD HAVE WIPED OUT ISLAM**

It is to be noted that the Hindu powers that had risen on the ruins of
Muslim rule, had nowhere behaved like the Islamic barbarians of yester
years. Hindu princes could have easily done away with the descendants of
foreign adventurers as the latter’s forefathers had done earlier in the
case of Hindu ruling classes. They could have easily brought back the
native converts to the fold of the latter’s ancestral religion and
culture. They could have also reclaimed and restored to their original
architecture and use the thousands of mosques, *mazãrs, khãnqahs* and
palaces which had been built over the sites and, many a time, with the
debris of demolished *mandirs*, monasteries, and other Hindu monuments.

That Hindu princes never did any of these things and that many of them
gave employment to Muslim mercenaries in all positions, high and low,
may go to their credit or discredit according to differing perceptions.
But what cannot be gainsaid is that the residues of Islamic imperialism
had no valid cause for complaint if Islam had been an alternate way of
worship. The subsequent behaviour of the residues of Islamic imperialism
in areas subdued by Indian nationalism, however, gave ample proof that,
far from being an alternate way of worship, Islam was an imperialist
ideology dressed up in religious verbiage. This was proved conclusively
when the residues of Islamic imperialism in U.P., Bihar, and Bengal
raised a hue and cry in defence of their unequal privileges, and their
kinsmen elsewhere joined them with unconcealed enthusiasm.  
 

**RESIDUES OF ISLAMIC IMPERIALISM IN DIFFERENT ROLES**

To start with, the residues of Islamic imperialism, led by Sir Syed
Ahmed Khan in U.P. and Ameer Ali in Bengal, were very fond of stressing
that they were a ‘race of conquerors’ who had enjoyed a ‘monopoly of
power and wealth only a hundred years ago’. Their appeal to the British
government was to recognize the ‘political importance’ of their class.
The British response was positive for quite some time. The British
imperialists were getting worried over the rising tide of Indian
nationalism. Thus the residues of Islamic imperialism became parasitic
upon British imperialism, and strengthened their position by gaining the
Partition of Bengal and separate electorates.

But there was a limit beyond which even the British could not go in
their game of patronising Muslim separatism. They had not only to keep
in mind the power of Indian nationalism which had reached a high stage
in the Swadeshi Movement, and the spread of revolutionary activities in
several parts of the country. They had also to yield to Indian
nationalism in the matter of languages of administration at the lower
levels, and in recruitment to public services by competitive
examinations. This was what the residues of Islamic imperialism found
absolutely intolerable. The situation was further complicated by the
involvement of Britain in some foreign policy moves which ran counter to
the Pan-Islamic preoccupations of the residues of Islamic imperialism.
For a while, the ‘race of conquerors’ found itself in a difficult
predicament. The national movement was forging ahead in spite of their
hostility to it. The British were finding it difficult to meet more of
their demands at home and abroad.

It was at this critical juncture that the frustrated fraternity of
foreign Muslims took a very strategic step. They started swearing by a
solidarity with the native Muslims whom they had despised so far. They
let loose on the native Muslims an army of mercenary Mullahs recruited,
mostly from their own ranks. These Mullahs went about broadcasting the
message that ‘Islam was in danger’, and that ‘Hindus were out to enslave
and exploit the Muslim minority’. It was in this manner that the
residues of Islamic imperialism managed to ‘merge’ themselves with the
native converts, and to present themselves at the head of a strong
phalanx pitted against whatever historical forces threatened their
unjust privileges. Hitherto, the haughty *Ashrãf* had stood strictly
aloof from the abject *Ajlãf* and the despised *Arzãl*. Now all of a
sudden the latter became the former’s ‘brothers in faith’. This was a
tremendous transformation of the political scene in the second decade of
the 20th century.

And to top it all, the residues of Islamic imperialism started referring
to themselves as ‘simple and straightforward fellows’ as compared to the
Hindus whom they named as the ‘wily *baniãs*’. The rogues’ gallery
played this act again and again, and succeeded in producing a dramatic
effect, not only among the Muslim masses but also among the
English-educated Hindu elite. The act was perfected over a period of
time and played before larger and larger audiences with the help of an
illiterate press controlled mostly by Hindu moneybags. A motley crowd of
self-alienated but self-righteous Hindu politicians and scribes came
forward to provide the applause. There was one note that became the
refrain in the melancholy music which accompanied the act. The refrain
that raised its pitch with the passing of every day, was that the
Muslims had been deprived of an empire by the wily British, that the
same British had suppressed and oppressed the Muslims in the aftermath
of 1857, that the Muslims had been driven to become educationally
backward and economically depressed in successive periods, and that the
Hindu moneylenders in the countryside and the Hindu capitalists in the
urban centres had been exploiting the Muslim peasants and workers.

The British were not impressed by this demonstration of ‘Muslim power’,
or presentation of ‘Muslim poverty’. They went ahead with the annulment
of the Partition of Bengal, and enlargement of competitive examinations
for recruitment to public services. The Montague-Chemsford Report
expressed serious doubts about the very concept of separate electorates.
In the international arena, too, the British supported the dismemberment
of Turkey. They knew it very well that though the residues of Islamic
imperialism could produce a lot of sound and fury and also become a law
and order problem in several parts of the country, they were incapable
of mobilizing the nation as a whole. The British never attached more
than a nuisance value to this noisy fraternity which had to be
befriended or ignored according to the needs of British policy at any
time.

It was the national leadership which was impressed by this mobilisation
of the ‘Muslim masses’ and the pathos of ‘Muslim plight’. They accepted
not only separate electorates but also weightages for the ‘Muslim
minority’ in many provinces. They thought that they were beating the
British at the latter’s own game. The cries of ‘Hindu-Muslim Bhãi Bhãi’
raised by Muslim mobs in the aftermath of the Lucknow Pact and during
the Khilafat agitation, blinded them to the game which the residues of
Islamic imperialism were playing. They gladly offered their backs for
carrying the dead-weight of Pan-Islamism. The residues of Islamic
imperialism, who had been parasitic on British imperialism so far, now
started to feed and fatten upon Indian nationalism. All this fanned the
flames of Islamic fanaticism. It also gave birth to a brand of negative
nationalism whose only stock-in-trade was anti-British hysteria. The die
was thus cast, and what followed in subsequent years was a mere
unfoldment of the drama which had already been scripted by Lokamanya
Tilak, Mahatma Gandhi, and C.R, Das in all its salient features.  
 

**THE TRAGEDY OF NATIONAL LEADERSHIP**

In the event, the national leadership repeated the story of the
proverbial convict whom the judge had sentenced either to eat a hundred
onions or to take a hundred shoe-strokes. The convict started by eating
onions which soon made him sick with tearful eyes and a flowing nose.
Next he chose to be beaten by shoes which exercise also produced very
soon an unbearable pain in his body. Thereafter, he alternated between
eating onions and suffering shoe-strokes, till he had eaten a hundred
onions and received a hundred shoe-strokes. In like manner, the national
leadership alternated between resisting and conceding Muslim demands
which went on increasing. Resistance led to street riots which made the
leadership panicky. Concessions led to more demands which forced the
leadership to have second thoughts. Finally, the leadership conceded
Partition in order to avoid bloodshed. But it ended by having Partition
as well as a large-scale bloodshed in which millions were killed,
maimed, ruined, and rendered homeless. The bloodshed would have
certainly been on a smaller scale if the national leadership had opted
for a civil war in the face of Muslim intransigence. It is doubtful if
the residues of Islamic imperialism were in a position to pick up the
gauntlet without British help which was no more available.  
 

**VOICES OF WARNING**

Sri Aurobindo was the earliest to see a disastrous degeneration of
national psychology, and sound a warning. Although he had retired from
active politics several years earlier, his political perceptions had
remained as sharp as ever. Speaking to a disciple on 18 April 1923, he
had observed: “I am sorry they have made a fetish of Hindu-Muslim unity.
*It is no use ignoring facts; some day the Hindus may have to fight the
Muslims and they must prepare for it*. Hindu-Muslim unity should not
mean the subjection of Hindus. Every time the mildness of the Hindu has
given way. The best solution would be to allow the Hindus to organize
themselves and Hindu-Muslim unity will take care of itself; it would
automatically solve the problem. Otherwise, we are lulled into a false
sense of satisfaction that we have solved the problem when in fact we
have only shelved it.”^([1](#1))

A few months later, on 13 July 1923, a disciple had observed that “There
is also the question of Hindu-Muslim unity which the non-violence school
is trying to solve on the basis of their theory”. Sri Aurobindo had
replied: “You can live amicably with a religion whose principle is
toleration. But how is it possible to live with a religion whose
principle is ‘I will not tolerate?’ How are you going to have unity with
these people?  Certainly Hindu-Muslim unity cannot be arrived at on the
basis that Muslims will go on converting Hindus while Hindus shall not
convert Mohammedans. You can’t build unity on such basis. *Perhaps the
only way of making the Mohammedans harmless is to make them lose their
faith in their religion*.”^([2](#2))

Sri Seshadri has cited the advice which Sarat Chandra Chatterjee had
tendered to his people. He had written as follows in October, 1926:
“*Hindustan is the land of the Hindus*. It is, therefore, the duty of
the Hindus alone to liberate it from the shackles of foreign domination.
*Muslims are sitting with their faces turned towards Arabia or Turkey*.
Their heart is not in the land of Hindustan. But when it is not there,
it is no use lamenting over it. We need not be unnerved by counting the
heads of Muslims. Numbers are not the supreme truth in the world… In
freedom’s battle in any country, do all the people of that country take
part? When the Americans fought for their freedom, more than half the
people of that country were with the British. In the Irish freedom
struggle, how many were actually involved in it?… Right or wrong is not
decided by the counting of heads. It is decided by the intensity of
tapasya or the single-minded devotion to the cause. *The problem before
the Hindus is not to devise ways and means of bringing about an
artificial unity. The problem before them in how to organise
themselves*.”^([3](#3))

Later on, the same line of Hindu consolidation was advocated by the
Rashtriya Swayamsewak Sangh. The Hindu Mahasabha under the leadership of
Veer Savarkar gave the clarion call to Hinduize politics and militarize
the Hindus. It was the only right response to the grave situation
created by a series of surrenders made by the national leadership in the
face of the Muslim League goondaism. But the national leadership not
only ignored these seers, sages, statesmen, and patriots of
unimpeachable integrity; it also branded them as ‘Hindu communalists’.
That was a great sin. On the other hand, the same national leadership
hugged to its bosom as ‘nationalist Muslims’ not only Islamic
imperialists like Abdul Bari and Abul Kalam Azad but also Pan-Islamic
conspirators and habitual embezzlers of public funds like the Ali
Brothers. That was an unpardonable folly. The sin and the folly combined
in due course to close every other option of the national leadership,
and forced it into an abject surrender - acceptance of Partition.  
 

**SECULARISM: THE NEW SMOKE-SCREEN**

The same sin and folly which the national leadership committed in the
name of Hindu-Muslim unity in the years before Partition continue to be
committed by *all* national political parties in the name of Secularism.
Earlier, the residues of Islamic imperialism had acquired a veto on what
could be called national; now they have acquired a veto on what could be
called secular. Things have reached such a pass that no cause, no
platform, no organization, and no political party can claim to be
secular unless the residues of Islamic imperialism approve of it.
Conversely, all causes, platforms, organizations, and political parties
which do not countenance  the claims of Islamic imperialism stand
automatically condemned as ‘Hindu communalist’. This is the conditioned
reflex which seems to have been planted permanently in the national
psyche.

And the rogues’ gallery continues to play the same old act to which some
more scenes have been added. The refrain now is that the ‘Muslim
minority’ has not received its ‘fair share’ in the fruits of national
development after the dawn of national independence, that the Muslims
remain a ‘deprived and beleaguered minority’ inside democratic India,
that the ‘life, property and honour’ of Muslims are in constant danger
from ‘Hindu chauvinism’, and that a secular state in which the ‘Muslim
minority is thus discriminated against and oppressed and threatened with
genocide is a sham and a shame’. The line-up of grievances is so long
and seems so impressive that even the most sceptical gets deceived. In
any case, it provides good copy for Hindu scribes and scholars who spend
most of their time in coffee shops but who nevertheless write so
authoritatively on the socio-economic scene as if they had freshly
arrived from a painstaking field study. And they also denounce as a
‘Hindu communalist’ any one who questions their credentials vi-a-vis
this serious subject.  
 

**THE ONLY WAY OUT: AN AWAKENED HINDU SOCIETY**

Hindu society by and large has become a poor society as a result of
centuries of exploitation by Islamic and British imperialism. Unlike the
Muslims and Christians in India, Hindu society has no patrons and
financiers abroad and has to depend entirely on its own resources from
inside its only homeland. The class which came to power on the strength
of sacrifices made by Hindu society has turned its back on its
benefactor, and continues to cultivate the sworn enemies of Hindu
society in the name of Democracy and Secularism. Hindu society also
suffers from a lack of leadership which can free it from the
stranglehold of power-hungry politicians who divide it into smaller and
smaller segments pitted against each other. Hindu-baiting has become a
profitable profession for all sorts of penpushers. As a cumulative
effect, Hindu society has lost its self-confidence, and has been thrown
on the defensive by a variety of bullies and blackmailers. Such a
society is in no shape to face the inroads of Islamic imperialism which
remains as vicious today as it was in the years before Partition.

The first task before Hindu society is to recover its self-confidence.
That can happen only if Hindu society re-awakens to its inimitable
heritage - spiritual, cultural, and scientific - and stops treating
totalitarian ideologies like Islam as anything other than falsehoods
fattened by force and fraud. The rest will follow. A self-confident
Hindu society will make a start by attaining the pride of place in its
present-day homeland. It will assert itself as the nation rather than be
treated condescendingly as one of several communities, or even as the
majority community. Next, it will recover those parts of its ancestral
homeland which have been lost to its enemies, as also those of its
children who have been alienated from it in the past. Finally, it will
hold its head high as the inheritor of a vast spiritual and cultural
vision. A self-confident Hindu society alone can make its characteristic
contributions to the present-day human society which is caught in the
throes of an unprecedented spiritual and moral crisis.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) *Evening Talks with Sri Aurobindo* recorded by A.B. Purani,
Second Series, Pondicherry, 1974, p. 48.  Emphasis added.

[²](#2a) Ibid, p. 50. Emphasis added.

[³](#3a) *The Tragic Story of Partition*, p. 252. Emphasis added.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


