+++
title = "07 CHAPTER 8 - Towards A Language of Indian Nationalism"

+++
## CHAPTER 8 - Towards A Language of Indian Nationalism

We have seen in the foregoing chapters, that India's prevalent political
parlance - Right and Left, Reactionary and Progressive Revivalist and
Revolutionary, Fascist and Democratic, Communal and Secular, Capitalist
and Socialist,, etc. -- is an alien imposition imported mostly from
Soviet Russia by a fifth-column of Communist imperialism. We have also
seen how this language shares its basic characteristic with the
languages of Islamic, Christian and British imperialism.

The salient features of the role which this parlance has played in the
past have also been discussed. The details can be filled up by anyone
who follows the lead. This parlance played its most perfidious role when
it blackened Indian nationalism as *"Hindu communalism"* and aided and
abetted Islamic imperialism to consolidate on the soil of India an
aggression spread over more than thirteen hundred years.

The discussion about the role of this political parlance could have been
extended to the post-independence period - how this parlance has
continued its campaign against Indian nationalism and has thrown the
national society increasingly on the defensive; how it has converted the
residues of Islamic imperialism into a *poor and persecuted minority*;
how it has blamed the *brute majority* for aggression and violence to
which the *minority* has resorted more and more often; how it has
pressed for a socialist pattern of society till we have landed with a
listless leviathan sitting on top of an atomised, impoverished and
helpless mass of citizens; how it has provided protection to a Communist
fifth-columan which has brutalised public life with its coarse language
and repeated rounds of hooliganism; how it has given rise to a corrupt
politics in which personal ambition for power and pelf and not
commitment to the community or the country has become the guiding
principle; and how it has distorted our foreign policy till all our
options have been closed and we have become a client state of the Soviet
Union for all practical purposes and a loyal champion of Arab causes.
But that is too vast a canvas to be covered in a small booklet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## NEED FOR A LANGUAGE OF NATIONALISM

The conclusion becomes irresistible that this perverse parlance will
paralyse this country completely unless it is soon replaced by a
language of Indian nationalism. It has already transformed all sorts of
traitors into patriots and all sorts of parasites into public servants.
It provides a smoke-screen behind which several types of imperialism -
Islamic, Christian, Communist and Consumerist - are stealing a march.
The love of country and its tried and tested culture has been turned
into a cardinal sin by the poisoned phraseology of this political
parlance.

A language of Indian nationalism has not to be invented or synthesised
from a floating mass of syllables. On the contrary, this country has
known a language of nationalism since times immemorial. This language
was evolved, developed and perfected in the past by a long line of
seers, sages, saints and scholars. All our immortal literature -
particularly the Mahabharata, the Puranas and the Dharmashastras - was
written in this language. India had spoken in this language to the rest
of the world in her days of greatness and glory. This language has
sustained the spiritual, cultural, social and political life of India
through many stormy centuries. In short, this language has flourished
and functioned in this country for so long as to make it readily
accessible to all her people in every nook and corner of the land. No
other language in the world can claim such longevity combined with such
creativity.

A decline in the national elan has led, in course of time, to a decline
in the vigour and vitality of this language. But it has retained its
essential flavour even during the darkest periods of national history.
It was under the banner of this language that the princes and people of
India waged and won a long-drawn-out war with Islamic imperialism. It
was this language which had revived after an interval of lethargy and
had led the battles against British imperialism. Bande Mataram, the
quintessence of this language, was not coined by Bankim Chandra
Chatterji. He had inherited it from his ancestry and passed it on to
future generations. This language stirred the nation to its depths when
it was spoken by Maharshi Dayananda, Swami Vivekananda, Lokamanya Tilak
and Sri Aurobindo. Its last great spokeman was Mahatma Gandhi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## BASIC NOTES OF INDIAN NATIONALISM

The Itihasa-Purana speaks of people who are members of the same family
and who live in the land of Bharatavarsha bounded by the Himalaya and
its ranges on the north and by the sea on the east, west and south. For
the Dharmashastras, which are only commentaries on the Vedic
Dharmasutras, Bharatavarsha is the field for the establishment of
varna-ashrama-dharma. The ancient works on dandaniti regard
Bharatavarsha as Cakravrtya-kshetra, that is a compact country which
should be brought under one political sceptre without uprooting regional
provincial and local traditions and intitutions. The basic notes of
Indian nationalism were thus sounded at the very dawn of Indian
civilisation. The symphony as a whole was worked out in a wealth of
later literature.

The dominant note in this sympathy is that Bharatavarsha is the land of
sanatana Dharma. The truths of Sanatana Dharma are not of the nature of
a revelation received by a historical prophet from an extra-cosmic God
or some other supernatural source. Nor are those truths contained in or
confined to a Book or al-kitab. On the contrary the truths of Sanatana
Dharma are secret in every human heart and have always been accessible
to those who seek for them. Those truths are never in need of a crusade
for their spread and propagation. On the contrary, those truths are
self-propagating due to their own inner strength. The only defence they
need is the dedication they inspire spontaneously in all those who
invoke them.

The starting point of Sanatana Dharma is the human self which can be
explored, which can be purified progressively and which can be
transcended till it attains the highest heights of knowledge and
creativity. At this summit, the Self becomes one with the Universe and
sees all things, animate and inanimate, as its own symbols and
sequences. In this vast vision, sanctity attaches not only to human life
but to the whole of creation. This is the summum bonum of spiritual
humanism which has always been India's message to mankind.

A second and supplementary note in the symphony of Indian nationalism is
the vast complex of a culture and civilisation created and sustained by
the spiritual vision of Sanatana Dharma. The base is provided by an
economic infrastructure drawing its strength from swadeshi, that is, use
of local resources for local needs and limitation of human wants pari
passu with the preservation of natural resources and the purity of
environment. The middle is constituted by social and political
institution informed by the spirit of swabhava, swadharma and swarajya,
that is, autonomy of the family, the clan, the village and the region in
accordance with the inner aspirations and the inherited tratitions of
each. At the apex stands a wealth of art, architecture, music, dance,
drama, language and literature, all of which experiment with a variety
of forms without losing the inner sense of unity. In all these economic,
social, political and cultural creations, there is no insistence on a
dead uniformity. Instead, a living universality accomodates and keeps in
accord any number of individualities without suffering any strain. This
is the true and tested universalism which India has prescribed and
practised throughout the ages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## IMPLICATIONS OF INDIAN NATIONALISM

This being the character of Indian nationalism, certain implications can
be clearly drawn.

The first implications is that Bharatavarsha is an indivisible whole and
that its present division into Afganistan, Pakistan, Hindustan and
Bangladesh, brought about by Islamic imperialism, must go. Islamic
imperialism has alienated not only large areas from the national
homeland but also significant segments of national population. Indian
nationalism cannot and should not rest till this aggression gets vacated
for good.

The second implication is that closed creeds like Islam and Christianity
which are not in accord with the spirituality of Sanatana Dharma have no
place in India. No quarter can be given to these creeds in the name of
secularism which they are using in order to subvert India's ancient
spiritual heritage. An examination of the doctrines and histories of
these creeds shows beyond a shadow of doubt that these are political
ideologies of imperialism masquerading as religion. Their pretentions
should be exposed and their designs of using foreign partonage and
finances to alienate more members of tha national society and additional
areas of the national homeland should be defeated.

The third implication is that the economic systems of capitalism and
socialism, which are in fact variations on the same theme of
centralisation, should not be permitted to pulverize Indian economy and
that the Indian people should be saved from becoming helpless victims of
a vast industrial and commercial complex. The spirit of swadeshi should
be revived so that our people, particularly those in the countryside,
have control over their local resources, can employ their talents and
enterprise for their own benefit, and prevent their environment front
being eroded or poisoned.

The fourth implication is that totalitarian tendencies inherent in
Communism and Consumerism should be stopped from steamrollering India's
social political and cultural life into a dead uniformity. The national
genius and tradition of experimenting with a variety of social and
political institutions and cultural patterns should be preserved.

The fifth implication is that a strong structure of a central state
should emerge in order to preserve the national heritage and protect the
national homeland without inhibiting the multiple expression of
regional, provincial and local autonomies. In fact, this is the most
important implication because the absence of a strong central state has
been the bane of India's national life in the past providing as it did
many opportunities to foreign invaders for playing havoc with national
society and culture.

The basic notes and their implications being clear, it should not be
difficult ot develop a language of Indian nationalism such as would not
only enshrine India's eternal aspirations but also challenge and defeat
the several languages of imperialism which have been ruling the roost
for some time. This language of nationalism will be in direct continuity
with the language evolved during the fight for freedom against British
imperialism. But at the same time it will have characteristics which
were either not needed in the course of that struggle or did not get
crystallized due to confusions in national perceptions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## ECLIPSE OF THE LANGUAGE OF INDIAN NATIONALISM

There can be several explanations of why the language of Indian
nationalism suffered a steep decline after the passing away of Mahatma
Gandhi. The explanation which sounds most satisfactory is that a
language loses its inherent power when it fails to characterise in its
own idiom the various forces operating in the fieds. This failure in its
turn, is occasioned when a language wanders away from its own
ideological moorings and starts wallowing in a shallow and sentimental
liberalism.

The language of indian nationalism had become mature and self-confident
by the time of the Swadeshi Movement. It was able to proclaim that the
national struggle against British imperialism was a continuation of the
earlier struggle against Islamic imperialism. But it failed to
characterise Islam itself. Nor did it nail down the spokemen of Islam
for what they were in essence. As a result, Islam could continue to
masquerade as a religion and the residues of Islamic imperialism could
continue to strut about as the scions of a conquering race.

Christianity was characterised more clearly by the language of Indian
nationalism mainly because this creed was working hand in glove with
British imperialism. But here also the true character of Christianity as
an independent system of imperialism was neither recognised nor
proclaimed. Consequently, Christianity also continued to masquerade as a
religion.

Communism did not appear on the sense till two decades after the
Swadeshi Movement. But the language of Indian nationalism failed once
again to characterise correctly this new ideology from the West.
Instead, Communism was hailed as good in terms of its goals but bad in
terms of its means. This was a big failure which bore bitter fruits in
subsequent years.

The language of Indian nationalism will have to overcome these
shortcomings as it revives and surveys the national scene anew. It would
have to come out with concrete characterisations, in its own ideom, of
every alien and anti-national force in the field.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE DEVA-ASURA-SANGRAMA

Sanatana Dharma views human life and the world drama as a
deva-asura-sangrama, that is a battle between the forces of light and
darkness. But the battle is not defined as a battle between different
sections of human society on the basis of belief or disbelief in a
particular dogma. Instead that battle is perceived as a perpetual
struggle that takes place in the arena of human nature between animal
appetites on the one hand and aspirations for a larger, deeper and
divinized life on the other. It is in this perspective that Sanatana
Dharma classifies different doctrines into two categories. There are
doctrines which are mere rationalisations of the lower in human nature
and behaviour. There are doctrines which are repositories of the higher
in human consciousness and character. The Gita had a whole chapter, the
deva-asura-sampadvibhaga-yoga, on this particular theme. This has been
the starting point for the language of Indian nationalism.

A broad outline of the battle which is taking place at present in
India's spiritual, cultural, social and political life can be drawn as
follows:

1.  The spiritual traditions which constitute the commonwealth of
    Sanatana Dharma are the forces of light. They are struggling against
    forces of darkness embodied in Islam, Christianity and Communism.
2.  The complex of culture created by the spiritual traditions of
    Sanatana Dharma is the national culture of India. The cultures
    brought in by Islam, Christianity and Communism are imperialist
    impositions. Those who talk about a composite culture are either
    ignorant of what culture really means or are trying to sabotage
    India's national culture in the service of this or that imperialism.
3.  The society which cherishes the spiritual traditions of Sanatana
    Dharma and has inherited the national culture of India is the
    national society of India. It constitutes the nation in this
    country. On the other hand, communities which have been crystallised
    by Islamic, Christian and British imperialism are denationalised
    colonies left over by invaders who have departed. Those who regard
    the national society as only a majority vis-a-vis minority
    communities and who shout slogans of *"Hindu Communalism"* are
    enemies of the nation.
4.  A struggle is taking place in the political arena between the forces
    of nationalism and the forces of anti-nationalism. Leftism, even
    when it is not a part of the Communist movement is, by and large,
    the political expression of a self-alienated psyche. It serves as a
    smoke-screen for all anti-national forces. It has to be exposed and
    eliminated so tha anti-national forces can be seen clearly and
    fought decisively.
5.  It is the duty as well as the destiny of the national society in
    India as constituted at present to clean up all anti-national forces
    at home as a first step to cleaning them up from areas which have
    been alienated by Islamic imperialism. The national society in India
    at present should reclaim all its lost children so that it becomes
    once again the national soceity in its ancestral homeland of
    Bharatavarsha.

The details can be worked out till the language of Indian nationalism
becomes an effective weapon for claiming what is its own and countering
what has been smuggled in by foreign invasions.

Sanatana Dharma has a universal face. Only it has been developed more
fully in India. Moreover, in Sanatana Dharma, nationalism and
internationalism are not opposed; they are two necessary expressions of
the same truth. Islam, Christianity and Communism are not only
denationalising but also dehumanising; they represent truths about a man
less than himself. That is why Indian nationalism rejects them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
