+++
title = "06 4 Pirates in Priest’s Clothing"

+++
**4**  
**Pirates in Priest’s Clothing**

The next encounter between Hinduism and Christianity commenced with the
coming of Christian missionaries to Malabar after Vasco da Gama found
his way to Calicut in AD 1498. It took a serious turn in AD 1542 when
Francis Xavier, a rapacious pirate dressed up as a priest, arrived on
the scene. The proceedings have been preserved by the Christian
participants. They make the most painful reading in the history of
Christianity in India. Francis Xavier had come with the firm resolve of
“uprooting paganism” from the soil of India and planting Christianity in
its place. His sayings and doings have been documented in his numerous
biographies and cited by every historian of the Portuguese episode in
the history of India.

Francis Xavier was convinced that Hindus could not be credited with the
intelligence to know what was good for them. They were completely under
the spell of the Brahmanas who, in turn, were in league with evil
spirits. The first priority in India, therefore, was to free the poor
Hindus from the stranglehold of the Brahmanas and destroy the places
where evil spirits were worshipped. A bounty for the Church was bound to
follow in the form of mass conversions.^([1](#1))

We shall let a Christian historian speak about what the Portuguese did
in their Indian domain. “At least from 1540 onwards,” writes Dr. T. R.
de Souza “and in the island of Goa before that year, all the Hindu idols
had been annihilated or had disappeared, all the temples had been
destroyed and their sites and building materials were in most cases
utilised to erect new Christian churches and chapels. Various vice regal
and Church council decrees banished the Hindu priests from the
Portuguese territories; the public practice of Hindu rites including
marriage rites, was banned; the state took upon itself the task of
bringing up the Hindu orphan children; the Hindus were denied certain
employments, while the Christians were preferred; it was ensured that
the Hindus would not harass those who became Christians, and on the
contrary, the Hindus were obliged to assemble periodically in churches
to listen to preaching or to the refutation of their
religion.”^([2](#2))

Coming to the performance of the missionaries, he continues: “A
particularly grave abuse was practised in Goa in the form of ‘mass
baptism’ and what went before it. The practice was begun by the Jesuits
and was later initiated by the Franciscans also. The Jesuits staged an
annual mass baptism on the Feast of the Conversion of St. Paul (25
January), and in order to secure as many neophytes as possible, a few
days before the ceremony the Jesuits would go through the streets of the
Hindu quarters in pairs, accompanied by their Negro slaves, whom they
would urge to seize the Hindus. When the blacks caught up a fugitive,
they would smear his lips with a piece of beef, making him an
‘untouchable’ among his people. Conversion to Christianity was then his
only option.”^([3](#3))

Finally, he comes to “Financing Church Growth” and concludes: “...the
government transferred to the Church and religious orders the properties
and other sources of revenue that had belonged to the Hindu temples that
had been demolished or to the temple servants who had been converted or
banished. Entire villages were taken over at times for being considered
rebellious and handed over with all their revenues to the Jesuits. In
the villages that had submitted themselves, at times *en masse*, to
being converted, the religious orders promoted competition to build
bigger and bigger churches and more chapels than their neighbouring
villages. Such a competition, drawing funds and diverting labour, from
other important welfare works of the village, was decisively bringing
the village economy in Goa into bankruptcy.”^([4](#4))

During the same period, Christianity was spreading its tentacles to
Bengal. its patrons were the same as in Goa; so also its means and
methods. “The conversion of the Bengalis into Christianity,” writes Dr.
Sisir Kumar Das, “not on y coincided with the activities of the
Portuguese pirates in Bengal but the pirates took an active interest in
it.”^([5](#5)) The Augustinians and Jesuits manned the mission with
bases at Chittagong in East Bengal and Bandel and Hooghly in West
Bengal. Mission stations were established at many places in the
interior. “It was the boast of the Hooghly Portuguese,” records Dr. P.
Thomas, “that they made more Christians in a year by forcible
conversions, of course, than all the missionaries in the East in
ten.”^([6](#6))

The Portuguese captured the young prince of Bhushna, an estate in Dhaka
District. He was converted by an Augustinian friar, Father D’Rozario and
named Dom Antonio de Rozario. The prince, in turn, converted 20,000
Hindus in and around his estate. “The Jesuits came forward,” continues
Dr. Das, “to help the neophytes to minister to the needs of the converts
and this created bitterness between Augustinians and Jesuits... In 1677,
the Provincial at Goa deputed Father Anthony Magalheans, the Rector of
the College at Agra, to visit and report on this problem. According to
his report nearly 25,000, if not more, converts were there but they had
hardly any knowledge of Christianity.... He also observed that many of
them became Christians to get money. *The Marsden Manuscripts* now
preserved in the British Museum containing letters of Jesuit Fathers,
give evidence that Portuguese missionaries gave money to perspective
converts to allure them.”^([7](#7))

The quality of the converts, though bewailed frequently by the
missionaries, did not really perturb them. Frey Duarte Nunes, the
prelate of Goa, had foreseen the situation as early as 1522. According
to him, “even if the first generation of converts was attracted by rice
or by any other way and could hardly be expected to become good
Christians, yet their children would become so with intensive
indoctrination, and each successive generation would be more firmly
rooted.”^([8](#8))

It was a very difficult situation for Hinduism. But, by and large,
Hindus chose to stay in the faith of their forefathers in spite of all
trials and temptations. There was no mass movement towards the Church
except the “mass baptisms” staged by the Jesuits. The mission was in a
fix. The strategy of forced conversions recommended by Francis Xavier
had failed.

Another Jesuit, Robert Di Nobili, came forward with a new strategy. When
he came to the Madura Mission in 1606, he had found it a “desert” in
terms of conversions. He had also seen that Hindus had retained their
reverence for the Brahmanas in spite of missionary insinuations. So he
decided that he would disguise himself as a Brahmana and preach the
gospel by other means. The story is well-known - how he put on an ochre
robe, wore the sacred thread, grew a tuft of hair on his head, took to
vegetarian food, etc., in order to pass as a Brahmana. He also composed
some books in Tamil and Sanskrit, particularly the one which he palmed
off as the *Yajurveda*. When some Hindus suspected from the colour of
his skin that he was a Christian, he lied with a straight face that he
was a high-born Brahmana from Rome!

Some Christian historians credit Di Nobili with converting a hundred
thousand Hindus. Others put the figure at a few hundred. But all agree
that his converts melted away very fast soon after he was exposed by
other missionaries who were either jealous of him or did not like his
methods. Christian theologians hail him as the pioneer of Indigenisation
in India and the founder of the first Christian Ashram. A truly ethical
criterion would dismiss him as a desperate and despicable
scoundrel.^([9](#9))

One wonders how Hinduism would have fared in South India if its
encounter with Christianity under the Portuguese dispensation had
continued uninterrupted. Hindus were helpless wherever Portuguese power
prevailed and Hindus outside could not help as they themselves were
groaning under the heel of Islamic imperialism after the defeat of the
Vijayanagara Empire by a Muslim alliance in 1565 AD. The situation was
saved by the Dutch in the second quarter of the seventeenth century. The
Dutch destroyed the maritime monopoly of the Portuguese and drove them
out of Malabar and southern Tamil Nadu. Christianity had to break its
encounter with Hinduism except in the small Portuguese enclaves where it
continued for two more centuries. But most of the heat applied on
Hinduism had to be taken off because “the fear of retaliatory raids by
the powerful Marathas in the neighbourhood acted as an effective check
on the missionary zeal and coercion.”^([10](#10))

A plausible case has been made by Christian historians, namely, that the
Portuguese were using Christianity as a cover for their predatory
imperialism. But what about the Augustinians and the Dominicans and the
Franciscans, all of whom belonged to the holy orders? And what about
Francis Xavier and his Jesuits? It cannot be overlooked that the
Catholic Church hails an-arch criminal like Francis Xavier as the Patron
Saint of the East. His carcass (or plaster cast) is still worshipped as
a holy relic and the basilica where it is enshrined remains a place of
Christian pilgrimage. It is shameless dishonesty to say that the
Christian doctrine had nothing to do with the atrocities practised in
Goa and Bengal and elsewhere under the Portuguese dispensation.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Francis Xavier was the pioneer of anti-Brahmanism which was
adopted in due course as a major plank in the missionary propaganda by
all Christian denominations. Lord Minto, Governor General of India from
1807 to 1812, submitted a Note to his superiors in London when the
British Parliament was debating whether missionaries should be permitted
in East India Company’s domain under the Charter of 1813. He enclosed
with his Note some “propaganda material used by the missionaries” and,
referring to one missionary tract in particular, wrote: “The remainder
of this tract seems to aim principally at a general massacre of the
Brahmanas” (M. D. David (ed.), *Western Colonialism in Asia and
Christianity*, Bombay, 1988, p. 85). Anti-Brahmanism has become the
dominant theme in the speeches and writings of Indian secularists of all
sorts.

[²](#2a) M.D. David (ed.), *op. cit.,* p. 17.

[³](#3a) *Ibid.,* p. 19.

[⁴](#4a) *Ibid.,* pp. 24-35. For a detailed account of Christian doings
in Goa, see A.K. Priolkar, *The Goa Inquisition*, Bombay, 1961, Voice of
India reprint, New Delhi, 1991 and 1996.

[⁵](#5a) Sisir Kumar Das, *The Shadow of the Cross*, New Delhi, 1974, p.
4.

[⁶](#6a) P. Thomas, *Christians and Christianity in India and Pakistan*,
London, 1954, p. 114.

[⁷](#7a) Sisir Kumar Das, *op. cat.,* p. 5.

[⁸](#8a) M. D. David (ed.), *op. cit.,* p. 8.

[⁹](#9a) The masquerade of Robert Di Nobili has been described in detail
in Sita Ram Goel, *Catholic Ashrams: Sannyasins or Swindlers?*, Voice of
India, New Delhi, 1995.

[¹⁰](#10a) M.D. David (ed.), *op. cit.,* p. 19.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
