+++
title = "08 6 Encounter in Tamil Nadu"

+++
**6**  
**Encounter in Tamil Nadu**

Ziegenbalg who was “the most aggressive evangelist of this
period”^([1](#1)) came from the Lutheran seminary at Halle in Germany. 
Ostensibly, the Lutheran mission to Tranquebar was patronised by
Frederick IV, King of Denmark.  But its real sponsor was the British
Government who financed it through the Society for the Propagation of
Christian Knowledge (SPCK), floated in 1798.  This is obvious from *The
Epistle Dedicatory* which J. Thomas Philipps attached to his English
translation of Ziegenbalg’s *Conferences* with Brahmanas.^([2](#2)) *The
Epistle* is addressed to the King of England.  “The following
*Conferences*,” wrote Philipps, “being an essay to recommend to the
*Heathens* in the *East Indies* that faith, of which Your Majesty is the
*Glorious Defender*, I have humbly presumed to lay them at your Royal
Feet, as a pledge of the indefatigable labours of the *Protestant
Missionaries* sent thither by the King of Denmark.  One of the
*Missionaries* had the honour to be graciously received by Your Majesty
here in *London* on his return to India.  They have already acknowledged
the charitable assistances they have received from Your Majesty’s
subjects both in *Europe* and in the *East Indies*.” The British
invaders of India did not want to be known as patrons of Christianity
till a more opportune time.

The places where Ziegenbalg had built his mission stations were in the
vicinity of great centres of Hindu learning such as Srirangam, Tanjore,
Madura, Kanchi, Chidambram and Tirupathi.  He travelled around,
established contacts with the Brahmanas, and held as many as 54
conversations with them.  He recorded the conversations in some detail
and passed them on to Halle which published them from 1715 onwards.  “In
a notable debate,” writes P. Thomas, “held under the auspices of the
Dutch in Negapatnam, Ziegenbalg disputed with a Brahmin for five hours
and far from converting the Brahmin, the missionary came away with an
excess of admiration for the intellectual gifts of his
adversary.”^([3](#3)) Sometimes, the Brahmanas visited Ziegenbalg and
held discourse with him.  Only thirty-four of these conversations were
translated and published in English in 1719.  The Preface to the English
translation sums up the Brahmana’s “Divine Law sent from Heaven” in the
following eight Precepts:

> I. Thou shalt not kill any living creature whatsoever it be, having
> life in the same: For thou art a creature of mine and so is it: Thou
> art endued with soul and it is endued with the same.  Thou shalt not
> therefore spill the blood of anything that is mine.
>
> II\. Thou shalt make a covenant with all thy five senses.  First, with
> thy eyes, that they behold not things that be evil.  Secondly, with
> thy ears, that they hear not things that be evil.  Thirdly, with thy
> tongue, that it speaks not things that be evil.  Fourthly, with thy
> palate, that it takes nothing that be evil; as wine, or the flesh of
> living creatures.  Fifthly, with thy hands, that they touch not things
> defiled.  
>
> III.  Thou shalt duly observe the times of devotion, thy washings,
> worshippings and prayers to the Lord thy God, with a pure and upright
> heart.
>
> IV\. Thou shalt not tell false tales, or utter things untrue, by which
> thou mightest defraud thy brother in dealings, bargains or contracts;
> by this consenage to work thy own peculiar advantage.
>
> V. Thou shalt be charitable to the poor and administer to his need,
> meat, drink, and money, as his necessity requires, and thine own
> ability enableth thee to give.
>
> VI\. Thou shalt not oppress, injure or do violence to the poor, using
> thy power unjustly to the ruin and overthrow of thy brother.
>
> VII\. Thou shalt celebrate certain festivals; yet not pampering thy
> body with excess of anything; but shalt observe certain seasons for
> fasting, and break off some hours by watching, that thou may’st be
> fitter for devotion and holiness.

VIII. Thou shalt not steal from thy brother anything, however little it
be, of things committed to thy trust in thy profession or calling; but
content thyself with that which he shall give thee as thine hire;
considering that thou has not right to that which another man calleth
his.^([4](#4)) 

Yet according to the same Preface, “there is not, perhaps, a more wicked
race of men treading upon God’s earth.” “The Brahmanas”, it continues,
“are the greatest impostors in the world; their talent lies in inventing
new fables every day, and making them pass for incomprehensible
mysteries among the vulgar.”^([5](#5)) Whatever be the facts, Christian
conclusions remain the same.  That is because Christianity is compelled
by its doctrine to be at war with other cultures, howsoever superior.

The next thing which Ziegenbalg did in 1712 was to send a large number
of letters to a selection of Hindus Brahmanas and non-Brahmanas -
inviting answers to a number of questions.  “The purpose of this
correspondence,” writes Dr. H. Grafe, “as stated by Ziegenbalg, is
three-fold:

1\. To make for increased publicity of the missionaries’ work,  
2. To reach people whom they are not able to meet personally,   
3. To get better informed about Hinduism and particularly about Hindu
objections to Christian Faith.  In short: Publicity, evangelism and
religious research, all these were in Ziegenbalg’s mind.”^([6](#6))

Ziegenbalg attached to these letters a printed booklet, *Abominable
Heathenism*, which described Hinduism as a state of *ajñAna* (ignorance)
and accused it of five sins-idolatory, fornication, fraud, quarrel,
witchcraft and laziness.^([7](#7)) It was “the very first product of the
Tamil Press at Tranquebar ‘inaugurating the modern era of Tamil
book-printing’,” as H.W. Gensichen puts it.^([8](#8))

The letters which Ziegenbalg received from Hindus in reply to his
questions were translated by him into German and forwarded to Halle in
two batches of 58 and 46.  The theologian, A.H. Francke, who scrutinised
them, flared up, “The missionaries were sent out to exterminate
heathenism in India, not to spread heathen nonsense all over Europe.”
When Ziegenbalg received the reprimand, he wrote back, “We should be of
the opinion that such materials quite Certainty are suitable for
communication to the public.  Should you, however, find anything about
which you have hesitations to communicate it to the public you have
always the liberty to *change*, to *improve*, or omit the same in this
as well as in other tracts.”^([9](#9))

Finally, 99 letters were published, 55 in 1713 and 44 in 1717.  Five
letters were totally suppressed.  No one knows how far the published
ones were edited.  The publication of the first batch, however, carried
the following introduction: “On our part we could not decide in favour
of withholding the Tamil correspondence from the public.  True, it
contains much which is partly foolish, partly detestable.  Especially,
it tells of fornication and impurity with which idol worship of our own
past as well as Tamil worship are concerned.  However, if we had omitted
such things and communicated those good things only, which the heathens
still recognise and possess by the *light of nature*, some might
conceive of the false idea, that heathenism is not so bad and corrupt
after all.”^([10](#10)) 

We shall give only a summary of opinions which, according to these
letters, Hindus had of Christianity.

The most common reason given by Hindus of why they despised Christianity
was that most Christians led a very unclean life - slaughtering and
eating cows and other animals, guzzling strong drinks, not washing after
easing themselves, not brushing their teeth before or after meals,
spitting around in their houses, mating with their wives in menses,
etc.  One correspondent was more forthright.  The Christians, he said,
“beat and kill one another, swear, fornicate, play, do not give any help
to travellers and pilgrims and concern themselves only with eating and
drinking, beautiful dresses and the decoration of their
houses.”^([11](#11)) Ziegenbalg had himself observed that Christians
were “so much debauched in their manners” and “so given to gluttony,
drunkenness, lewdness, cursing, swearing, cheating, cozening” besides
being “proud and insulting in their conduct” that many Indians, judging
the religion by its effects upon its followers, “could not be inclined
to embrace Christianity.”^([12](#12))

Tamil Hindus were also telling Ziegenbalg that there was something
seriously wrong with the doctrine which inculcated such beastly
behaviour, particularly in the converts who were leading disciplined
lives before they became Christians.  Christian writers dismiss these
Hindu observations as “superficial objections.” But Mahatma Gandhi, as
we shall see, noticed the same behaviour of converts and advised the
Christians to demonstrate by their living rather than preaching that
they had a better doctrine.

Hindus also pointed to the “hatred and persecution between various
Christian sects”, leading to doubts as to which of them represented real
Christianity.  But more serious doubts were raised about Jesus, the god
of the Christians.  “To our reason,” they said, “it does not appear very
sensible that they believe in a God who was tortured and killed by his
own people.”^([13](#13)) One correspondent asked, “Why did he at last
have to hang on the cross like a thief? How is it possible that he being
true God could die?”^([14](#14)) Another correspondent put it more
plainly: “Does it not seem the height of unreasonableness to suppose him
to be the saviour of the world who was of mean parentage, had as mean an
education, was persecuted by his countrymen, and at last was hanged by
public Authority upon an infamous cross?”^([15](#15)) Hindus found it
hard to believe that Jesus was God and Son of God and Holy Ghost at the
same time: “How is it possible that God who is only one nevertheless is
threefold?”^([16](#16))

Hindus had no use for the Christian doctrine of original sin.  They held
that “the bad sins spring out of one’s own wickedness, vice, evil will,
haughtiness and corrupt desires of like nature,”^([17](#17)) rather than
inherited from Adam and Eve.  They rejected outright the doctrine of
free grace: “Nobody attains salvation for nothing, because God does not
give his grace to those who are lazy and live like animals.  There must
he good works, sacrifice, worship, faith and love.”^([18](#18)) One
correspondent observed, “I have never seen hitherto any of all you
Christians taking any care of the saving of his own soul by doing
Penance for his sins: whereas we Malabarians undergo many tedious and
long Penances, denying ourselves all the pleasures of this Life... But I
see no such thing practis’d among you Christians.”^([19](#19a)) Another
asked, “Will nobody else be saved in the world except
Christians?” ^([20](#20))

The doctrine of ever-lasting punishment for “unbelievers” was found
repugnant: “Seeing that we live in this world but a few years and our
sinful Actions are, as to their Duration, transitory; why then should
the Punishment be Eternal?  The necessary proportion attending
distributive justice, is not observ’d here.”^([21](#21)) One
correspondent asked, “If the evil ones are being condemned to hell, do
they have to remain in hell or may hope for salvation
afterwards?”^([22](#22)) Another juxtaposed the Hindu doctrine of
*mukti* for all creatures: “(It is) firmly believed, among us, that not
only mankind but all Birds, and Beasts of the Fields, shall be Eternally
Happy after many repeated Nativities or Regenerations, qualifying them
for the Enjoyment of God.”^([23](#23)) The central Christian sacrament
also came in for criticism: “When they administer the Sacrament, they
say that the bread is the holy body and they drink the holy blood of
Christ, which I am at a loss to grasp.”^([24](#24))

That exhausted the list.  There was nothing else in Christianity which
Hindus could examine specifically, however verbose Ziegenbalg might have
been about the merits of his creed.

Next, the Hindus turned to a defence of their own Sanatana Dharma.  The
first thing they said was that “we have a venerable Antiquity on our
side” and that “we are an Ancient Nation, whose Religion is as old as
the world itself.”^([25](#25)) There was an implied advice that
Christianity which was born only yesterday should have some sense of
humility.

Religion, it was pointed out, was not such a simple matter as the
missionaries had assumed.  It needed deep deliberation.  “Every
religion,” said one correspondent, “claims to be the only true
religion.  There is even dispute among the Tamilians whether Vishnu or
Siva is the highest god... how can we accept a strange religion as long
as we do not properly know the truth in our own.”^([26](#26)) In reply
to Ziegenbalg’s question, “why do the Tamilians not leave their false
precepts and convert to the true precepts of Christianity?”, another
correspondent replied, “You have to prove the presupposition of the
question.”^([27](#27))

Ziegenbalg’s most serious charge was that Hindus neglected One God and
worshipped many others.  One correspondent replied, “The One God is not
being neglected even where a multitude of Gods is believed in because in
them he alone is being worshipped, after they have obtained salvation
through him.”^([28](#28)) Another observed, “We teach the people to
worship one only, and not many Gods; and the Notion of a plurality of
Gods comes hence, viz., because God is variously represented under
different names; Yet he is still but One God as Gold is but one, as to
its kind, tho’ wrought into a Thousand different
figures.”^([29](#29)) Yet another replied, “Siva is not more than one,
but has many names, Vishnu is not more than one… and one is all in all,
and through him alone we attain to salvation, but not through anybody
else.”^([30](#30))

Hindus pointed out repeatedly that different religions are suited to
different temperaments so that different nations have different
religions.  Chiding Ziegenbalg for prescribing one religion for all, a
correspondent said, “Everything you write and speak amounts to contempt
and total rejection of our religion and our worship of God… God is
manifold in his creatures and manifold in his creations.  Hence he wants
also to be worshipped in manifold way.”^([31](#31)) Another
correspondent said the same thing more concretely: “For as Christ in
Europe was made Man, so here our God Wischtnu^([32](#32)) was born among
us Malabarians, and as you hope for salvation through Christ, so we hope
for salvation through Wischtnu, and to save you one way, and us another,
is one of the Pastimes and Diversions of Almighty God.”^([33](#33))

One of Ziegenbalg’s questions was whether “Hindu worship exists in
external rites only or whether there is something in one word to it
which is done from the heart of hearts.” One correspondent replied,
“Yes, Love, Faith, and Faithfulness, or in one word Bhakti are much more
important than rites, and all external works are useless and vain
without love, faith and faithfulness towards the
Lord.”^([34](#34)) Another explained, “Although the Supreme Being is
present in all souls and there is faith and faithfulness in many men,
whatever religion they adhere to, still this faith and faithfulness
cannot be perceived and recognised in their hearts.  It must find
outward expression.”^([35](#35)) In other words, a good life alone
proves that there is inner faith.

There is no evidence that Ziegenbalg ever pondered over what the
Brahmanas had told him during his conversations with them or what his
Hindu correspondents had conveyed to him.  What we know is that he used
the conversations as well as the correspondence for compiling two books
*Genealogy of Malabar Gods* completed in 1711 and *Malabar Heathendom*
completed in 1713 - in which he repeated all that he had said in his
earlier book, *Abominable Heathenism*.  The dialogue with Hindus had
gone completely over his Christian head.

In his Preface to *Malabar Heathendom*, he wrote: “Meanwhile, the clear
exposure of this Indian heathenism may be regarded as a sign that God,
at this time, intends to do some special thing for these heathens, and
to visit them by granting them grace to be converted.  He will thereby
also try the Christian people in Europe to whom this is made known, if
some will pity their condition, and think of means through which the
Word of grace and all the means of salvation may be offered unto them
effectually for their conversion.” Again, whatever be the facts, the
conclusions drawn by Christian missionaries remain the same!

The latter-day Christian historians, however, have understood what had
really happened.  “This encounter shows,” comments Dr. H. Grafe, “that
Hindus seriously examined the challenge to their religion that came from
Christianity.  They were drawn into a dialogue of asking and replying,
of accusing and excusing, and of trying to understand... However,
although some subjects treated show considerable depth in spiritual
quest, on the whole one cannot escape the impression that politeness and
cautiousness exerted some restraint and the whole exchange was regarded
as a sort of vanguard battle at which not all ammunition was used
up.”^([36](#36)) Dr. Arasaratnam observes, “It was now clear that
Christian evangelism was going to be a hard, rigorous, intellectual
grind and missionaries would come up against the custodians of Hindu
tradition who would present the case for Hinduism.”^([37](#37))  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) S. Arasaratnam, op.cit., p. 20

[²](#2a) *Thirty-Four Conferences Between the Danish Missionaries and
Malabarian Brahmans (or Heathen Priests) in the East Indies, London*,
1719.  The Brahmanas referred to were really from Tamil Nadu.  But
Christian missionaries in that period were too full of Malabar to make
the distinction.

[³](#3a) P. Thomas, *op. cit.,* pp. 153-154.

[⁴](#4a) *Thirty-Four Conferences*, pp. v-viii.

[⁵](#5a) *Ibid.,* pp. iii-iv.

[⁶](#6a) ‘Hindu Apologetics at the Beginning of the Protestant Mission
Era in India’, by H. Grafe in *Indian Church History Review*, June,
1972, p. 48.

[⁷](#7a) *Ibid.,* P. 64.

[⁸](#8a) *Ibid.,* p. 58.

[⁹](#9a) Francke and Ziegenbalg quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 46.  Emphasis
added.

[¹⁰](#10a) *Ibid.,* p. 47.  Emphasis added.

[¹¹](#11a) *Ibid.,* p. 55.

[¹²](#12a) R. C. Majumdar (ed.), *The History and Culture of the Indian
People*, Volume X: *British Paramountcy And Indian Renaissance*, Part
II, 2nd edition, Bombay, 1981, p. 150.

[¹³](#13a) Quoted in H. Grafe, *op. cit.,* p. 56.

[¹⁴](#14a) *Ibid.,* p. 57.

[¹⁵](#15a) Quoted in Richard Fox Young, *op. cit.,* p. 24.

[¹⁶](#16a) Quoted in H. Grafe, *op. cit.,* p. 56.

[¹⁷](#17a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 63.

[¹⁸](#18a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 56.

[¹⁹](#19a) Quoted in Richard Fox Young, *op. cit.,* p. 24.

[²⁰](#20a) Quoted in H. Grafe, *op. cit.,* p. 57.

[²¹](#21a) Quoted in Richard Fox Young, *op. cit.,* p. 24.

[²²](#22a) Quoted in H. Grafe, *op. cit.,* p. 57.

[²³](#23a) Quoted in Richard Fox Young, *op. cit.,* p. 24.

[²⁴](#24a) Quoted in H. Grafe, *op. cit.,* p. 55.

[²⁵](#25a) Quoted in Richard Fox Young, *op. cit.,* p. 23.

[²⁶](#26a) Quoted in H. Grafe, *op. cit.,* p. 61.

[²⁷](#27a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 64.

[²⁸](#28a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 60.

[²⁹](#29a) Quoted in Richard Fox Young, *op. cit.,* p. 24.

[³⁰](#30a) Quoted in H. Grafe, *op. cit.,* p. 66.

[³¹](#31a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 65.

[³²](#32a) The missionary spelling of Vishnu.

[³³](#33a) Quoted in Richard Fox Young, *op. cit.,* p. 23.

[³⁴](#34a) Quoted by H. Grafe, *op. cit.,* p. 66.

[³⁵](#35a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* pp. 66-67.

[³⁶](#36a) H. Grafe, *op. cit.,* pp. 68-69.

[³⁷](#37a) S. Arasaratnam, *op. cit.,* p. 33.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
