+++
title = "11 9 Encounter in Maharashtra"

+++
**9**  
**Encounter in Maharashtra**

Another dialogue between Hinduism and Christianity was held soon after
the one in Calcutta.  This time the venue was Bombay, the second most
important city founded by the British and another storm centre of
missionary activity against Hinduism.  John Wilson, after whom the
Wilson College in Bombay is named, was an important Presbyterian
missionary from Scotland.  He “debated for six successive evenings with
a pandit named Morabhatta Dandekara” in February, 1831.  “John Wilson’s
knowledge of Hindu literature,” we are told, “was first-rate, but he did
not hesitate to subject what he read to withering ridicule from his
perspective as a Christian.  Inconsistencies in the Puranas were among
his special targets.” He held debates with Zoroastrians and Muslims
also.  But “Hindus proved to be his dogged opponents.”^([1](#1))

Wilson invited the Brahmanas for a debate on May 31, 1830, but he
himself failed to turn up.  A native convert, Ram Chandra, had to serve
as his substitute.  Ram Chandra informed the Brahmanas that Jesus was
the second person of the Trinity who took “a human birth, and died for
the world.” A Brahmana asked Ram Chandra not to “use that expression”
and said that “God does not die.” Next the Brahmana speculated that
“Jesus Christ was some philosopher (*sadhoo*) among you” but wondered
why so much fuss was being made about him when “we have a thousand
philosophers and saints like Jesus Christ.” Ram Chandra asked if Rama or
Krishna or any other Hindu god “gave his life for you.” The Brahmana
replied, “Why should they give their lives when they could save us in
many other ways?” Ram Chandra asked a few more questions about Rama and
concluded that Rama had lived for himself and not for others.^([2](#3))

The proceedings of the debate that finally took place between Dandekara
and Wilson in February 1831, have not been preserved.  Wilson wrote a
book, *An Exposure of the Hindu Religion*, in 1832.  It was a reply to
Dandekara’s Marathi book, *SrihindudharmasthApanA*, published earlier. 
The original in Marathi has been lost, but Wilson “prefixed” to his
reply an English translation of it.  We do not have Wilson’s book before
us.  What we have are extracts from it regarding Dandekara’s view of
several Christian doctrines.

Dandekara defends the deeds of Hindu gods which the missionaries
considered immoral.  He says that those deeds are virtuous which “have
as much power as image worship itself to create in some pure and holy
dispositions.” In any case, “These deeds, when narrowly conceived, are
even far better than those virtuous actions of Christ’s that you
mention.”^([3](#3)) Next, he takes up the Christian doctrine of
Trinity.  He finds it difficult to understand how “Those who hold these
doctrines” of three divinities “maintain that the Unity of God is
undestroyed.” But the more important point he makes is that if “these
three divinities occasion no bewilderment of mind” to the Christians
“how can the worship of Rama, Krishna and other gods, occasion...
bewilderment to us?”^([4](#4))

Coming to the atoning death of Jesus, Dandekara sees no merit in a God
who “sent his son into the world... for the salvation of men” and then
“brought him into a state so reproachful and so appalling.” He wonders
why this God started by creating sin and then “unheard of suffering” for
the redemption of that sin.  He asks, “Had he no other way of saving the
world?  Why, pray, should he put himself to so much ado?” He says that
Rama, Krishna and other incarnations have for their “appropriate object
the salvation of the world.” But they “sported themselves at pleasure,
and by these very sports accomplished the salvation of those who took
refuge in their mercy.” They gave salvation “without suffering pain at
all to be compared with that of Christ and without submitting to a
reproachful death like him.” He asks the Christians it “whether these
actions of Rama, Krishna and the rest, or those of your Jesus Christ are
better.”^([5](#5))

Dandekara sees no sense in Christian sacraments such as taking “a piece
of bread, and muttering a few words to eat it up,” drinking wine and
pouring “water on the head.” These, he says, are “all material things”
from which no “merit and holiness” can result.  They cannot entitle a
man “to a state of nearness to God and emancipation from matter.”
Compared to the bread and wine and water in a pot, the water of the
Ganga “sanctified by the touch of Krishna’s feet or from the
contemplation of his image” is far more pure.  Yet the Christians say
that the water of the Ganga creates “an increase of
ignorance.” Dandekara concludes that Christians doctrines being hollow
and Christian sacraments meaningless, the Hindu who favours them and
finds Hinduism objectionable, does so as a result of sin committed in
his former birth.  The Hindu who converts to Christianity is like the
man who suspects his own mother of adultery, “when he himself was
conceived in her womb.”^([6](#6))

Another Hindu whom Wilson tried to refute in A Second Exposure of *Hindu
Religion*, published in 1834, was Narayan Rao, a teacher of English in a
college at Satara.  Rao wrote a Marathi book *SvadeshadharmAbhimAni*
expounding Vedanta and examining the Bible.  We have with us neither
Rao’s book nor Wilson’s refutation of it.  What we have are extracts in
an English translation from Rao’s criticism of the Old and the New
Testaments.

Rao finds the God of the Old Testament frail as he had to take rest for
a day after being busy with creation for six days. He seems to have “a
figure like man” because the first man he created by breathing into an
“image of clay” was “after his own image.” He cannot be credited with
omniscience because he forgot to create a female companion when he
created Adam.  He had to put Adam to sleep and steal one of Adam’s bones
for making Eve.  As he did not seek Adam’s permission, he “was guilly of
theft.” He is also unjust and vindictive.  He cannot be credited with
omnipotence either as he could not stop the Devil from telling to Adam
and Eve the truth about the Tree of Knowledge.  Moreover, the Devil is
more truthful because he revealed to Adam and Eve what God had concealed
from them.  The God of the Old Testament, on the other hand, proved
himself to be unjust and vindictive by cursing Adam and Eve for no fault
of their’s.^([7](#7))

Coming to the New Testament, Rao finds no improvement in the character
of its God.  He consorted secretly with the wife of Joseph “who was an
upright man.” It was only when Joseph found Mary pregnant and “thought
of dismissing her privately” without raising a public scandal that God
told the truth to him in a dream.  A better course for him would have
been that since he desired Mary, he should have secured her divorce from
Joseph.  One wonders whether the Christians are praising or denouncing
God by presenting him in this manner.  God should certainly feel
irritated with the Christian scripture.

Nor is the birth of Jesus a commendable event.  As soon is Jesus is
born, “a great number of infants are unreasonably put to death” by
Herod.  Jesus did not act like God at all.  Instead of facing Herod and
preventing the death of the infants, he ran away to Egypt.  He “did
nothing whatever for the establishment of religion” as long as Herod
lived.  He came out of hiding only when Herod was dead.  “It hence
appears that Herod was more powerful than Jesus.  It is impossible,
therefore, that he, who by his flight, became murderer of children, and
was so despicable in power, can be either the Son of God, or bear any
relation to God whatever.”^([8](#8))

Rao finds the Christian scripture equally despicable for saying that all
those who have not accepted Christ as the only saviour will go to hell. 
Yet Christian teachers “are gent to Hindustan eighteen hundred years
after Christ.” The consequence of this delay has been that “innumerable
millions of people have gone, and will continue to go, into hell.” That
only proves that the Christian scripture is false.  If there had been
any truth in it “Christian teachers... should have been sent forth into
all the world at the time of Christ.” Finally, Rao draws the
“unavoidable conclusion” from these contradictions in the Christian
scripture.  He says that “the Christian religion is false” and “the
Padres, taking advantage of the sovereignty of the people of their
caste, have come to this country for the express purpose of practising
deceit, and leading the people to apostasy.”^([9](#9))

Dr. Richard Fox Young to whose book we owe the extracts from Narayan
Rao’s examination of the two Testaments, sees only “literalistic
exegesis” in Narayan Rao’s conclusions.  He sees nothing wrong in the
Christian exegesis which he himself admits to be equally literalistic. 
On the contrary, he justifies missionary retailing of miracles in terms
of Hindu credulity!  The implication is that the missionaries would have
been philosophical in their approach if they had found a philosophically
inclined audience among the Hindus.  There is no evidence that
Christianity has had any philosophical equipment at any time. 
Christians insist on a literal acceptance of their own scripture because
they themselves believe that this scripture is divinely inspired.  And
they believe just the opposite about Hindu Shastras. Narayan Rao was
only meeting them on their own level.  Wilson’s mention of his work on
Vedanta proves that unlike the Christian missionaries he was quite
capable of philosophical discourse also.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Richard Fox Young, *op. cit.,* p. 25.

[²](#2a) *Ibid.,* p. 25-26.

[³](#3a) *Ibid.,* p. 26.

[⁴](#4a) *Ibid.,* p. 27.

[⁵](#5a) *Ibid.,* pp. 27-28.

[⁶](#6a) *Ibid.,* p. 28.

[⁷](#7a) *Ibid.,* p. 29.

[⁸](#8a) *Ibid.,* pp. 29-30.

[⁹](#9a) *Ibid.,* p. 30.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
