+++
title = "14 12 Second Encounter in Tamil Nadu"

+++
**12**  
**Second Encounter in Tamil Nadu**

While a heated dialogue between Hinduism and Christianity was going on
in the North, with Maharshi Dayananda in the forefront, another dialogue
was taking shape in South India.  Its centre was in the Cauvery Delta,
particularly the District of Tiruchirapally, which had witnessed the
first Hindu-Christian dialogue nearly 175 years earlier.  This
stronghold of Hindu learning had invited concentrated missionary
attention since the days of the Portuguese pirates.  One foreign mission
after another had descended on the scene and mounted assaults on
Hinduism in various forms.  The flow of Christian finance and manpower
from abroad was unceasing and in ever-increasing quantities, as it
remains today.

We have seen already how the British sponsored Royal Danish Mission
(RDM) had set up a station at Tranquebar in 1706 under the leadership of
Ziegenbalg.  The same mission set up another station at Tanjore in
1732.  In the same year, the Society for Promotion of Christian
Knowledge (SPCK) started operating from Tiruchirapally and Tanjore and
the Society for Propagation of the Gospel (SPG) from Tiruchirapally. 
The region remained disturbed during the next fifty years due to English
and French intrusions and internecine wars among native powers.  But as
soon as conditions became favourable for missionary work, the SPCK set
up a second centre at Negapatinam in 1785.  It was followed by the
London Missionary Society (LMS) which started working from Kumbakonam in
1805.  In 1825 the SPG set up a second station at Tanjore and the Church
Missionary Society (CMS) began work from Mayavaram.  In 1833, the SPG
set up its third and fourth stations at Tranquebar and Negapatinam. 
Meanwhile, the Methodists had arrived at Negapatinam in 1820 and
Melanattam in 1830.  They extended their activities to Mannargudi in
1835, Tiruchirapally in 1847, Tiruvarur in 1859, Karur in 1861 and
Dharapuram in 1881.  In due course, they were to become the dominant
mission in this area.  But other missions were not slack.  In every
case, the headquarters was only the starting point for reaching out into
the interior.  By the beginning of the ninth decade of the nineteenth
century, the whole region had become honeycombed with mission stations.

The message which the missionaries carried everywhere was very simple. 
“That all might understand,” reported Dr. Elijah Hoole in 1824, “I spoke
plain and loud, and set forth the value of the soul and the importance
of its salvation, and that my business was to raise concern for its
welfare in all to whom I had access; that by sin we are exposed to death
and hell, but that the one true God who had made us, not willing that
any should perish, had found a ransom, at the same time giving us true
Vedam, teaching us how to obtain and keep the blessings purchased for us
by Jesus Christ; that the truths of the Bible were the object of faith,
and the precepts of it the rule of practice.”^([1](#1))

The missionary view of Hinduism had remained stable since the days of
Ziegenbalg.  According to a missionary report of 1821, “an immense
population lies enslaved in the grossest darkness.” Hindu temple worship
was “calculated to corrupt the heart, to sensualize the mind and to lead
to every description of vice.” James Mowat, a Methodist missionary wrote
in a letter to his headquarters at London, “I never had so plain
demonstration of depravity heathenism binds upon its votaries in the
shape of religion.  The principal pagoda abounds with the most obscene
and polluting representations, and decidedly proves, if proof be
necessary, how greatly this people need the hallowing light of
Christianity.” Naturally, the Hindus invited “tenderest pity” from the
missionaries who used “all their means to rescue them from impending
destruction.”^([2](#2))

The missionaries were fully equipped to undertake the task.  “They
visited Choultries, market places and bathing tanks, preached in the
city streets, under the shadow of idolcars, under the canopy of
country-trees, in the open square of the villages and other places where
they could meet a good number of people.  In the villages situated in
the immediate neighbourhood of each mission station, the Gospel was
preached very often, while places more remote were visited less
frequently.  These visits were generally undertaken by missionaries
accompanied by a staff of native preachers.  A tent would be pitched at
a suitable centre and the whole neighbourhood would be visited.  The
singing of Christian lyrics and hymns accompanied by musical instruments
soon attracted a congregation.”^([3](#3))

Amore effective weapon in the hands of the missionaries was their
network of educational institutions.  The South Indian Missionary
Conference held in 1858 had left nobody in doubt as to what the
missionary schools and colleges were trying to achieve.  “The object of
all missionary labour,” proclaimed the Conference report, “is, or should
be not primarily the civilization but the evangelisation of the
heathen.  Schools may be regarded as converting agencies, and their
value estimated by the number who are led by the instruction they
receive to renounce idolatry and make an open profession of
Christianity; or the principal object aimed at may be the raising up of
Native helpers in the Missionary work.  Each of these is a legitimate
object of Missionary labour and the value of any system of education as
a Missionary Agency, must be tested by its adaptedness to accomplish one
or more of these objects.”^([4](#4)) The Bible was compulsory reading in
all missionary schools and colleges.  A Christian atmosphere was created
all around by daily public worship, conversations and essay competitions
on theological themes, textbooks which praised Christianity and
denounced Hinduism, and employment of as many Christian teachers as
possible.

Missionary education was showing results in Hindu homes.  “The nation
regrets,” wrote *The Hindu Reformer and Politician of Madras*, “that
money and trouble are spent on young men who return to their household
with contempt for the practices and beliefs of their relations and
ancestors, and the young men regret that their homes and community are
attached to what seems to them to be foolishness and
superstition.”^([5](#5)) Only a few Hindus who attended missionary
schools and colleges came out unscathed.  Among these few there could be
found some spirited ones whose self-respect had been hurt by the
missionary campaign against everything they cherished most and who
harboured in their hearts nothing but contempt for Christianity.  But
they were helpless because the missionaries had a monopoly of
educational institutions.

Hindus did try to meet the challenge with whatever means they could
mobilise, but there was no question of matching missionary resources. 
Their ancient and catholic culture inhibited them from descending to the
level of the missionaries, either in language or in demonstrativeness. 
The missionaries were aware of these tolerant and civilized inhibitions
and were able to exploit them until the Theosophist leaders, Madame
Blavatsky and Colonel Olcott, arrived on the scene in 1878.  They knew
Christianity A to Z and had witnessed its rapid decline in the West due
to the humanist and rationalist examination of Christian scriptures,
Christian institutions and Christian history.  Their sympathies were
entirely with Hinduism which they honoured as the most ancient and
profound religion known to man.  From their headquarters at Adyar,
Madras, they started publishing magazines which described the
missionaries as “thickskulled, bigoted bloodhounds” and Christianity as
“the purest idiotic trash.” The Bible for them was “senseless gossip”,
“the most disgusting filth”, and the “obscenest book ever touched by
human hands.” The captions and conclusions were backed by evidence from
Christian sources.  The writings of Bradlaugh, the anti-Christian
British labour leader, also became known to the Hindus around this time.

The cumulative result of all these developments was the formation of the
Hindus Tract Society in 1887.  It had its headquarters in Madras.  “We
have painfully witnessed,” said the founders of the Society, “the
injustice done to our religion by foreign and native Christian
missionaries.  Baseless charges were trumped up against it; and relying
on the poverty of the masses and the ignorance that generally prevails
among them regarding their own religion and their own traditions, those
apostles of foreign creeds have, by means fair or foul, attempted and
even succeeded to some extent in leading our poor brethren astray.  This
aroused in us the instinct of self-preservation, and made us see the
need of some organisation like the present one; and since the Christian
propaganda could only thrive by destroying the better religion
bequeathed to us by our ancestors, we were obliged to use against the
missionaries their own weapons.”^([6](#6)) The Society soon engaged
itself in publishing tracts, sending out Hindu preachers and arranging
open air lectures.

We do not have any of the tracts before us, but a quotation from one of
them published in 1888 shows the trend.  “How many hundreds of
thousands,” it said, “have these padres turned to Christianity and keep
on turning!  How many hundreds of children have they swallowed up!  On
how many more they have cast their nets!  How much evil is yet to come
upon us by their means!  If we sleep as heretofore, in a short time they
will turn all to Christianity without exceptions, and our temples will
he changed into churches... When Christianity has laid waste the land,
will a blade of Hinduism grow there?  When the flood rushes up over our
heads it will be too late.  It is because of our carelessness that these
strangers insult our gods in the open streets during our
festivals.”^([7](#7)) The names of the tracts which followed in 1889 are
interesting – “Jesus only a man”, “Are we also sinners?”, “Is Jesus
Christ God ?”, “Supporting idol-worship and refuting Christianity”, “Why
should missionaries despise other religions without examining their
own?”, “History of Christianity”, “Women’s position according to the
Bible”, “The evil disguises and inconsistencies of the Salvation Army”,
“Jehovah’s character according to the Bible”.

The Hindu Tract Society was followed by the Advaita Sabha of Kumbakonam
formed in 1895 and the Shaiva Siddhanta Sabha of South India formed in
1896.  They met the missionary challenge in their own ways.  More and
more skeletons were brought out of Christianity’s cupboard.  The
missionaries found it hard to hide them.  They were being given a taste
of their own medicine.  Rev. Woodward had observed triumphantly in 1887
that “Christianity and Hinduism are in deadly conflict” and that
“Hinduism is being put on its mettle.”^([8](#8)) By the end of the
decade, his brethren in the various missions were moaning that Hinduism
was shedding its traditional tolerance and showing hostility towards a
sister religion!  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Quoted by S. Manickam, ‘Hindu Reaction to Missionary Activities
in the Negapatam and Trichinopoly District of the Methodists,
1870-1924’, *Indian Church History Review*.  December 1981, p. 84.

[²](#2a) *Ibid.,* p. 82.

[³](#3a) *Ibid.,* p. 83.

[⁴](#4a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 91.

[⁵](#5a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 95.

[⁶](#6a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 88.

[⁷](#7a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 89.

[⁸](#8a) Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 87.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
