+++
title = "Mineral resources control - leith"
+++

Source: [TW](https://sci-hub.hkvisa.net/10.2307/20028398)

The Political Control of Mineral Resources  
Author(s): C. K. Leith  
Source: Foreign Affairs, Vol. 3, No. 4 (Jul., 1925), pp. 541-555  
Published by: Council on Foreign Relations  

THE POLITICAL CONTROL OF  
MINERAL RESOURCES  
By C. K. Leith  

THE mineral geography of the future has been etched in  the earth by recent industrial development. Minerals  constitute only a part of what is termed "the naturalresource problem," but they furnish a defined basis for an in  ductive approach to the broader problem. We are just learning  to make use of our physical environment; the problem of ourmineral resources offers a tempting challenge to our ability to  foresee and take intelligent advantage of a new environmental  factor, instead, as has been our habit, of allowing ourselves to be  overrun by environmental conditions to which we remain passive  and more or less oblivious.  

The world has used more of its mineral resources in the last  twenty years than in all preceding time, and there is nothing to  indicate any slackening of the acceleration which has occurred  during this period.+++(5)+++ 

- The production of oil, for example, is now  as great for one year as for any ten years preceding 1900; a single  company in the United States now produces annually more than  did the entire country in that year. 
- The last twenty-five years  has seen as much gold production as the four hundred years  following the discovery of America. 

There are important mineral industries (as, for instance, the aluminum industry)  which are not yet fifty years old. 

One of the most significant  changes has been in the use of the so-called energy resources?  coal, oil, gas and waterpower. If the power used in recent years  from these sources be translated roughly into man power it  appears that every man, woman, and child in the United States  has potential control of the equivalent of from ten to twenty  hard-working slaves. The world has just entered on a gigantic  experiment in the use of earth materials. Energy is being released on a scale never before approximated, with consequences  which cannot yet be appraised.  

The Convergence of Demand on the Few Adequate Sources.  Vastly increasing mineral requirements have resulted in the in  tensive exploitation of the comparatively few deposits capable  of meeting these requirements. When the demand was small, it was often possible to secure the necessary supplies from a  considerable number of scattered sources. As the mineral in  dustries have grown, the units most favorably situated in regard  to raw materials and markets have naturally outstripped the  others, thereby deepening and widening the trade channels  tributary to them. In each of the principal mineral industries  there now stand out a few dominating centers of supply and  manufacture, which usually cannot be duplicated in regardeither to quantity or efficiency of production. Other possible  centers are likely to be handicapped in some essential particular  ?in size or grade of reserves, in cost of transportation to markets,  or in some other way.  

Iron ores, for example, are widely scattered over the globe,  being present in every continent and in almost every country;  yet the principal supply is drawn from only a few sources?from  the Lake Superior region of the United States, from northeastern  France, from the Cleveland, Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire,  and Cumberland districts of England, from the Kiruna district  of Sweden, and from northern Spain. Together, these sources  supply about three-fourths of the world's annual total; the re  mainder comes from scattered sources in many countries.  

The steel industries using these iron ores are concentrated in  large units, favorably situated where they may draw on the  large reserves and where there are adequate supplies of coking  coal, together with access to a consuming population. Of the  world's steel-making capacity over 90 percent is confined to  three regions: the United States, centering for the most part  about the lower Great Lakes; northeastern England, using both  local ore and coal; and the Ruhr and adjacent portions of north  eastern France. All of these great units draw supplementary  supplies from outside sources. As they have become larger andmore firmly entrenched, they have been able to reach farther  afield for the needed raw materials. In no other region now  known would it be possible to duplicate these large units with  equal efficiency. Even if some location could be found which  would apparently satisfy all of the necessary conditions, thesize and efficiency of the units already established, with their  ramifications of allied industry, would make competition or  duplication difficult for the new district.  

Turning to coal, we find that the grade of bituminous coal  adapted to coking and to efficient power uses is most extensively exploited in the eastern United States, in England, and in  western Germany, these three regions producing about two  thirds of the world's supply. The remaining third comes from  many sources, no one of which is in the class with the sources  named. The United States has about half of the world's esti  mated reserves. All the countries of the southern hemisphere  have together less than one-tenth of the estimated reserves.  In China there are large reserves of proper grade for commer  cial utilization, but the difficulty there is in the lack of industrial  development and initiative on the part of the Chinese.  The anthracite production of the world is still more concen  trated, being confined practically to eastern Pennsylvania.  Over 95 percent of the world's total comes from that region, the  remainder coming mainly from Wales. The only large reserves  in sight are the yet unexploited reserves of China.  

In recent years the United States has produced about 65  percent more oil than all other countries combined. Southern  Russia, Mexico, Dutch East Indies, Rumania, and Galicia have  accounted for 30 percent, leaving only about 5 percent for the  rest of the world. Productive fields will probably be developed in India, Persia, Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, China, Formosa,  and perhaps also in South America and Africa, but the location  of the great oil reserves of the future is not nearly so well known  as is the case with other mineral commodities, and important  shifts in the geography of the industry are to be expected.  

Making large allowance for such shifts, however, it seems clear  that in the future, as in the past, the oil industry will be domi  nated by a very few districts.  

The United States produces nearly 60 percent of the world's  copper, and of this nearly 90 percent comes from a few mines in  Utah, Arizona, Montana, Michigan, and Alaska.+++(5)+++ Another  14 percent of the world's production comes from Chile (which  probably contains greater reserves than any other country  except the United States). The companies controlling the  major production of the world are even fewer in number than  the principal mines. Two companies in the United States con  trol over 30 percent of the world's output.  

The minerals known as the ferro-alloys, necessary in the  making of iron and steel, are derived from a very few principal  sources. Manganese ore comes mainly from limited districts in  India, Georgia (Southern Russia), and Brazil; chromite comes from Rhodesia, India, and New Caledonia; nickel for the most  part comes from a single district in Canada; tungsten comes  from China (60 percent of the total); and about half of the  world's vanadium comes from Peru.  

The Malay Straits, Bolivia, and Dutch East Indies account  for over three-quarters of the world's tin production. The  Union of South Africa produces over half of the world's gold  (principally from the Transvaal district) and over two-thirds of  the total comes from the British Empire. Mexico and the  United States account for two-thirds of the world's silver pro  duction, mainly from half a dozen districts. The United States  is the greatest lead-producing country, yielding 42 percent of  the world's output in 1923; Mexico, Australia, and Spain yield  35 percent. As for zinc, the United States in 1923 produced  about one-half of the world's output, and 83 percent of it came  from three districts.  

If we consider potash we find that the deposits of the Stass  furt district of Germany and, secondarily, those in Alsace,  dominate the world's fertilizer markets. Natural nitrates, used  in peace times for fertilizers, come almost solely from Chile.  

The sulphur markets of the world draw predominantly on three  deposits in Louisiana and Texas, and present indications are  that these are likely to be reduced to two.  

This sketchy and necessarily disjointed outline of the distri  bution of the most essential mineral resources is perhaps suffi  cient to establish the fact that the dominating centers are few.  

About thirty of the principal mineral districts account for over  three-fourths of the world's mineral production. In any picture  of the world mineral situation, then, there stand out a few nodal  points, pretty well fixed for the future, with ramifications usually extending far beyond national boundaries and crossing one  another in the most intricate fashion. Even though new ele  ments come into the picture, its main outlines will doubtless  remain the same. Consolidation and coordination are proceed  ing rapidly in the interest of more efficient operation. Competi  tion has not been eliminated, but it is now mainly among a few  commercial giants.  

The International Movement of Minerals Consequent on Central  ization of Production. It is clear from the foregoing that the  principal mineral trade routes must necessarily be few in number  and more or less independent of national boundaries. A substantial portion of the minerals produced is consumed outside  the countries of origin. In fact, nearly a third of the world's  mineral tonnage moves across international boundaries (of this  third coal and iron constitute nearly 90 percent).  

The necessity of world-wide movements of minerals puts a  premium on freedom of the seas in peace and control of the seas  in war. The key to the problem is to be found mainly in the mineral strategy of the north Atlantic Ocean, and secondarily  in that of the north Pacific Ocean. The interruption of any one  of the main channels of movement between nations is followed  by confusion or disaster, because of the difficulty, usually the  impossibility, of making up the supply of minerals from other  sources. This was strikingly manifested in the Great War.  Failure to comprehend this simple fact underlies many futile  attempts to close or change these routes by political action.  Certain schedules of our own recent tariff law? for illustration the one relating to manganese? were designed to foster domestic  mineral industries and limit importations. But it happens that  nature omitted to put adequate supplies of the minerals in  question in this country when it was created. The actual result,  therefore, is only to lay an additional charge on the consumer,  without materially changing the volume of movement from  foreign sources. As a revenue producer such tariffs may be  useful; but this was not their primary purpose. There are other  minerals which really warrant tariff protection.  

The Exploration and Development Required to Maintain Avail  able Mineral Supplies. Heavy drafts on mineral resources of the  kind made in recent years make necessary constant exploration  and development if a sufficient "cushion" of available reserves  is to be maintained. This is not only because of the high rate of  exhaustion, but because it is necessary now to look farther ahead  for the raw materials as a matter of insurance on the large opera  tions and the immense capital outlays involved. In proportion  as there are world or regional shortages of available reserves?  and there are acute ones?the rush for new supplies becomes  more strenuous. The fear of a shortage varies with different minerals, with fluctuations in commercial demand, and with  conditions of war and peace, but underlying it all is the out  standing fact that the general increase of the world's requirements during the last two decades makes even the largest re  sources look less adequate than they formerly did.  


 
The effort to maintain adequate reserves has made itself felt  in several ways:  

Better transportation facilities and enhanced commercial  competence have made it possible to go farther afield for raw  materials; in fact, there are now few parts of the world which  are too remote to be affected by the demands of the mineral  industries.  

The geographic range of entirely unexpected major discoveries  has been much narrowed. Geologically the earth has become  well enough known to indicate in large measure what primary  sources will remain fixed, the probable directions of geographic  shifts of others, and some of the regions or countries of potential  discoveries.  

As the richer mineral deposits are exhausted the demand must  be satisfied by the exploitation of minerals of lower grade. New  beneficiation processes are making possible the use of mineral  reserves which were not marketable a few years ago. A good  illustration is found in the copper industry: the main supply  formerly came from ore containing upwards of 5 percent of copper, but now it is won largely as a result of large-scale beneficiation of ores containing 2 percent or less of copper. Lower  grade mineral deposits are on the whole much more extensive  than high grade deposits, affording a better opportunity for  large-scale operations, with correspondingly cheaper costs. The  resulting postponement of the time of exhaustion of the richer  ores is distinctly conservational in its effect.  
Mineral supply and demand, both present and future, are  much more carefully measured than formerly. Geologists and  engineers are for the first time giving a comprehensive idea of  the world's stocks of minerals and of the probable life of each.  

Finally, there are important political consequences, to be dis cussed under a separate heading.  

## Political Consequences of the Geographic and Commercial Con centration of the Mineral Industry. 

An examination of the distri  bution of mineral industries, nation by nation, discloses the fact  that about 85 percent of the world's output of minerals originates  in countries bordering the North Atlantic basin. The United  States far outranks all others. No country, however, not even  the United States, has enough of all the essential minerals, and many countries are devoid of nearly all of them. A few decades  ago the mineral commodities necessary for the welfare of a nation were not so large in volume but that they could be easily  supplied from various sources by the natural processes of trade;  if they could not be obtained in one place, they might in another.  

With the present vastly greater requirements the securing of a  steady and adequate supply is a much more serious matter.  The sources capable of supplying these larger demands are  relatively few and limited; the failure of a regular supply has  disastrous consequences; the international competition for them is keen. Hence it is that governments are giving closer attention  to questions of supply, not only by aiding their nationals in  various ways to secure supplies outside, but by the formulation  of measures tending to conserve supplies within their own  national boundaries.  

A fact of far-reaching significance, made obvious by the war  but still often disregarded in discussion, is the overlapping of  political and commercial spheres of influence.1 Commercial  interests of one country own minerals in other countries, or  international commercial interests control minerals in more  than one country. British and American capital play an espe  cially prominent r?le in controlling commercially supplies of minerals in other countries. Extra-national commercial control  often carries with it important political influence, and the ex  tension of political control is more and more tending to conform  to the commercial spheres determined by the occurrence of raw  
materials. Such facts are seldom indicated in making up classi  fications of mineral production by countries.  

An illustration of the kind of problem created by the over  lapping of the spheres of political and commercial influence is  the Ruhr controversy.2 The iron and steel industry of western Europe centers about the Ruhr district of western Germany,  and overlaps into Belgium, Luxemburg, and northeastern  France. France has the iron ore, Germany most of the coking  coal. The iron and steel plants have complementary relation  ships?France produces more raw steel than it can finish,  Germany has most of the finishing plants. The industry cannot  be successfully divided geographically into self-sustaining parts.  Outside competition requires the efficient operation or this  
industry, which in turn requires coordination, consolidation,  


\* See "Political and Commercial Geology," edited by J. E. Spurr: McGraw-Hill Book  Co., New York, 1920.  

2 See "The World Iron and Steel Situation in Its Bearing on the French Occupation of  the Ruhr," by C. K. Leith: Foreign Affairs, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 136-151.  


 
and singleness of direction. The very size of the industry puts  a premium on the firm possession of all the parts necessary to  its operation. The history of this industry shows the growth  of powerful economic unity, spreading over national boundaries, which since 1870 has been reflected in stirring political and mili  tary events. With the still further consolidation of commercial  power, which seems to be inherent in the natural growth of this  industry, it is quite possible that there will be further shifts of  national boundaries in the effort to unify political and military  control; even the creation of a new state is not impossible.  
National barriers?such as certain tariffs, embargoes, prohi  bitions against extra-national ownership or exploitation of  minerals, and lack of cooperative enterprise or capital?are  likely to be swept aside by the world's necessity for developing  new resources and for preserving freedom of movement. The  need for the "open door" often comes squarely into conflict with  the principle of self-determination of nations. When it happens  that one of the few large potential sources of some needed  mineral is situated in a country lacking the local capital and  initiative necessary for its development, or where there is  political opposition to such development, pressure is exerted by  the outside mineral industries, and often by their governments,  to compel exploitation in one way or another. Cases of this  kind are rapidly multiplying. The pressure is constant, in  sidious, powerful, and is really backed up by world-wide forces.  It is idle to argue whether this should or should not be, or  whether or not it could be stopped by political action. A world  which is rapidly developing habits in the use of the products  based on mineral resources will not easily change these habits  for the sake of an academic principle. If, for instance, it should  be decided that it was unethical to force the development of  much-needed supplies of oil in a country where such develop  ment would not take place without compulsion, the only prac  tical way of giving effect to this decision would be to find means  for lessening the demand for oil. The very man who argues on  behalf of national self-determination on ethical and historic  grounds is likely to be a user of materials which can be had only  by breaking down this principle. Neither the mineral industries  nor their agents should be blamed for acting on the demands  which they feel pressing behind them. Instead of criticising  this tendency it would seem wiser for us to devote our attention  



to examining and regulating the manner in which it is being  translated into action.  

An extreme result of the demand for raw materials is seen in  one country's actual establishment of political control over all  or part of another country. In several recent cases of national  expansion the acquisition of mineral resources has been a  frankly recognized motive. Less spectacular, but equally real,  are the influences of mineral exploitation in determining the  political complexion of many a regional settlement, as, for  instance, in our own west, or in the case of the Mississippi Valley  zinc and lead districts. Historians and geographers have  pointed out many interesting instances of this.  

Although students of mineral resources see these tendencies  and note the steady pressure which is exerted, it is only when  some actual political change results that public attention is  attracted, and perhaps not then. There is a lag in the emer  gence of political results, often for many years, after the causa  tive exploitation has started, and this is one reason why the  influence described is not more generally recognized. In the  case of some of the changes which have occurred since the war  the economic spade work was done years ago, just as the ex  ploitation now under way will make itself felt politically some  years hence. A wider recognition of the influence of this new  environmental factor should go far to clarify international  political procedure. The public might well know more generally,  both for reasons of self-interest and for the sake of international  accord, just what minerals our country has in excess, what must  be secured from foreign sources, where they can be secured,  what are the vital needs of other nations, and what important  explorations are now under way in various parts of the world.  

With this information available, it should be possible to dis  criminate between exploitation forced by real national needs  and that which is irresponsible or needless, and to graduate  political aid, protection, or opposition accordingly. The public  might well know, also, the few great channels of international  
mineral movement fixed by nature, and the futility of attempts  to interrupt or divert them by tariffs and embargoes.  Our experience during the war demonstrated clearly that the  United States was not acquainted with these facts, and today  there is little to show that our tariffs, our diplomatic notes re  lating to competition for mineral supplies, or our international  

55o FOREIGN AFFAIRS  
trade agreements, are constructed on any broad policy reflecting  an understanding of the problem as a whole. Too often such  measures are enacted with regard only to some special interest  
which happens to be urging its claims at the moment. In this  lack of perspective and comprehensive national policy the  United States already is far behind many other nations whom  necessity has taught to study these problems and take full stock  of factors both of national surplus and deficiency. The informa  tion is now available.  
It is, of course, not to be overlooked that the exploitation of  mineral resources is only one of the many factors, environ  mental and human, that determine political action. The net  political result of the interaction of several factors may be quite  different from the effect of any single factor operating inde  pendently. But no one factor must be ignored.  
The Nationalization of Mineral Resources. Public control of  mineral resources takes many forms, among them direct govern  ment ownership and operation?control through leases and  
royalties?many forms of licenses, concessions, taxes, and tariffs  ?various measures of inspection and regulation of operations?  regulations for the improvement of labor conditions?coopera  tion and even control in marketing?price-fixing?prohibition  of monopoly?political, commercial, and military aid given to  private interests exploiting foreign reserves?restrictions on the  exploration of lands within governmental jurisdiction, particu  larly for extra-nationals?and a variety of measures for the  control of transportation, both rail and water. At one extreme  is outright governmental ownership, at the other a fairly full  measure of private control, varying in the case of different  countries, different mineral commodities, and with conditions of  peace and war.  

In recent years there has been a pronounced stiffening of  public control, particularly over minerals of which there is a  regional or world shortage. During the war most nations  assumed charge of their own raw materials, in one way or an  other, for military reasons, and some of the measures then  adopted have been carried along in peace times for purposes of  commercial defense or offense. But aside from war measures,  the tendency toward public control has grown so steadily and so  widely, and under so many different conditions, that one seems  fairly safe in inferring that it will persist. Noteworthy steps  



have been the withdrawal of mineral lands from public entry,  the participation of governments in commercial operation, ex  ploration, and selling arrangements, measures for the restriction  of exploration by extra-nationals, and levies of special taxes.  In the United States the movement has as yet been slight, but  to show that it exists one need only cite the withdrawal of  public lands from mineral entry, new leasing laws, the occupa  tional tax on the iron ores of Minnesota, the special anthracite  coal tax of Pennsylvania, the severance tax on minerals of  Louisiana, the tax on oil and sulphur in Texas, and the appoint  ment of coal and oil commissions.  

This tightening of public control may be broadly designated  as nationalization of mineral resources. Nationalization is popu  larly understood to imply government ownership and operation,  but an examination of the discussions on this subject in countries  where the problem has become politically acute shows that the  
term also covers various forms of more or less indirect control,  and that it is difficult to draw any distinct line. Perhaps the  best picture of the problem of nationalization in the narrower  sense can be found in British political discussions of the coal  
mining industry during the last few years. Recently these dis  cussions have been well summarized in non-technical language  by Mr. Lloyd George.  

It is not necessary in this article to do more than indicate the  actual existence of nationalization, in one form or another, in  many parts of the world, and to note its rapidly widening inci  dence. These are facts, whatever we may think of their de  sirability. Probably most people familiar with the mineral  industry are agreed that it would not have reached its present  high state of development under bureaucratic direction, because  the problems involved?metallurgical, geological, commercial?  are varied and intricate, and seem peculiarly to require the free  play of individual initiative. They believe that the government  could accomplish little more?probably less?than is already  being done in the normal course of private trade. Naturally  they view the progress of nationalization with alarm. On the  other hand, the world is coming to realize the basic connection  between mineral resources and national prosperity, the political  advantages accruing to the country possessing mineral resources,  and how limited are the reserves of some of these resources in  comparison with the life of a nation. "Conservation," so little  


55^ FOREIGN AFFAIRS  

understood in its practical workings, is popularly assumed to  require more direct government control, though the correctness  of this assumption is open to argument.3 The thought is grow  ing that mineral deposits, so slowly accumulated by nature, are  the heritage of all the people and are not to be exploited exclu  sively for private gain,?or that if the exploitation is left in  private hands it must be done in trust for the public.  
It is not our purpose here to argue this question, but merely to  state it. The problem cannot be solved by ignoring it, as is the  disposition in some sections of the mineral industry. To arrive  at an intelligent solution will require broad objective study, as  free as possible from self-interest, and an understanding of the  
variety and inter-relation of the various aspects which the  problem assumes. The salient facts are not too many and  intricate but that they can become fairly generally understood.  A special responsibility rests on the leaders of the mineral in  dustry to contribute their knowledge and ideas toward the  
formulation of a wise national policy. Otherwise nationaliza  tion is likely to take forms determined by surges of political  sentiment, probably ill-adjusted to the facts of the situation.  
The Internationalization of Mineral Resources. One begins to  hear the phrase "internationalization of mineral resources."  It comes up in connection with the League of Nations, with the  peace settlements, and with various projects for world peace.  The phrase means different things to different people; the  
manner of its use often suggests that there is no well-considered  plan in mind, that it is more or less of an academic abstraction.  Yet the idea behind it is reasonably clear?that some arrange  ment should be made to protect nations weak in resources  
against nations better favored by nature; to prevent monopoly  by any one nation or group of nations; to minimize the strenuous  competition among nations, which sometimes leads to war; to  prevent abuses in the exploitation of the resources of backward  countries; to insure freedom of search and of international  
movement. The phrase implies a belief in the possibility of  distributing the advantages of local environmental factors in  accordance with some sort of political arrangement. It equally  implies the belief that the desired results are not being properly  accomplished by uncontrolled private trade, or the fear that  
3 See "Economic Aspects of Geology," by C. K. Leith: Henry Holt & Co., New York,  1921.  



they will not be so accomplished in the future, and that therefore  governments must collectively assume control.  

During the Great War the Allies went far in the direction of  internationalization of their mineral resources by many mea  sures of pooling and allocation. Before the armistice British  and American officials gave consideration to a plan that after  the war the exportable surplus of key raw materials controlled  by the Allies (mainly by the United States and Great Britain)  should continue to be distributed as mutually agreed, as a means  of controlling the commercial rehabilitation of the enemy coun  tries during the reparation period. With this in mind the ex  portable surpluses and deficits of key materials were listed and  totaled for the several nations most concerned. One of President Wilson's fourteen points?"the removal, so far as possible,  of all economic barriers and the establishment of an equality of  trade conditions among all the nations consenting to the peace  and associating themselves for its maintenance"?was inter  preted in some quarters as requiring internationalization of key  resources. These ideas received no expression in the Versailles  Treaty. But since then the question has reappeared from time  
to time in connection with various international economic diffi  culties which were not solved by the Versailles Conference, and  it has been given some attention by the Economic Committee of  the League of Nations, following a resolution by the Inter  national Miners' Congress in 1920, "that there be constituted  within a brief period an international office for the distribution  of fuel, ores, and other raw materials indispensable for the  revival of normal economic life." Recent attempts by France,  Germany, and Belgium to make satisfactory working and  financial arrangements for the iron and steel industry of western  Europe, already cited, are essentially attempts to secure some  of the advantages which would follow the internationalization  of the coal and iron ore supplies necessary to that industry.  

Another significant step toward internationalization, by agree  ment between private interests and governments, is exemplified  in the recent organization of an international company (the  Turkish Petroleum Company) to explore and exploit the poten  tial oil fields of Iraq, in Turkey. Four groups are equal partners  ?The Anglo-Persian, the Royal Dutch-Shell, the Standard Oil  and six other American companies, and sixty-five French com  panies. The British Government is a direct owner of shares in  


 
the first two companies named and also is governing Iraq under  a mandate. The American and other governments concerned  also took more or less of a direct part in formulating this arrange  
ment. Our State Department interceded with England, for  example, to allow participation by American companies, and,  permission having been granted, was instrumental in seeing that  the opportunity was open to more than one American oil com  
pany. The purpose of the plan is to insure equal opportunity  among the nations represented and to prevent monopoly or  exclusion by any one. Of course it does not necessarily insure  equal opportunities for other nations.  
It seems inevitable that the tendency toward international  ization will continue, in the sense that governments will take a  larger hand in the formulation of agreements relating to explora  tion in foreign countries and to the maintenance of open channels  for necessary supplies. The conditions to be met are so varied  that probably it is impossible now to devise any comprehensive,  precise, and workable plan of internationalization for the future.  

At best, any general scheme of control now worked out would  lack the elasticity and effectiveness of the present procedure  based primarily on private initiative. In time such a plan may  be evolved, empirically, from the sum total of international  experience in this field. Perhaps about as much as could be done now in this direction would be to give international affirma  tion to the general principle of the open door policy, which is  after all the core of the problem, leaving the specific procedure  to be worked out as circumstances require. The Permanent  Court of International Justice at the Hague furnishes oppor  tunities for the settlement of international controversies relating  to resources, and in fact it is now being used in this manner, for  instance, in the settlement of the recent suit on power con  cessions brought by the Greek Government against the British  Government. The League of Nations, or a World Court, might  also come to exercise a certain measure of supervision over such  
arrangements.  

Internationalization of the tentative and partial kind so far  tried accrues to the advantage of the nations possessing most of  the supplies to trade with, and does not help less favored nations  to the extent of making them equal partners in the control of  resources. Certainly the world has not reached the Utopian  condition where any nation can be expected voluntarily to yield up to any super-national body the ownership of a part of its  resources. A few strong combinations dominate the world's  resources. England and the United States alone, by agreeing  on the disposition of the mineral supplies they control, are in a  position to determine the general course of the mineral industry  of the world. It is a question whether such a combination, or  any other strong one, would ever really subordinate its own  advantage to any broader political or judicial control. It may  only be hoped that, with the emergence of larger units of com  mercial and political control, there may be a fixing of responsi  bility and a broadening of self-interest which will help insure  administration for the good of all.  

