+++
title = "01 INTRODUCTION"

+++
**INTRODUCTION**

The volume in hand is a reprint of an old book compiled in 1947 by
Sardar Gurbachan Singh Talib, Principal of the Lyallpur Khalsa College,
Jullundur, and published in 1950 by the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak
Committee (SGPC).  It records the story of 7-million Hindus and Sikhs
who were uprooted from their homes in the West Punjab, the North-Western
Frontier, Sind and parts of Kashmir.  It tells the story of political
parleys that preceded this event, their inevitable failure, and the
barbarity that immediately followed - barbarity that had elements of
pre-planning.  The book records the atrocities of this period - the
carnage, killings, abductions and forced conversions that took place
particularly in 194 6-47, forcing Hindus and Sikhs to leave their
hearths and homes and start on the “biggest mass migration of humanity,”
as the author describes it.

At the end of the book, the author gives an Appendix, 100 pages of about
50 eye-witness accounts of those atrocities.  It contains statements of
those who saw themselves attacked, their houses burnt, their kith and
kin killed, their womenfolk abducted but who themselves survived to
relate their account.  The section also includes press reports and other
first-hand accounts.  For example, one report which appeared in *The
Statesman* of April 15, 1947 narrates an event that took place in
village Thoha Khalsa of Rawalpindi District.  It is a story of tears and
shame and also of great sacrifice and heroism.  The story tells us how
the Hindu-Sikh population of this tiny village was attacked by
3000-strong armed Muslims, how badly outweaponed and outnumbered, the
beseiged had to surrender, but how their women numbering 90 in order to
“evade inglorious surrender” and save their honour jumped into a well
“following the example of Indian women of by-gone days.” Only three of
them were saved.  “There was not enough water in the well to drown them
all,” the report adds.  The author also gives an 85-page long “list of
atrocities,” date by date and region by region, that took place during
the months from mid-December 1946 to the end of August 1947.  And these
represent only “a small fraction of what really happened,” and they have
to be multiplied “a hundred-fold or more… to get the right proportions,”
the author says.

From this it would appear that the book deals only in atrocity stories
albeit true ones.  But if there was nothing more to it, the events it
chronicles could not hold long-range interest and it was perhaps better
that the wrongs were forgotten and forgiven.  We must also bear in mind
that these atrocities alone could not make the full story.  Even during
the midst of all this carnage, there must have been many cases of
humanity and chivalry and there must also have been people who rendered
neighbourly help not without some risk to themselves.  Let us not forget
this chapter and let us be thankful to this innate goodness in man which
binds humanity together and rises above the crusading ideologies that
teach inhumanity.

But it would not do to neglect the other chapter dealing in unpalatable
facts, particularly if those facts have a deeper story to tell and a
continuing pattern to reveal, and if they disclose a larger ideational
framework or ideology at work.  Luckily for us the author does more than
chronicle gruesome events.  He goes behind them and explains why they
happened.  He tells us that the mass exodus did not happen as if by
chance but that it was “the last culminating episode in a conspiracy
that had been under planning for more than a decade before it actually
occurred,” that it took place because it was “the conspiracy of the
Muslim League in India to establish a Muslim State which should not be
encumbered with any such non-Muslim population as would be a likely
factor in diluting to any extent its purely Muslim character.”
Therefore, the Hindus and Sikhs, the minorities in the new Muslim
homeland, were not to be suffered to stay there.  This “minorityism”,
the name for Hindus and Sikhs, was “the major enemy of the *Milltat*,”
as Rehmat Ali, one of the early League leaders and intellectuals and
coiner of the word Pakistan, said.

According to its original conception, Pakistan itself was to be larger
than it turned out to be; it was to include Kashmir, Assam and Bengal in
the East and Hyderabad and Malabar in the South and many independent
Muslim states within the rest of the Indian territory.  India, or
whatever remained of India, was itself to be considered *Dinia*, an
important Islamic concept.  The author explains that it means it “would
be the continent which, if not at the moment the home of an Islamic
State, was such in immediate conception, waiting to be converted and
subordinated to Islam through the proselytising and conquering zeal of
its sons.”

This was broadly the approach of the generality of Muslims though there
were also differences of emphases and in exceptional cases even
disagreement with the main thesis.  Some of them, particularly of
*Ulema* class, sounded a warning that Pakistan might impede the
establishment of *Dinia* by arousing unnecessary resistance among the
Hindus; therefore, they stayed away from the Pakistan campaign and some
of them even opposed it.  They came to be known as “nationalist
Muslims.”

Sardar Gurbachan Singh Talib mentions this broader dimension and
connects the events of the forties with the League politics and the
League politics itself, through *Dinia*, with the larger Muslim
politics.  He, however, does not develop the point and it remains no
more than a hint.  But he does more than most other authors whose vision
remains confined in the best of cases to the League’s activities and who
provide a narrow and even distorting framework.  The fact is that League
politics did not initiate Muslim politics but was itself a part of this
larger Muslim politics; it was neither the latter’s beginning nor its
end but its continuation.  Muslim politicians and scholars also see it
this way.  Bhutto tells us that the “starting point of Pakistan goes
back over a thousand years to when Muhammad bin Qasim set foot on the
soil of Sind and introduced Islam in the sub-continent.” *History of
Pakistan: Past and Present*, a typical textbook taught in Pakistan’s
schools, begins the story of Pakistan with the “Advent of Islam”, giving
exactly nine pages to “Pre-Islamic Civilization”, negatively presented
as *Jahiliya*, an important Islamic concept and a name for all
pre-Islamic period.  Muslim scholars have also their own idea and
version of Muslims’ freedom struggle and they equate it with the Muslim
Empire.  It began when Muslims lost their empire after Aurangzeb and
partially ends with the establishment of Pakistan.  Pakistan’s official
“History of the Freedom Movement of Muslims in the Indo-Pakistan
Sub-continent covering the period from the death of Emperor Aurangzeb in
1707 to the Establishment of Pakistan in 1947” reveals their approach.

**II**

Muslim politics in turn is grounded in Muslim theology.  Islam believes
in *one* God (*their* God) but two humanities: the believers and the
infidels.  Islam teaches, at least according to its most pious and
learned men, *Jihad* or holy war against the infidels.  It is not that
the infidels have done any harm to Islam or Muslims but it is simply
because holy war against the infidels “is established as a divine
ordinance, by the word of God, who has said in the *Koran*, ‘Slay the
Infidel’,” according to *Hidayah*, an old and important work widely
esteemed in the Muslim world.

Similarly, it is not a question of self-defence against any aggression
or any unprovoked war but it is simply because the infidels by being
infidels incur “the destruction of the sword,” although “they be not the
first aggressors,” to put it again in the language of the *Hidayah*,
which derives it “from various passages in the sacred writings which are
generally received to this effect.” It reveals not only what the Islamic
sacred writings say but, what is still more important, what the Muslim
pious men and scholars believe these writings do.  There has been a wide
consensus among them about the message of these writings.

To this theology of holy war belong two related concepts: *dar al-harb*
and *dar al-islam*.  According to this theology, *dar al-harb* is a
country of the infidels, a country not ruled by Muslims; Muslims have to
wage a war against it and convert it into *dar al-islam*, a country
governed by Muslims.  Again, it is not a question of majorities and
minorities but of believers and unbelievers.  A country of a majority of
infidels but ruled by a small minority of Muslims, as India once was, is
*dar al-islam* and is perfectly legitimate and conforms more truly to
the divine injunction and is superior in Allah’s eyes to a country ruled
by its own people but who are infidels.  Similarly, it is not a question
of “equal rights” for all citizens irrespective of their religions. 
Such concepts are un-Islamic.  Under Islam, non-Muslims, if they are
allowed to exist at all, are non-citizens or *zimmis*; only Muslims are
full citizens.

It also means that, theoretically, the believers are at war with the
infidels all the time, though, in practice, a war may not be possible at
a particular time.  The actual shape of the war will depend on many
external factors, not the least of them being the stage of preparedness
of the believers for the venture.  But they must continue exerting and
planning and looking for opportunities.  This is the essence of
*Jihad*.  It has been widely discussed in Islamic books on religious
laws.

But it does raise some problems on the practical level.  For example,
when Europe ruled and the whole Muslim world was on its knees and
Muslims were not in a position to wage an effective war, what would they
do?  Then the concept of *Jihad* had to be diluted and in India another
concept was added, the concept of *dar al-aman*.  According to this
concept, it was sufficient if Muslims had the liberty to give their
*azan*-call (which was banned by Maharaja Ranjit Singh), to offer their
*namaz* and keep their fast, and it was enough for them to be most loyal
to a Christian power.  There are also other complicating problems in a
world where nationalism has become a new recognised value and a citizen
is governed by his country’s laws and owes his first allegiance to his
country.  But Islam is essentially pan-Islamic and pan-Islamism must
override the demands both of territorial nationalism and of universal
humanism.  In this sense extra-territorialism (and also religious
exclusivism) is fundamental to Islam.  If the contending parties are
Muslim, nationalism could still have a meaning; but when of the two
contending parties, one is Muslim and the other infidel there is no
dilemma for the Muslims of both countries and their duty is clear.  The
Muslims living in *dar al-harb* must support a *Jihad* against their
Government.

This is the ideational framework from which the events of 1940s
derived.  For those who know this framework, the chapter of Muslim
history which this book discusses is not new; to them, it is an old
chapter and also the one which has not yet closed, not even its carnage
and exodus.  Hindus have been subjected to these forces for centuries,
and these forces continue to operate unabated even now.  Take for
example, the exodus from West Pakistan, the subject of the present
book.  Hindus have known many such exodus in the past.  Repeated Muslim
invasions created repeated Hindu exodus.  Speaking of the “wonderful
exploits” of Mahmud Ghaznavi (A.D. 997-1030), Alberuni tells us how
“Hindus became like atoms of dust scattered in all directions.” All
along the coast of the Arabian Sea and the Persian Gulf, and also along
old trade-routes passing through North-West and Central Asia, there were
prosperous Hindu settlements.  All these inhabitants became refugees. 
Exodus continues (besides extensive infiltration) from Bangla Desh and
the Kashmir Valley even today.  The only thing unique about the
1947-exodus was that thanks to its Sikh component it was not a one-way
traffic.

In this larger perspective, Pakistan itself is not a new phenomenon, nor
does the story end with its creation.  On the other hand, old politics
continues under more unfavourable conditions for India.  Pakistan is
emerging as an important focal point of Islamic fundamentalism and it is
seeking new alignments in the Middle East in conformity to its new
role.  Muslim fundamentalism is a danger in the long run both to the
West as well as the East, but it is not yet fully realized.  Meanwhile,
Pakistan is using its new position of leadership against India.  While
holding out the threat of nuclear blackmail, it is more than a willing
ally of any country or group which has any quarrel with or grouse
against India.  In India itself, Pakistan enjoys a large support, not
only amongst Muslims who have always had a soft corner for it and who,
in fact, had an important role in its creation, but also amongst Hindu
intelligensia, the country’s left and secular elite who control its
media and politics.  The motives are complicated into which we cannot go
here.  But meanwhile India is being subjected to a war of subversion and
aggression, a war hot and cold, active and passive.  Pakistan has become
an instigator and supplier, a trainer, an arsenal and a safe rear of
many guerilla and militant forces.

But Hindu India remains confused and even unconcerned.  It has been a
poor student of history; it has therefore also neglected its lessons; it
has failed to read properly the forces, particularly ideological forces,
that have been and are still at work to keep it down.  In fact, it does
not even acknowledge them.  It still stubbornly clings to its old
assumption that the League politics came out of the scheming head of one
Jinnah who was aided and abetted by the British, and that Muslims and
Islam had nothing to do with it; that, in fact, they were reluctant
victims of this politics and were pushed into it by an intransigent
Hindudom.

All this we believe partly because it involves doing nothing,
anticipating nothing, planning nothing, and we can continue to live from
day to day.  A more realistic and faithful appraisal will impose on us
duties of a different kind and scope, duties which we therefore shirk. 
We have learnt to live without thinking and we have got used to the idea
of a shrunken and shrinking India.  We can now think of India without
Afghanistan, without the North-West Frontier Province, without Punjab
and Sind, without East Bengal, and we can do the same without Kashmir
and other parts in the future.  Why assume avoidable responsibilities?

Or perhaps the sickness is deeper.  Long back, Sri Aurobindo saw the
“root cause of India’s weakness,” not in foreign yoke or poverty or
dearth of spiritual experience, but in the “decline of thinking power.”
Everywhere he saw “inability or unwillingness to think, which is a sign
of tragic decadence.”

**III**

This book has another kind of interest for us.  It was published by the
Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee, Amritsar, something which would
be unthinkable now.  The book belongs to the time when Hindus and Sikhs
were spoken of in one breath indistinguishably and it was taken for
granted that they were one and that they had suffered and striven
together.  Its approach is very different from the one which had
continued to be canvassed for over half a century even before this book
was written and which has also continued to be in vogue during the
-whole post-Independence era.  Now for a century the Sikhs have been
told by the controllers of Akali politics and by neo-Akali writers that
the Sikhs are not Hindus, that instead of deriving from *Hindu* Advaita,
*Hindu* incarnation, *Hindu* theory of karma and rebirth, *Hindu*
Moksha, Sikhism has grown in revolt against *Hindu* polytheism, *Hindu*
idolatry, *Hindu* caste-system and *Hindu* Brahmanism.  And many Akali
scholars have been re-interpreting their scriptures and re-writing their
history in the light of this new understanding of Sikhism.  The early
inspiration was provided by Christian missionaries and British officials
like Macauliffe, but it was internalized by many Akali scholars.  While
Kahan Singh of Nabha said at the end of the last century that Sikhs were
not Hindus, some neo-Akali writers now take pride in saying that they
are some kind of Muslims.

As Akali politics developed its separatism, the post-Independence
neo-Akali writers also learnt to look at events of the 1940s through
eyes very different from those of Gurbachan Singh Talib.  His approach
enjoys no sympathy with them and he is neglected by them.  In *A History
of the Sikhs* by Khushwant Singh, first published in 1963, Gurbachan
Singh Talib’s book is mentioned but dismissed as one which gives “the
Hindu-Sikh point of view,” and which forms that “mass of contradictory
statements” with which the “future historian shifting the documents of
the partition riots will be faced.” He also evaluates these facts
differently.  Gurbachan Singh Talib is pained and is angry that the
Sikhs were treated shabbily by the Muslims; Khushwant Singh shows more
understanding for the Muslim side and tells us why they had to do it
since the Sikhs were taking side in a conflict which was essentially a
“Hindu-Muslim conflict.” He tells us: “The Sikhs were in a peculiar
position in the Hindu-Muslim conflict.  They professed a neutral creed
but were a part of the Hindu social system.  They were much the most
prosperous section of the Punjab peasantry and, having been nurtured in
a martial tradition, more ebullient than their numbers (13 percent in
the Punjab) would warrant.  The Sikhs often tried to play the role of
peace-makers but since their sympathies were manifestly Hindu, as the
rioting increased in intensity, the Muslims quite rightly began to look
upon them as an aggressively anti-Muslim element.  In any case, the
Muslims felt that if Pakistan was to bring prosperity to their people,
Sikhs who owned the best wheat lands of the Punjab would have to be
dispossessed.”^([1](#1))

Dr. Gopal Singh, another noted Akali historian, treats the subject in no
different spirit.  He does not mention Gurbachan Singh Talib’s book at
all but gives half a page to its subject-matter in his 860-page *A
History of the Sikh* People.  But unlike Khushwant Singh, he defends the
Akalis who are sometimes accused of their own excesses in the riots of
those days.  He holds that their action was purely retaliatory and says:
“This total contempt for non-Muslim life could not fail to inflame the
people of the East Punjab and the Sikh States, and retaliation started
in full fury everywhere from early August.  No pains were spared to pay
the Muslim Leaguers in their own coin: blood for blood, loot for loot,
though, abductions, conversions and rape were rare occurrences.” Then
describing the exodus from West Punjab, he adds: “The Sikhs of the
Punjab had paid full price and more for the freedom of the country and
their own ruin.”^([2](#2))

He does not tell us what could be done to avoid this ruin and how it
could be called the price for Indian freedom from which the official
Akali leadership had kept away studiously.  Moreover, was it a price
paid for Indian freedom or was it a penalty imposed for trying to wage
the freedom struggle on wrong assumptions - assumptions which, while
they involved neglecting and even undermining the truly nationalist and
humanist ideas and forces, tried to make common cause with ideas and
forces trying to revive an old Imperialism?  The results could not be
different from what they were.  The question is of more than theoretical
interest as the old forces are fully active again and trying to complete
the old half-fulfilled task; they are also supported by the same forces
which had once a hand in the division of the country and they are today
even better placed than they were in the past.

But leaving aside this digression and returning to Dr. Gopal Singh, we
find that though he may be critical of League-led riots he is quite in
sympathy with the larger Muslim politics.  He says that the Muslim
grievances were “genuine”, that their “modest demands were
misinterpreted and not met on time.” He even sympathises with the
*Khilafat* movement and blames those who did not look at it through the
Muslim eyes.  He says: “It was perversity of fact to call
inconsequential a just (though seemingly exaggerated) demand of a
minority (then about 80 million strong) with a political history and
religious cohesion which had once swept through the world from China to
Spain, and led to the establishment of the Indian and Turkish empires
for at least 500 years and had introduced new discoveries in
mathematics, medicine and astronomy, besides architecture, cultural
mores, and culinary and decorative arts.  To dismiss their pride and
humiliation, both, as of no consequence, was the height of majority
egotism.”^([3](#3))

Is it really no more than “height of majority egotism” to think less
glowingly of Islamic Imperialism?  Many competent historians have
regarded it as one of the cruelest phenomena of history and to Will
Durant its conquest of India was “probably the bloodiest story of
history.” But Dr. Gopal Singh has a right to his own personal estimate
and it is wonderful to see him take so much pride in Islam’s political
expansion, its religious cohesion, its Indian and Turkish empires, and
make Muslims’ pride and humiliation his own.  But why should he baulk at
Hindus trying to recover a bit of pride in their own culture, remember a
bit of their own history, achieve a measure of social cohesion, try to
recover from servile attitudes imbibed over centuries, and regain some
dignity for themseleves?  Dr. Gopal Singh finds fault with Hindus who
remember the “excesses of some Muslim rulers like Aurangzeb”; he blames
the Arya Samaj for its call of *Shuddhi*; he finds fault with Tilak for
reviving *Ganapati Puja* as under Shivaji (Khushwant Singh’s bastard);
he blames *Ananda Matha* and the *Bande Matram* of Bankim; he finds
fault with Gandhi who wanted Swarajya to bring in Ramarajya though he
must have known that it was impossible considering the human material he
was working with; and of course he is averse to Purushottam Das Tandon
and Vallabhabhai Patel who did not believe that Hindu-baiting in order
to woo and appease Muslim communalism was nationalist politics.  In
short, Dr. Gopal Singh finds it blamable in common Hindus that they are
not proud of Muslim rule over them and their status of non-citizens or
*zimmis* under it, and that they do not denigrate the memory of those
who fought against the foreign tyranny and instead regard them as some
sort of heroes.

Though Dr. Gopal Singh feels so close to Muslim history, it does not
however follow that he agrees on all points with League politics and its
politicians.  The most serious objection he finds in their politics is
that they “demanded weightages in the minority provinces on a scale
which they should ridicule in the case of Sikhs.”^([4](#4)) Another
serious objection is that Muslims did not realize their own best
interest and did not know that they would have done better by remaining
in India than by separating.  He argues: “They were offered 40% of seats
in the Central Government, equal to the Caste Hindus as late as 1946,
and with the help of other minorities in the government, and their own
and Sikh strength in the army (around 60 percent), they could acquire a
position of such prestige, if not also of domination, that the whole of
India could have felt its certain impact.  With the historical dynamism
\[his name for a most destructive and aggressive imperialism of the
world\] and the egalitarianism of Islam \[which was compatible with a
most perfected slavery system, and which divided humanity into believers
and unbelievers\], what is it that they would not have achieved
especially in a secular state, mostly populated by the all-embracing
Hindus, their leaders by and large deeply wedded to secularism and
democracy.”^([5](#5))

**IV**

Dr. Gopal Singh probably does not realize what he is saying, or perhaps
he does not care.  He seems to say that Hindus do not matter and that
they can be made quite irrelevant by means of a coalition of
minorities.  He also believes that the all-embracing character of
Hinduism and the secularism of Hindu leaders could also be utilized to
the same end.

Minorityism of a sort already existed even under the British in as much
as they ruled through favoured communities.  But a full-fledged
coalition of minorities which replaced the British and ruled in their
place or in their behalf was not possible, nor was it a part of the
dream of the loyal minorities - the coalition was meant to replace the
Hindus not the British.  Things have changed and the idea of a
minority-coalition is now quite attractive.  Neo-Leaguers find it of
great strategic value in their current move for power and Shahabuddin
and Co. have been advocating it for quite some time.  An ideological
axis between Muslim fundamentalism, pseudo-secularism, terrorism and
Marxism has already existed for quite some time; now it is taking a
concrete political shape.

During the British regime, while the League pursued its Muslim politics
to the hilt, it kept the Congress in tow by accusing it of being a Hindu
body.  The latter felt its self-image compromised and it tried to prove
its nationalist credentials by disowning any Hindu connection.  Some of
its stalwarts went further and falsified India’s history and accepted
the Muslim view of India and Hinduism.  All this, however, did not help
the Congress nor the Independence Movement but it did denature the
Congress and lower down the concept of Independence and rob it of its
spiritual anchorage.

Having proved its value, the politics of taunts and accusations
continues unabated.  Those who benefit by it have merely to hurl the
epithet ‘communal’, and there is a panic all around and the accused try
to establish their *secular* credentials by the only way they know - by
denouncing Hinduism.  All this has led to competitive minorityism,
selective communalism, the politics of out-musliming the Muslims and
Hindu-bashing.  But this politics is already getting discredited and
yielding opposite results.  It is awakening the Hindus and it is making
them realize that the whole lot is rotten and that they should now take
things in their own hands.

The context and the argument of the moment may have made Dr. Gopal Singh
concede that India is secular and that this has been made possible by
“all-embracing” Hinduism, but the pure-breed fraternity of secularists
are not ready to make any such concession.  They hold that India’s
secularism is phoney and it is negated by its Hinduism.  Khushwant Singh
finds that already India’s “official commitment to secularism is being
reduced to a meaningless clause in the constitution”; which is proved by
the “emphasis on Sanskrit and Hindi, study of the Aryan classics,
insertion of cow-protection as a directive clause of the constitution,
the increase in the number of cow-protection societies, the growth of
Hindu political groups such as the Bharatiya Jana Sangh and the militant
R.S.S.” And then speaking for all minorities in general and the Sikhs in
particular, he says that the “chief cause of Sikh uneasiness in free
India was the resurgence of Hinduism which threatened to engulf the
minorities,” and that the “Hindus, who form 80% of the population, will
in due course make Hinduism the state religion of India.”^([6](#6))

The grievances are truly on a grand scale and they coincide with
Hinduism itself.  Everything that relates to a Hindu - his language,
history, religion, classics - grieves our secularists.  If they were
living in England, they would be objecting to Shakespeare and Milton, to
the English language itself, to the Church of England, to the Englishmen
being in a majority.  Hindus can never hope to satisfy these secularists
and they should not even attempt to do it. They must follow their own
conscience and sense of right.  Should someone also begin to speak of
“the causes of Hindu uneasiness in secular India?”

Indeed, we are face to face with a strange kind of Sikhism.  The Sikh
Gurus had worked and fought for the resurgence of Hinduism but now we
are told that this resurgence is precisely the cause of Sikh
uneasiness.  Guru Govind Singh started sending Sikh Gyanis to Varanasi
to learn Sanskrit and to study the Epics, the Puranas and other classics
to understand the Adi Granth itself, but the neo-Akali ideologues find
Sanskrit and these classics objectionable.  Maharaja Ranjit Singh banned
cow-killing in his kingdom and a hundred Sikhs were blown to smithereens
by the British because they stood for cow-protection, but now it is an
anathema to secularist Akali scholars.  The fact is that it is not the
old Sikhism of the Gurus but a new version of it which has been taking
shape under the impact of very different ideological and political
forces that we are meeting.  This neo-Akalism is a child of
self-alienation and spiritual illiteracy and it, is at odd not only with
Hinduism but for that very reason with Sikhism itself.

Perhaps the neo-Akali ideologues do not realize what they are saying and
also that they have quite a part in shaping the current cruel events in
the Punjab.  Here I am not referring to the more dramatic and
terroristic aspect of the situation with which some of them at least -
and, certainly, our two historians - are not in sympathy and which they
have even opposed with courage, but I am talking of the mind and the
ideas and the sympathies that such works shape, and the distorted view
of Sikh scriptures and history which they teach which incline many Akali
youths to unworthy roles and set them adrift from their spiritual
moorings.

V.S. Naipaul, in his recent book, *India: A Million Mutinies Now*,
provides some intimate glimpses into the minds of some of the actors in
the Punjab tragedy.  He tells us of an interview which he heard on the
British Radio and which Bhindranwale had given from the premises of the
Golden Temple undergoing fortification just before the Blue Star
Operation: in this interview, Bhindranwale had said that Sikhism “was a
revealed religion; and the Sikhs were people of the Book.” Naipaul says
that he was “struck then by the attempt to equate Sikhism with
Christianity; to separate it from its speculative Hindu aspects, even
from its guiding idea of salvation as union with God and freedom from
transmigration.” But at that time, he thought that it was merely “an
attempt, by a man intellectually far away, to make his cause more
acceptable to his foreign interviewer.” He did not realize that the
attempt to give a Semitic rendering to their religions is an old one and
is not limited to Sikhism alone, nor to men “intellectually far away.”
It has very much to do with the circumstances in which the world came to
be dominated by people of Semitic religions.  During this period,
monolatry, prophetism, revelation - concepts of little spiritual
validity or worth - acquired a great political clout and social prestige
and these began to be adopted by many subject people.  They wanted their
religions to look like the Semitic ones with a single God, a Revelation,
a Prophet or Saviour, and a single Church or *Ummah*.

That is, however, a large question into which we need not go here.  But
returning to Naipaul we find that he discovered this phenomenon all
along among most militants he interviewed.  One militant, also an
intellectual of a sort, gave him a pamphlet which he had written. 
Naipaul tells us that the theme of it was “the separateness of the Sikh
faith and ideology from the Hindu; its further theme was that the Punjab
was geographically and culturally more a part of Middle East than of
India.  The great enemy of Sikhism and the Sikh empire of Ranjit Singh
had been - again - brahmanism.”

The writer of the pamphlet also narrated to Naipaul his evolution into a
militant Akali; he said he was baptized by the *amrit* stirred “with the
sword of Ali,” which was as the new lore believed, “in the possession of
the Moghul emperors, and it was presented to Guru Govind Singh by Moghul
emperor Bahadur Shah.” Naipaul reflects that again in the version of the
Sikh faith that the narrator propounded, “there was an Islamic twist, a
non-Hindu, a non-Indian aspect, a separateness of the faith from the
land of its Origin.”

Naipaul also asked his narrator whether he “had noticed any
discrimination as a Sikh.” He said yes; “he remembered that once, when
he was queuing up to buy a railway ticket, the booking clerk had been
rough with him.” And that is all.  In most cases, the Sikh grievances do
not amount to anything more than this.  The fact is that Sikhs cannot
complain of economic and political discrimination - they are by far the
most prosperous community and over-represented in most walks of life. 
Their grievances are really of the privileged and of the haves, not of
have-nots.  Also, as we have already seen, the neo-Akalis have embraced
a good deal of League politics and as a result they have also adopted
grievances suited to that politics.

**V**

But one might justly hold that what the Akali ideologues say is nothing
unique, and that they merely voice the current wisdom found amongst our
secularists - or pseudo-secularists if you win - who dominate our media,
our universities and our political life; that even in their antipathy
towards Hinduism and attraction for League politics, they follow rather
than lead the fashion of the day.  True, as their own politics
increasingly acquired the look of League politics, they found that what
justified it also justified them and therefore they adopted its
arguments and rationalizations.  But in its deeper ideation, they were
neither its initiators nor its loudest spokesmen.  That honour belongs
to Macaulayites, Marxists, Royists, and liberty forums.  Akali
self-alienation is only a small part and one expression of this larger
Hindu self-alienation.

This larger self-alienation has to do with the historical circumstances
of the last thousand years.  During this long period, India has lived
under two Imperialisms and it was constantly under their military,
political and ideological attack.  As a result, its psyche was badly
wounded; it lost self-confidence and developed a deep sense of
inferiority.  Hindus became apologetic about their religion, their Gods,
their culture, their institutions; they began to look at themselves
through the eyes of their rulers, thus learning to hold their religion
and culture in low esteem and even in contempt; some for sheer survival
learnt to be on the side of their masters and betray their own people;
some learnt to disown their identity in order to please their masters. 
In due course, this self-denigration and self-disowning became a part of
Hindu psyche.

Like any other imperialism, Muslim and British Imperialisms also created
a class of mercenaries and compradores - and here I am talking of
intellectual mercenaries; they created a collaborationist *tradition* or
*school* which endured even after the rulers had left.  Marxist
historians, for example, belong to the school of Hindu *munshis* whom
the Mughal kings employed to eulogize their rule and their religion, and
who wrote servilely to flatter their patrons and whose writings failed
to reflect even remotely the feelings, fears, hopes and yearnings of
their own subject fellow brothers.

This phenomenon of self-depreciation was not limited to India alone but
it was widely spread.  When the West became dominant, many ancient
peoples and cultures and countries including Russia and China were
filled with a great sense of inferiority.  This inferiority created d
class of people who were ashamed of their own past and wanted to be like
the West.  In due course, when they captured power in their countries
they proved the worst enemies of their people and great persecutors of
their cultures.  In China, the communists declared war on their ancient
ethics and thought, once considered glorious human achievements; they
destroyed half-a-million Buddhist shrines.

In Mongolia has been discovered a mass grave containing the remains of
thousands of Buddhist monks liquidated by a former communist regime.  An
83-old man, once head of an extermination squad, admitted that he
personally put 15,724 to death. 1197-at-Nalanda was repeated not by
invading Muslim armies but by local communist revolutionaries and social
transformers.

But not all these *westernizers* lacked patriotism.  What they lacked
was a larger view and a deeper wisdom.  They failed to see that the
Western culture itself was based on a very inadequate definition of man
and a distorted view of nature.

Returning to the Indian story, we find that as Hinduism became a dirty
word, and Hindus learnt to disown their identity, other smaller
identities and narrower loyalties, once part of a larger milieu, came to
the forefront.  Castes and *panths* and creeds became prominent; and
once becoming important they acquired their own momentum, power,
justification and vested interests.

Renascent Hinduism will have to contend with these forces; it will have
to overcome the forces of self-denigration and self-alienation; it will
have to become strong so that its present weakness does not breed
self-contempt in its own sons and daughters but on the other hand its
new strength should be such that those of them who were once forced to
leave come back to their ancestral fold in pride.  It must also realize
that it is not just a community in competition with other communities,
but that it is a nation and a civilization which has a great role to
play in the world.  It must work on this larger self-definition and
assert this larger self-identification.  No lesser definition will do.

But the task is not easy.  The old imperialist forces are active and
they are mobilizing old allies who worked for the division of the
country.  They have been joined by new vested interests who find
disintegration of the country equally useful or close to their heart. 
They daily tell you through the media they control that India is not
one, that it is only a geographical expression, or merely an
administrative entity; they tell you that while India is an abstraction,
its reality is “ethnic minorities” who have a right to their “national
homelands.” And as they push their right with the help of AK-47 rifles
and Kalashnikovs, they find that they have powerful friends and
protectors in Delhi and powerful ideologues of their cult in the press. 
Jagmohan, in his recent *My Frozen Turbulence in Kashmir* shows the deep
sickness that has overtaken the country, the intimate nexus that exists
between the militants, the so-called national political parties, and
groups of doubtful motives working under various names: liberty and
civil rights forums, prominent citizens or private initiative, etc. 
Their game is obvious; it is to confuse the nation’s counsel, to weaken
its will, to create a soft society so that its parts can be picked up
one by one.

Those who are against India are even more opposed to Hinduism, a name
for India at its deepest and most cultural and spiritual; Hinduism
embodies India’s civilization dimension and gives it cohesion,
integrity, continuity and unity.  They know that before they can subvert
India, they must subvert Hinduism, that the country’s balkanization is
not possible without prior fragmentation of the Hindu society.  Hence
their tenacious attack on Hinduism, their need to unleash caste
politics.  The game-plan allows the talents of people like V.P. Singhs,
Chandrashekhars and Mulayam Singhs full scope; it allows the Naxalites,
Marxists, Macaulayites to make their full contribution; it allows
Pakistan, petrodollars, evangelists, liberation theologians and several
other unnamed agencies to play a crucial role not always hidden.

But let not these odds discourage us.  Hinduism has survived in spite of
them and it will again grow strong in spite of them.  Hinduism is weak
in many ways, but it is still strong in spiritual knowledge.  It does
not derive from dogmas and personality cults, but it is grounded in
ethics, in the knowledge of the Spirit, in the culture of Yogas. 
Therefore its spiritual message is irresistible which is proved by the
fact that though it has sent out no missionaries it has attracted some
of the best minds of the world.  In fact, they are finding that Hinduism
is perhaps the only religion for the spiritually awakened people though
it has also enough in it to help people of various grades and stations
to make spiritual progress.  They are discovering through their own
reflection that true spirituality has little to do with the God of their
conventional religion - more often than not a psychic formation thrown
up by a mind not always pure - but with Self-knowledge, with *Atma*; not
with Commandments (often theological rather than moral) but with the
inherent ethics of the soul, its categorical imperative; not with
prophets and saviours (sometimes not even edifying figures), but with
discovering truth-forms of the soul.  Ale worst enemy of man is not an
inadequate social environment, but an inadequate philosophy, a distorted
ideology, an undeveloped and backward spirituality.

Hinduism or rather something akin to Hinduism is the natural religion of
seeking men.  Dogmatic religions are impositions.  Many thinking men in
Europe and America are realizing this and they are returning to their
nations’ old Gods and old religions which they lost when Christianity
triumphed.  And as they do it, they discover their natural affinity with
Hinduism; they also find that Hinduism still preserves the knowledge
that once gave life to these lost religions, the knowledge which can
also revive them and their Gods again.

The same thing is bound to happen in other parts and countries like
Egypt, Iran, Syria, and Central Asia once they acquire minimum freedom
to discuss spiritual matters and investigate their past.  Then they
would realize that they are not peoples of yesterday, but are ancient
nations who had their own developed spiritualities and that Islam was
imposed on them by force.  Hindu India could help them and such other
countries to rediscover their spiritual roots.

<div align="right">

Ram Swarup

</div>

New Delhi,   
Vijayadashami,  
October 18, 1991  
   
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))Khushwant Singh, *A History of the Sikhs*, Oxford University
Press, Vol.  II, pp. 266-67)

^([2](#2a))Gopal Singh, *A History of the Sikh People*, World Book
Centre, New Delhi. 1988 edition, p.712

^([3](#3a))*Ibid*., p.673

^([4](#4a))*Ibid*., p.687

^([5](#5a))*Ibid*., P.733-34

^([6](#6a))Khushwant Singh, *op. cit*., Volume II, pp.293. 304-305

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
