+++
title = "02 PREFACE"

+++
**PREFACE**

This book is intended to reveal the grim and tragic story of the
uprooting of more than seven million Hindus and Sikhs from their homes
in West Punjab, in the North-Western Frontier Province, in Sind and in
raider-occupied Kashmir.  The outlines of this story are well-known all
over the world, and have formed the subject of debate before the
representatives of the major portion of mankind, assembled in the United
Nations.  This biggest mass migration of humanity in history under
extreme duress has received the attention and active sympathy due to it
from the rest of India, and the world is keenly aware of the existence
of this large portion of uprooted humanity.

What, however, is not very well-known or fully borne in mind is the fact
that this tragic migration was the last culminating episode in a
conspiracy that had been under planning for more than a decade before it
actually occurred-the conspiracy of the Muslim League in India to
establish a Muslim State which should not be encumbered with any such
non-Muslim populations- as, would be a likely factor in diluting to any
extent its purely Muslim character.^([1](#1)) This conspiracy needs
being unmasked by recalling the history of the Indian Muslim League over
the period in which its inception and maturing occurred-so that
responsibility for this tragedy is fixed where it properly belongs.

Muslim League propaganda has sought to blame the Punjab happenings of
1947 on the Sikhs and in a secondary degree on the Hindus.  A distorted
and fragmentary picture, drawn up with completely bare-faced lying, has
been presented to the world of a Sikh “Plan”^([2](#2)) to attack and
drive out Muslims from the Punjab.  And for a time a part of the world
swallowed the lie, and the Sikhs got an unenviable reputation.  But the
pendulum of opinion slowly swung round in the right direction, and the
Sikh name now has been fairly cleared of the supposed crime of a “Plan”
against Muslims.  That the Sikh (and Hindu) attack on the Muslims in
East Punjab was retaliation under terrible and unbearable provocation is
now admitted to be a fact by all impartial people; though it is not
known everywhere of what horrible nature, of what prolonged duration and
diabolical character was the provocation offered to Sikhs by Muslims
over a period of several agonizing months-beginning from December,
1946.  There was a war unleashed by the Muslim population of the Punjab
to cow down Sikhs, and as a means to that, to carry on among them a
total campaign of murder, arson, loot and abduction of women.  Sikhs
passed through the experience of this war as a people for months; and
not thousands, but millions of them were forced to quit their homes for
safety in the process.  Without a clear knowledge of this part of the
story a just and balanced view of the situation cannot be formed.

The details of atrocities committed on Sikhs and Hindus given in these
paces are not full or even a fairly large proportion of what actually
befell.  They are only representative episodes of what happened in a few
villages and towns all over West Punjab and other West Pakistan areas. 
Imagine such things happening in thousands upon thousands of villages
and hundreds of towns, and you will then be able to take in the
proportions somewhat close to what the reality was-which, in the last
analysis must, however, remain inexpressible in its full horror.  The
facts drawn upon are statements of sufferers of these horrors, recorded
from complaints made to the authorities, from reliable press reports and
from statements recorded with scrupulous fidelity and signed by those
who made them, in the refugee camps in East Punjab.

Sikhs left behind their homes, the richest land in the Punjab, their
factories and prosperous businesses, their holy shrines, schools and
colleges-all under the pressure of the Pakistan terror, so that
according to unbiassed estimates 40% (and these perhaps the most
enterprising section of the community) were rendered refugees.  They
came out of their homes-hammed, despoiled and in unending trudging
caravans.  This vast human tragedy is too large even for the imagination
to take in without the help of facts presented in a telling way.

This record is intended in the first place to rehabilitate the Sikh
name, maligned by false propaganda of the leaders and press of Pakistan,
and secondly to serve as part of the material for anyone who should set
out to write a full history of the Punjab of these terrible 1947 months.

<div align="right">

COMPILER

</div>

  

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))The recent (1950) driving out of Hindus from East Bengal
(Pakistan) is only the latest episode in this story.

^([2](#2a))Two scurrilous pamphlets were published by the West Punjab
Government (Pakistan) in 1948, entitled “The Sikh Plan” and “Sikhs in
Action.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
