+++
title = "03 PAKISTAN-BIRTH AND OBJECTIVES"

+++
**PAKISTAN-BIRTH AND OBJECTIVES**

Pakistan grew out of the two-nation theory of the Muslim League, which
for the last twenty years or more has been synonymous with its permanent
president, the late Mohamed Ali Jinnah, called by the Muslims
Qaid-i-Azam or the Supreme Leader.  The career of Qaid-i-Azam Jinnah
indicates a curious and. ironic development from being ‘the apostle of
Hindu-Muslim Unity, as he was called by admiring Congressmen, to being
the chief exponent, advocate and creator of Pakistan-a state based upon
the thesis that the Muslims of India are a separate nation, and a,, such
need a homeland and state for themselves, separate from Hindu-land. 
Pakistan is now a predominantly Muslim state, so predominantly Muslim in
its population that its western and more important portion has in the
course of a few months of its establishment, been almost completely rid
of its Hindu, Sikh and to a great extent of its Christian and
untouchable populations.  By what processes this development has been
brought about is what this booklet is designed to relate.  The present
overlords of Pakistan have declared times out of number that Pakistan is
*in character* a Muslim State-the largest Muslim State in the world. 
This description of its character, when placed side by side with the
declared character of India as a secular state, which she is also sought
to be made in effect, has unnerved the Hindu population of faraway East
Bengal, where alone now in Pakistan Hindus in any appreciable numbers
are found.  Since October last a deliberate policy on the part of the
Muslim majority in East Bengal, with the connivance of the East Bengal
Muslim League Government, forced the Hindus out of that Province.  This
exodus of Hindus became such a vast movement of emigration, that in
October, 1948 official estimates put the number of Hindu immigrants from
Eastern Pakistan into India at fifteen lakhs.  More and more were
following over the border into Assam and West Bengal everyday, and the
refugee problem for the Indian Government already preoccupied with the
rehabilitation of about a crore of people from Western Pakistan and
Kashmir, began to assume a desperate look.  That is what made Sardar
Patel to declare that if the Pakistan Government did not take effective
steps to stop the exodus of Hindus from East Bengal the India Government
would claim proportionate territory from East Bengal for the
resettlement of the Hindus immigrants.  This exodus is only an
illustration of the fact that the driving out of minorities and
non-Muslim populations is something inherent in the very nature,
conception and scope of the kind of state which the Muslims have
achieved through the good offices of the British in the shape of
Pakistan.  No amount of reasonableness and accommodation, no attempts at
friendship and understanding on the part of India could avert what
occurred in West Punjab, in the North-Western Frontier Province, in
Sind, in Bahawalpur, in raider-occupied Kashmir and is at present
occurring in East Bengal.  The thing is inevitable and inherent in the
nature of the State of Pakistan and the entire attitude and mentality of
which this State is the result.  It is a significant fact that while in
India, the Government discourages *communal* groups and parties, in
Pakistan no group or parties other than communal are encouraged.  A
Pakistan Peoples’ Congress is inconceivable.  When the Hindu leaders of
Sind planned the establishment of a political party which might draw its
membership from people belonging to various religions, the reply of the
Pakistan Government was characteristic.  The Hindus of Sind, (such of
them as are still there) might have a Hindu Party, but not one which
Muslims also might join.  In the *Muslim State* of Pakistan, no Muslim
may join any organization other than a purely Muslim one.  It is such an
attitude which bred the riots of 1946 and 1947-Calcutta, Noakhali, N.-W.
F. P., the Punjab, Sind and Bahawalpur.

The very name of the State which the Muslim League envisaged-and
achieved-is, in the context in which it was adopted, a standing insult
to the Hindus and other non-Muslims living in India.  This
name-*Pakistan*-means literally ‘the Land of the Pure’ or of Purity. 
This implies clearly that Hindus and all that belongs to them credally
and materially is impure, defiled and unholy.  In a communally-charged
atmosphere to have broadcast such an offensive name and concept among
the Muslims was to extend an open invitation to racial and communal
arrogance, contempt of others, challenges and counter-challenges.

The origin of the Pakistan idea is briefly this: - 

Dr. Mohammad Iqbal in his presidential address at the Annual Muslim
League Session held at Allahabad in .1930, advocated the establishment
of a separate Muslim State or Federation in India on the basis of the
Muslims’ separate political identity, in these words: “The Muslim demand
for the creation of Muslim India within India is, therefore, perfectly
justified. ………. I would like to see the Punjab, North-West Frontier
Province, Sind and Baluchistan amalgamated into a single state. 
Self-Government within the British Empire, or without the British
Empire, the formation of a consolidated North-West Indian Muslim State
appears to me to be the final destiny of the Muslims at least of
North-West India.”

This was the first hint thrown into the atmosphere of Indian politics of
a separate Muslim State or Federation.  But the thing at this stage was
a vague aspiration, the desire towards a separate state was unformed in
anybody’s mind as a concrete programme-symptomatic nevertheless of a
dangerous way of thinking and an explosive kind of mentality.

Dr. Mohammad Iqbal’s thesis did not immediately find much support among
the Indian Muslims.  At the Round Table Conference which was held in
London soon after, the Muslim delegates talked in terms only of
safeguards and the proportions of seats the Muslims might get in the
various legislatures of India in addition to pleas for the creation of a
new Muslim-majority province, namely Sind.  The official policy of the
Muslim League in these years continued to be very much the same-any
thought of setting up a separate state being regarded as the vision of
an idealist, a poet, but in no way practical politics.

But Dr. Mohammad Iqbal was by no means the only Muslim who thought in
terms of a separate Muslim State in India.  In the January of 1933
appeared, on behalf of certain Indian Muslim students at Cambridge,
headed by Chaudhari Rehmat Ali, a pamphlet entitled *Now or Never*. 
This pamphlet advocated a complete break away of the Muslims of
North-Western zones of India from the rest of the Indian nation. 
“India” it said, “is not the name of single country, nor the home of one
single nation.  It is in fact, the designation of a state created for
the first time in history by the British.” The Moslems are shewn in this
pamphlet to be altogether separate in their way of life from the other
people of India, and hence the unmistakable conclusion is suggested that
they must have a separate state of their own.  Says the pamphlet, ‘We do
not inter-dine, we do not intermarry.  Our national customs and
calendars, even our diet and dress, are different.  Hence the Muslims
demand the recognition of a separate national status.’

It is necessary here to point out that the essence of this last argument
given above has been repeated ever since 1940 by all Muslim Leaguers,
down from Mr. Jinnah.  Differences and cleavages have been emphasized
and the doctrine of hate and animosity has been preached.  Muslim
separatism has been bolstered up; all attempts made in the
past-comparatively remote and recent-by far-sighted Hindus and Muslims,
Kings, poets, founders of faiths and others-have been sought to be
written off.  This exaggerated account of the cleavage between the
Muslim and the Hindu (and Sikh) way -of life led, when factors favour
able to such a consummation had developed fully, to the orgy of rioting
in Bengal, the N.-W. F. Province, the Punjab and Sind.  As a matter of
fact, it would have been a surprising thing if after the gospel of hate
which the Muslim League had been preaching to the Indian Muslims for so
many years, these riots and their accompanying horrors and devastation
had not occurred.

The word ‘Pakistan’, which so powerfully caught the imagination of the
Muslims of India, and which pinned the vague, floating idealism of
savants like Dr. Mohammad Iqbal to a concrete objective and programme,
is a coinage of Chaudhari Rehmat Ali, who has been mentioned above.  He
has been hailed among the Muslims as the founder of Pakistan National
Movement.  The coinage is said to have been formed from the initial
letters of the names of the Provinces designed to compose the original
Pakistan -The North-Western zone.  These provinces were: Punjab,
Afghania (N.-W. Frontier Province) Kashmir and Baluchistan (which
contributed the end letters to the name).  Apart from this genesis of
the name, which perhaps was an afterthought, the name is a Persian
compound formation; and an offensive challenge to the non-Muslims,
extremely defiant and provoking, is inherent in it. For Pakistan means
the Land of the Pure, in this case the Muslims.

Pakistan, as has been told above, was originally conceived to comprise
only the North-Western areas of the Punjab, Sind, Kashmir, the N.-W.
Frontier Province and Baluchistan.  But in a later concept of the thing,
issued in the form of a revised version of the original scheme, it was
devised to comprise, besides the areas originally ear-marked for it,
also Assam and Bengal in the East, and Hyderabad and Malabar in the
South.  In addition to these extensive strongholds of Muslim power in
the North-West, in the East and the South, beleaguering non-Muslim India
from all strategic points, were also to be several smaller though by no
means too small, Muslim pockets, studded all over the country-one in the
United Provinces, one in the heart of Rajputana and another still in
Bihar.  Thus, the Muslims of all India, and not only those of the Muslim
majority areas, were to have independent countries of their own,
parcelling out India into so many new Muslim-dominated States.

This process in its conception carried with itself certain very
far-reaching, and in the light of the communal developments of 1946 and
1947, very significant and pregnant corollaries.  Rehmat Ali, whatever
else he might be, has been quite fertile in the devising of catching,
though somewhat megalomaniac names.  Besides Pakistan, he has been
responsible for the concept of India as *Dinia*, a cleverly suggestive
anagram.  Dinia would be the continent which, if not at the moment the
home of an Islamic State, was such in immediate conception, waiting to
be converted and subordinated to Islam through the proselytising and
conquering zeal of its sons.  Bengal and Assam, conceived as a joint
Muslim-majority area by a logic partial to Muslim reasoning, was
rechristened by Rehmat Ali Bang-i-Islam or Bangistan, redolent of the
Feudal Moghal name of Bengal, *Bangush*, which has been offensive to the
Hindu, suffering for centuries under the hell of the Muslim.  The Muslim
Homelands parcelled out of Bihar, the U. P. and Rajputana (the Ajmer
area, where is the shrine of the great Muslim Saint, Khawaja Muinuddin
Chisti) were to be called respectively Faruquistan, Haideristan and
Muinistan.  Hyderabad, ruled over by a Muslim Prince, with its 86% Hindu
population, was to be called Osmanistan, after the name of the present
Nizam; and the Moplah tracts of Malabar were named Moplistan.  There
would, besides, be areas known as Safistan and Nasaristan.  On the map
of India (or Dinia) as drawn by Rehmat Ali, non-Muslim areas make
unimpressive, miserable patches, interspersed on all sides with Muslim
states, born out of conflict with Hindu India, and pursuing a set policy
of converting, conquering and amalgamating this Hindu India into
themselves.  Such was the conception of Pakistan, at any rate the first
push, made popular among the Indian Muslims by the tremendous force of
propaganda which communal and fanatical zeal could lend to the Muslim
League of which we have been witnessing the grimly tragic consequences
since August, 1946.

All this mentioned above was elaborated by Rehmat Ali in 1940, the year
in which his concept had been so far successful that the Lahore Session
of the Muslim League passed the famous Pakistan Resolution, adopting the
achievement of an independent ‘Muslim State’ out of the United India of
British formation, as the immediate goal of the Muslim League policy. 
Rehmat Ali’s Pamphlet of 1940 was entitled *Millat of Islam and the
Menace of Indianism*.  By the Menace of Indianism was implied the
conception of the Indian Muslims as a separate nation, who must refuse
to be of India, and must demand a separate state or several ‘states’ to
be in alliance with one another, for themselves.  The elucidation of
this conception by Rehmat Ali is very revealing for a student of the
trends forming the Indian Muslim mentality of the last decade or so.

In 1942 Rehmat Ali came out with still another Pamphlet, called *The
Millat and its Mission*.  In this Pamphlet, apart from the concept of
India as Dinia or the land which was destined to be converted in its
entirety to Islam and to Muslim hegemony, there was a very revealing
attitude about minorities.  As has been pointed out by all, those who
have been critical of the programme of Pakistan, the problem of
minorities to be left in Pakistan and Hindustan would be the chief
stumbling block of any future policy in these states.  Vast Hindu-Sikh
and Muslim minorities would be left in Pakistan and Hindustan
respectively, and to settle with them would require imagination, tact
and a high degree of fairness.  The Muslim League advocates of Pakistan
have been prolific with assurances of fair treatment towards
minorities-assurances never seriously meant to be kept, and broken in
the most unworthy manner in all the territories which became part of the
Pakistan State.  What the Muslim Leaguers had been planning all these
years was really to drive out minorities from Pakistan, and in this way
to solve the minority problem.  Listen to the illuminating remarks of
Rehmat Ali on minorities.  Says Rehmat Ali:

‘What is the fundamental truth about minorities……… remember that, in the
past ‘Minorityism’ has ever proved itself a major enemy of the Millat;
that at present it is sabotaging us religiously, culturally, and
politically even in our national lands; and that in the future, it would
destroy us throughout the Continent of Dinia and its dependencies, Hence
the Commandment (one of the seven commandments laid down in the pamphlet
“The Millat and its Mission”), Avoid ‘Minorityism’, which means *that we
must not leave our minorities in Hindu lands, even if the British and
the Hindus offer them the so-called constitutional safeguards*.  For no
safeguards can be substituted for the nationhood which is their
birthright.  *Nor must we keep Hindu and/or Sikh minorities in our
lands, even if they themselves were willing to remain with or without
any special safeguards*.  For they will never be of us.  Indeed, while
in ordinary times they will retard our national reconstruction, in times
of crisis they will betray us and bring about our redestruction.

“This is the gist of the Commandment.  It may be expanded into the
factual statement that

“(*a*) To leave our minorities in Hindu lands is:-

\(1\) To leave under Hindu hegemony 35 million Muslims who form no less
than 1/3 of the whole Millat, which in her struggle for freedom has no
allies in the continent.  

\(2\) To deny their resources to the cause of the Millat at a time when
she needs the maximum contribution of every one of her sons and
daughters.  

\(3\) To devote their lives and labour to the cause of the Hindu
*Jati*.  I hope people who argue that an equal number of (35 millions)
Hindu and Sikh minorities in Pakistan, Bangistan and Osmanistan will be
working for the Millat overlook the fact that the work of one can never
compensate for that of the other………”

To reinforce still further the lesson and the determination for the
total elimination of minorities, Rehmat Ali argues further on, more
uncompromisingly,

“(*b*) To keep Hindus and/or Sikh minorities in our lands is:

“(1) To keep in Muslim lands 35 million Hindus and Sikhs who form no
more than 1/8 of the total strength of the force opposing the Millat in
the Continent of Dinia.  

\(2\) To condemn to permanent servitude our 35 million brethren living
in Hindu Dinia, i.e., outside Pakistan, Bangistan and Osmanistan.  The
reason is that unless and until we accept this commandment we cannot
liberate them from the domination of ‘Indianism’.

(5) To forget even the unforgettable lesson taught to us by the
disappearance of our own Pak Empire^([1](#1)) and of the Turkish Empire,
namely that one of the major causes of their decline, defeat and
downfall was the treachery and treason of their religious, racial and
political minorities.”

Thus, in a thorough and relentless way Rehmat Ali has pleaded for the
total elimination of minorities from Pakistan.  How deeply the lesson
sank into the minds of the Muslim League and the average Muslim, will be
seen from the pronouncements given below of the leaders of Muslim
opinion in India from Qaid-i-Azam Jinnah downwards, on the question of
Minorities and the exchange of population.  It was this lesson,
thoroughly learnt, which led to the hounding out of the non-Muslim
populations from Eastern Bengal (1946), N.-W. Frontier Province (1946
and 1947), Western Punjab, Sind and its adjoining areas, and now from
the East Bengal Province of Pakistan.

Mr. Jinnah replying to a question seeking suggestions for the
restoration of peace in India, said: “In view of the horrible slaughter
in various parts of India, I am of the opinion that the authorities,
both Central and Provincial, should take up immediately the question of
exchange of population to avoid brutal recurrence of that which had
taken place where small minorities have been butchered by the
overwhelming majorities.

“The Viceroy-because he alone can do it-as the representative of the
Crown and as the Governor-General with powers that are vested in him,
should adopt every means and measures to restore, first, peace and
order.  In the present conditions there is no room for reason,
intelligence and fair-play.  Negotiations in these conditions can hardly
yield fruitful results and produce a settlement satisfactory to both
parties.”

It may be pointed out here that exchange of population has been in the
mind of all Muslim exponents of Pakistan, or whatever the Muslim State
designed to be carved out of India has been called. Dr. Latif of
Hyderabad (Deccan), in his book *The Muslim Problem in India*, in spite
of the temperate language used by him and the reasoned way in which he
has made out the case for creating Hindu and Muslim zones, has advocated
the exchange of population.  On this problem he says, “One of the
objects of the transitional constitution^([2](#2)) is to *facilitate and
prepare the ground for migration of Muslims and the Hindus* into the
zones specified for them so as to develop them into cuturally
homogeneous States.

During the transitional period migration should be on a
voluntary^([3](#3)) basis.  For this the necessary legislation will have
to be passed for each region, and a machinery set up to organise and
regulate this voluntary Migration.”

There is unconscious humour and irony in the use of the epithet
‘voluntary’ for this migration, for which Dr. Latif’s scheme postulates
the provision of legislation and a suitable machinery by the Government
or the Governments concerned.  Of course, when the Muslim Leaguers did
actually come to establish a Government of their own on August 15, 1947,
they drove the non-Muslim population out of their country with scant
ceremony-by a campaign of pillage, murder, rape and arson.  This method
effected the exchange desired much quicker and in a more thorough way
than could be done by any human legislation.  As a matter of fact, the
driving out of minorities had begun as early as November, 1946 with
Noakhali, when the whole of Northern India was flooded with destitutes
begging for a morsel or a piece of cloth to cover their shivering
bodies.  Later this was effected in December, 1946 and January, 1947 in
the Hazara District of the N.-W. Frontier Province, when Sikhs and
Hindus had to flee for dear life into the Punjab.  And then came March,
1947 with its horrors.  August, 1947 let loose a vast flood of
persecution of millions.  So, the Muslim scheme was being translated
into historic fact to the letter.

To return now for a while to Rehmat Ali, whose pamphlets provided the
germ of the Pakistan idea, and the Muslim League Plans and such bodies
as the Muslim National Guards, which were subsidiary to it.  Rehmat Ali
had the dream of reviving the old Muslim glory.  His ultimate vision was
of a Muslim India or Dinia, over which Islam must rule in its
traditional manner.  The areas carved out for Muslims in the midst of
Hindu India mentioned above, were called by Rehmat Ali.  ‘footholds’. 
Footholds from which presumably the Muslims were to plan expansion into
the heart of the neighbouring non-Muslim areas, and to link up with one
another, for tightening up their stranglehold in these non-Muslim areas.
Jinnah’s own abortive proposals for a ‘corridor’ to link up Eastern and
Western Pakistan was somewhat of this nature.  Have an area running all
over Northern India, cutting India into two-and plan for the rest from
this advantageous position.

Presumably had Hyderabad been in a position to accede to Pakistan, a
corridor would have been demanded for linking it up with Pakistan in the
shape of an outlet to the sea.  This has been the tempo, the character
and the insatiably ambitious nature of the Pakistan Plan, conspiring for
the conquest of Hindu India.  Rioting and pillaging would be accounted
only as minor rehearsary exercises in such a mighty and vast programme
of action!

On the exchange of population, Mr. Jinnah expressed himself quite
clearly on a number of occasions, as already quoted.  His views were not
those of a mere idealist like Rahmat Ali, or of an intellectual like Dr.
Latif, but of the leader of the most powerful Muslim Party in India,
whose words would carry tremendous influence with the Muslim masses and
would be effective in forming their attitude and reactions.  Speaking in
Kingsway Hall in London on December 13, 1946, when he had gone there to
have consultations with the British Government regarding the future
functioning or killing of the Constituent Assembly, to which talks the
Congress leaders too had been invited, Mr. Jinnah made a passionate plea
for the Muslim State of Pakistan, which would be inhabited by ‘one
hundred million people, *all Muslims*.’ The implication of this is very
clear.  The Muslim population of India was, according to the Muslim
League plan, to be concentrated in Pakistan, and as a necessary
corollary, the non-Muslims were to be packed off.  ‘The important
implications of such remarks were not lost upon the Muslims of the
Muslim majority areas of India, and they formulated their plans for
effecting a clean sweep of the non-Muslim minorities from their lands.

A few excerpts from the text of this speech of Mr. Jinnah, made at a
time when the situation in the country was very explosive, and any
provocation provided to the Muslims would lead to widespread rioting,
should serve to reveal the real nature of the campaign started by the
Muslim League.  The terrible Calcutta riots had already occurred;
Noakhali was hardly a month-old affair and stirrings of the Muslim
population of Hazara District in the N.-W.F.P. against the Sikhs were
becoming visible.  At such a time to have propounded the twin theories
of complete cultural and credal separation and the exchange of
population was only to inflame rioting on the part of the Muslims still
further.  Said Mr. Jinnah at Kingsway Hall:

“In the North-West and North-East zones of India which are our homeland
and where we are in a majority of 70% we say we want a separate State of
our own.  There we can live according to our own notions of life.  *The
differences between Hindus and Muslims are so fundamental that there is
nothing that matters in life upon which we agree.*

*“It is well known to any student of History that our heroes, our
culture, our language, our music, our architecture, our jurisprudence,
our social life are absolutely different and distinct*.  We are told
that the so-called one India is British-made.  It was by the sword.  It
can only be held as it has been held.  Do not be misled by anyone saying
that India is one and why, therefore, should it not continue to be one. 
What do we want?  I tell you, Pakistan.  Pakistan presupposes that
Hindustan should also be a free State.

“What would Hindus lose?  Look at the map.  They would have
three-quarters of India.  They would have the best parts.  They have a
population of nearly 200,000,000.  Pakistan “is certainly not the best
part of India.  We should have a population of 100,000,000, *all
Muslims*.

“On July the 27th, we decided to change our policy and to resort to
“Direct Action”-a big change of policy-and we decided to tell our people
this on August the 16th.

“Reviewing the whole position, there is no other way but to divide
India.  Give Muslims their homeland and give Hindus Hindustan.”

The Muslim League’s famous ‘Pakistan Resolution’ was passed in its
Annual session at Lahore in April, 1940.  It declared for the first time
the objective of Muslim League policy in India thus:

“Resolved that it is the considered view of this session of the
All-India Muslim League that no constitutional plan would be acceptable
in this country or acceptable to the Muslims, unless it is designed on
the following basic principles, namely, that geographically contiguous
units are demarcated into regions which should be so constituted with
such territorial readjustments as may be necessary, that the areas in
which Muslims are numerically in a majority, as in the north-western and
north-eastern zones of India should be grouped to constitute 8
independent states in which the constituent units shall be autonomous
and sovereign………”

Non-Muslim India did not readily give acceptance for this proposal which
on the very face of it was outrageous and the consequences of which
appeared to be nothing less than a relentless and destructive civil war
in the country.  Large sections of the Muslims too did not find this
solution of the country's constitutional problem acceptable, as it would
mean endless rioting in which Muslims as surely as non-Muslims would
suffer.  But the British Government found in this resolve of the Muslim
League a fresh sign of the perpetuation of the communal rift in India
and they were not slow to lend it countenance in a way, and as Congress
leaders repeatedly declared, to put a premium on Muslim League
intransigeance which made any reasonable settlement well-nigh
impossible.  The Viceroy, Lord Linlithgow, whose regime in India was
marked for the campaign of repression launched by the British Government
against the freedom movement in India, said in the well-known August
1940 ‘offer’ to India, “It goes without saying that they (the British
Government) could not contemplate transfer of their present
responsibilities for the peace and welfare of India to any system of
Government whose authority is directly denied by large and powerful
elements in India's national life.  Nor could they be parties to the
coercion of such elements into submission to such a Government.”

Here was a clear hint to all such groups as would decide to dissociate
themselves from the Congress, that any such dissociation on the part
would be duly noted and respected.  The Princes, the Muslim League and
any others might come along.  But coming as this declaration did not
long after the passing of the “Pakistan Resolution” it is clear that it
was meant as an acceptance by the British Government of the right of
Muslim separation.  Such was the joint Anglo-Muslim conspiracy out of
which Pakistan was born.  And the two forces-the British Government and
the Muslim League-worked hand in hand right up till the 15th August,
1947 to make Pakistan a fact, and to create such a temper of hate and
lack of confidence between the communities as would make any thought of
their living together an utter impossibility.

But the British Government did not stop short at this above
declaration.  In the Prime Minister's Statement in the House of Commons
on March 11, 1942 on the eve of the departure of Sir Stafford Cripps on
his historic mission to India it was said: “He (Sir Stafford) carries
with him the full confidence of His Majesty's Government, and he will
strive in their name to procure the necessary measure of assent, not
only from the Hindu majority, but also from those great minorities among
whom the Muslims are the most numerous and on many ground pre-eminent.”

With these and other declarations of the British Government’s policy in
their pocket, with the full support of the British bureaucracy in India
with whom in Pandit Nehru’s famous words the Muslim League had ‘a mental
alliance’ and with the confidence that any and every act of
intransigeance on its part would be respected by the British Government,
the Muslim League devised plans for creating sanctions behind its
extreme demands.  The sanctions were to be riots against Hindus, and
when these came into the Punjab, against the Sikhs as well.  Very
evidently the Muslim League was not at war with the British Government. 
Its war was with Hindu India, and so against Hindu India it would start
a fierce campaign.  While the War lasted, it did not suit the British
Government td have any large-scale rioting or conflict inside India, as
that would have meant hindering the war-effort.  But all this while the
propaganda campaign for Pakistan was kept on at full blast.  When the
Congress started its 1942 movement, Mr. Jinnah made vituperative
speeches against the Congress and called upon Muslims to oppose this
movement.  The Muslim League press all through this struggle used words
like ‘goondas’ in describing the Congress fighters against British
rule.  Even the British press did not say harder things against the
Congress leaders and workers than did the Muslim.

A good deal has been written regarding the psychological, political and
historical factors which led to the formulation of the Muslim demand for
Pakistan.  Leaving aside the issues which may be controversial and may
reflect only individual reactions, two or three things appeared to be
quite clear as to the factors which made this demand possible.  One was
the clear need of the British Government in the event of parting with
power in India; which they well knew, could not be long delayed, of
leaving behind them a warning and divided India.  The other was the
peculiarly arrogant and narcissian temperament of Mr. Jinnah which kept
him perpetually in conflict with the great personalities inside the
Congress, a number of whom were his equals, and so he would have to work
with them in a team and not dictate to them, as he could unquestionably
do inside the Muslim League, made up of mediocrities for the most part. 
Added to these was the general temper and behaviour of the Muslims,
especially in the important Muslim-majority provinces of Bengal and the
Punjab in which the Muslim-dominated ministries, which to begin with
were not Muslim League but became so in 1940, were ruling over the
Hindus and in the later province over the Hindus and Sikhs, in a most
discriminatory manner, extremely provocative to the latter.

In these two provinces, of which the Punjab had been called by Mr.
Jinnah the ‘corner stone’ of Pakistan, and which were, between them to
constitute the bulk of the territory and about 80% of the population of
Pakistan, a policy of thoroughly beating down the non-Muslims had been
in operation for some time.  In Bengal, and to a still greater extent in
the Punjab, the administration was placed in its most important aspects
into Muslim hands.  Hindus and Sikhs were removed from key positions,
and Hindu or Sikh officers as were occupying such positions, were
transferred to routine or office work, and those whose promotions were
due were kept down under one pretext or the other.  Wherever any
District Magistrate or other senior administrative officer showed
impartiality and dared to put down the aggressive Muslim elements within
his area, the wrath of the Muslim Ministers inevitably descended upon
him, and he soon found himself cast into the wilderness of the
secretariat or such work as would keep him in a position of utter
impotence, under the check of some Muslim favourite of the Ministry.  In
administration there were glaring instances of discrimination against
non-Muslims, which while they made the average Muslim very arrogant and
aggressive, put the non-Muslims in a mood of desperation against
injustice of the administrative machinery.  It was the opinion openly
held in these times among the Hindus and Sikhs of the Punjab and the
Hindus of Bengal, that in these two provinces, the Muslims already had
Pakistan *in action* though not in name. As a matter of fact, that
astute politician, the late Sir Sikandar Hyat Khan, Premier of the
Punjab from 1937 to the end of 1942, suggested in vain to his Muslim
League colleagues not to press for a formal division of India into
independent states, but to ask only for the creation of Hindu and Muslim
*zones* within an Indian Federation with a weak centre, as that would
give the Muslims all the advantages of Pakistan without the liabilities,
financial and political, of having an independent State, which would be
deprived of the rich economic backing of the more productive parts of
India.  He and his Unionist Party succeeded to a great extent in making
the Punjab very much a Muslim province.  Protests of Hindu and Sikh
politicians and legislators were of no avail.  Sir Sikandar died in the
December of 1942, and his death removed from the field of Muslim
politics perhaps the only, if any, figure who could have successfully
helped to modify at least some of the extreme theories of Mr. Jinnah. 
His successor, Sir Khizar Hyat Khan, although a capable man and one who
got ample support from Hindus and Sikhs as against the rabid Punjab
Muslim League, became as time passed, altogether helpless to resist the
onslaught of the League on his party and the Hindu and Sikh minorities
of the Punjab.

After the passing of the Pakistan Resolution by the League and the
declaration by the British Viceroy and the British Prime Minister that
the Muslim point of view would be given a place of importance in all
constitutional negotiations, the next Annual Session of the Muslim
League (1941) held at Madras showed still greater vehemence in the
expression of the Pakistan demand by the Muslim League.  While repeating
the substance of the Pakistan demand in its resolutions” this session
drew forth an exposition of this demand from its President, Mr. Jinnah. 
He said, “The goal of the All-India Muslim League is that we want to
establish a completely independent State in the north-west and eastern
zones of India with full control on defence, foreign affairs,
communications, customs, currency, exchange etc.  We do not want under
any circumstances a constitution of All-India character with one
Government at the centre.  We will never agree to that.  If you once
agree to it, let me tell you that the Muslims would be absolutely wiped
out of existence.  We shall never be a feudatory of any power or of any
Government at the Centre so far as our free national homelands are
concerned.  Muslim India will never submit to an All-Indian constitution
and one Central Government.  The ideology of the League is based on the
fundamental principle *that the Muslims of India are an independent
nationality and that any attempt to get them to merge their national and
political identity and ideology will be resisted*………”

The last portion, italicized by the present writer, is worthy of note. 
Resistance, direct action’ struggle-these words have been the keynote of
the Muslim League in defining its relations with Hindu India.  As early
as 1938, at its Patna Session, the Muslim League had passed a resolution
declaring: “The time has come to authorise the Working Committee of the
All-India Muslim League to decide and resort to direct action if and
when necessary”.  This was to launch a struggle against the Congress
Ministries on whose resignation in November, 1939 in protest against the
drafting by the British Government of India into the war without prior
consent of the people, the Muslim League celebrated its ‘Thanksgiving
Day’.

Mahatma Gandhi was released from prison in 1944, and while in prison he
had addressed a letter to Mr. Jinnah asking him to come and see him for
a talk regarding the political settlement in the country.  This letter
the British Government withheld, but Mr. Jinnah and the country knew of
it from a Government *communique*.  The Muslim press was moved at this
gesture on the part of the incarcerated Mahatma, but not Mr. Jinnah.  He
found occasion, even in the Mahatma’s writing an invitation to him, to
abuse and vilify the latter, and so he never applied to the Government
for permission to see the Mahatma.  On coming out of prison, with the
Congress still in jail, the Mahatma went to meet Mr. Jinnah, at his
Bombay residence, day after day.  But Mr. Jinnah really did not want a
settlement.  So the Mahatma’s approach proved unavailing.  Then, in
1945, after the surrender of Germany when the Congress leaders were
released, Lord Wavell, the Viceroy called the famous conference at
Simla, of Congress, League, Sikh and other leaders.  Nothing short of
complete severance of relations with the rest of India would satisfy Mr.
Jinnah.  Parity was offered with the Congress to the Muslim League on a
basis of 5:5 in a cabinet of 14.

This was to be an interim measure, with the permanent settlement to come
a little later.  But Mr. Jinnah would have none of it.  The Muslim
temper of hostility to the Hindus was kept up by the resolutions of the
Muslim League, the speeches of Mr. Jinnah and the Muslim League leaders
and the comments of the Muslim League-controlled press.

During the period the Muslim League was preparing, as is now evident
from what happened in 1946 and 1947, for a large-scale struggle against
Hindu India, and in the Punjab inevitably against the Sikhs and Hindus,
the Muslim League had been gathering a private army of its own, to which
training was being imparted in fighting, stabbing and assaults.  Arms
were being collected, and demobilized Muslim personnel of the Indian
Army were freely enlisted in the League army.  This army, begun about
the year 1938, continued to expand and grow better equipped.  It had two
famous organizations; one was the Muslim League Volunteer Corps, which
was parallel to the Congress Seva Dal.  But there was a great difference
between the Congress body and this League body.  The Congress adopted
and followed its creed of non-violence.  The Congress volunteers were
forbidden even under the gravest provocation to retaliate with physical
force.  They were to regulate crowds, to organize picketing,
anti-Government processions to arrange protest strikes, but no way to
fight.  But the Muslim League creed was not non-violent.  Every town
with any Muslim population had a large proportion of its Muslim
inhabitants who could be counted only as riff-raff, and who very often
with the connivance of the black sheep among the police force, lived on
crime.  Such unprincipled elements were the favourite recruiting ground
for the Muslim League volunteer corps.  Any hooligan with the badge and
uniform of a political organization, which was day in and day out
preaching the gospel of hatred against other communities, would be
formidable in a well-organized group, which could back him up, and
direct him in secret and violent action.

Still more important and more dangerous was the Muslim National Guards,
which by the bye, is now converted into the Pakistan National Guards.

The Muslim National Guards did not owe any formal allegiance to the
Muslim League, though it had the same flag as the Muslim League had.  It
is well-known that the National Guards was the secret arm of the Muslim
League.  Its membership was secret and it had its own centres and
headquarters, where its members received military training and such
instruction as would make them affective in times of rioting, such as
using the lathi, the spear and the knife.  The Unit Commander of the
Muslim National Guards was known as *Salar*, over whom were higher
officers, but all functioning secretly and with clearly such
instructions as would make them formidable in rioting against unarmed
non-Muslims populations. When in January, 1947 the Lahore office of the
Muslim National Guards was raided by the Punjab police, a good deal of
Military equipment including steel helmets ant badges were recovered. 
The National Guards had their own jeeps and lorries, which helped them
in swift mobility for attack on Hindu and Sikh localities, in sniping
and stabbing lonely passers-by and in carrying away loot.  One of the
articles the Muslim National Guards prized and stored was petrol, which
would be used not only as fuel in transport, but as an excellent means
of incendiarism on a large and devastating scale.  This use of it the
Muslims of the Punjab, and earlier of Bengal made very thoroughly and
effectively, and hundreds of burnt town and villages in the two
provinces are tragic evidence of how thorough the preparations of the
Muslim League had been for its war on Hindus and Sikhs.

Regular tests were held of the Muslim National Guards in feats of
fighting and attack.  Marks were given and certificates granted. 
Alongside were reproduce the facsimile of one such certificate from
Jullundur, dated (date is on the back, not here reproduced in
photograph) 3.XI.46^([4](#4)). This is only one of thousands of such
certificates granted at the various centres and headquarters of the
Guards in the Punjab and elsewhere.  So the Muslims had a widespread and
well-trained semi-military organization to back up its programme and
policy.

So alarming was the rise of the Muslim National Guards that the Punjab
Government took serious notice of this development, which proved to be
so dangerous for the peace of the Province.  But the entire machinery to
the Government being pro-Muslim, nothing serious was done about the
Muslim National Guards.

In April, 1947 Mr. Akhtar Hussain, Chief Secretary to the Punjab
Government reported to the Governor of the Punjab: -

“The necessity for recruitment and re-organization of the Muslim League
National Guards is occupying the attention of the Provincial Salar.  An
increase of 5,630 Guards has been reported and accelerated activity has
been noticeable in the western and north-western Punjab.  In the eastern
Punjab, active training has been confined mainly in Simla, Ambala Cantt.
and Panipat where Guards have been exercising secretly in Lathi Fighting
and in the Central Punjab and in Jullundar District, where Khaksars have
undertaken their training.  Open activity has been confined to the
collection of Relief Funds, and in the Rawalpindi area to warning
Muslims to destroy looted property and refrain from giving evidence in
connection with the recent disturbances.”

The Chief Secretary’s report dated a fortnight later says,:

“There are already indications that the Guards are being used as secret
messengers, and their general activities are becoming less open, and in
some places, they are active in arming the Community^([5](#5)).  It has
been reported that financial aid from the Centre has been promised,
particularly for the Western Districts which are to act as recruiting
grounds for the entire Province.  Enlistment in the Rawalpindi and
Campbellpore Districts has been particularly brisk and efforts have been
made to enlist the services of ex-soldiers.  The increase in membership
is noticeable in all districts however and it is estimated that the
number of Muslim League National Guards in the Province now is in the
neighbourhood of 39,000.”

The Muslim League, therefore, had this two-pronged thrust to make in its
assault on the non-Muslims of the Muslim majority areas.  In the first
place it was preaching its two-nation theory and its uncompromising
opposition to the Hindus, and in the Punjab, to the Sikhs as well.  It
tried to write off all such things as a common Indian Culture and an
Indian Nationhood.  In the name of self-determination for the Muslims of
India, it inculcated in them the creed of intolerance, arrogance and
hate.  All this made any compromise with Hindu India an impossibility
for the Muslims; they must fight against the Hindus to enforce their
extreme demands.  And this fight came in 1946, when the Muslim League
gave its Direct Action call on the 27th July of that year, which part of
the story is to be narrated in the next chapter.

Secondly, the Muslim League had been preparing the Muslims physically
and militarily for such a fight, which when it came, the Hindus and
Sikhs were caught unawares, and suffered heavily in the dead and in the
injured, in women abducted and dishonoured, in property looted and
houses and religious and educational places burnt.  Such retaliation as
came from the Hindus and Sikhs was only belated, and after the Muslim
onslaught was becoming continuous and a threat to their very existence. 
Before August, 1947 such retaliation wherever it came, it even served
the purpose of the Muslim League, for it created that atmosphere of a
civil war in India, which the Muslim League found necessary for the
furtherance of its programme and policy.  It could trot out atrocity
stories and incite Muslims elsewhere to fall upon Hindus and Sikhs, as
they actually did in the N.-W. Frontier Province in December, 1946, and
January, 1947.  Such was the aim and method of the Muslim League.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))Meaning the Muslim Empire in India (Present writer’s note).

^([2](#2a))As advocated in Dr. Latif’s scheme adumberated in “The Muslim
Problem in India”.

^([3](#3a))One, however, fails to see how it would be voluntary, if
effected by law.

^([4](#4a))The original is in the possession of a Hindu gentleman.

^([5](#5a))Muslims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
