+++
title = "04 THE CABINET MISSION AND THE MUSLIM LEAGUE DIRECT ACTION"

+++
**THE CABINET MISSION AND THE MUSLIM**  
**LEAGUE DIRECT ACTION**

During the later months of the year 1945 and early 1946 the temper of
the Muslim masses was kept up by the propaganda of hate emanating from
the official pronouncements of the Muslim League, the speeches of its
leaders and the unrestrained articles of the pro-League press.  Muslims
had everywhere in the Punjab and Bengal begin to look upon the
minorities as their subjects in prospect.  Provocative acts against
non-Muslims by the Muslims were beginning to be frequent.  By this time
the police and the officials were so thoroughly saturated with the
poisonous propaganda of the Muslim League against the Hindus and Sikhs,
that it was not easy for a Hindu or Sikh to find a Muslim policeman or
civilian impartial in his attitude where the conflict lay between a
Muslim and a non-Muslim.  This attitude on the part of the police was a
great hardship, especially as more than 70% of the police force in the
Punjab, for example, was made up of Muslims.  In the people’s daily
lives the police could do much to make them happy or miserable.  That
the police and the officialdom had gone thoroughly Muslim League was
demonstrated by three successive events: The Provincial Assembly
elections in the Punjab early in 1946; the Muslim League agitation
against the Khizar Ministry in January-February, 1947 and the Punjab
Riots which began early in March, 1947 and continued in Pakistan as late
as January of 1948, till which month incidents of glaring brutality on a
colossal magnitude against the Hindu and Sikh remnants of the population
continued to be reported.

The 1946 elections in the Punjab provided to the Muslim League the first
opportunity for a trial of its strength in the Punjab.  The Punjab,
called corner-stone of Pakistan-was the one province in which the Muslim
League had not been able to form a ministry.  Not that the Muslims did
not have in this province what was called ‘Pakistan in action.’ But that
was not enough.  The Punjab must go Muslim League, in name as well as in
action, in order to make Mr. Jinnah’s edifice of Pakistan complete.  For
this purpose it was necessary that an overwhelmingly large number of
Muslim seats must be won by the League in the Punjab.  A mere majority
of Muslims seats would not do-for in the Punjab, out of its 175 seats,
as many as about 87 worked out to be non-Muslim, as some of the special
constituencies like the University, Labour, Commerce and Landlords went
to non-Muslims.  The League, therefore, must win all or almost all
Muslim seats, for which purpose it must defeat the Unionist Party of
which Sir Khizar Hyat Khan, Premier of the Punjab in succession to Sir
Sikandar Hyat Khan, was the leader.  As the Unionist leader. detesting
the methods of Muslim League and regarding the path of the partition of
the country harmful for the Muslims themselves, was bent upon giving a
fight to the League, the contest was expected to be very bitter, as it
actually turned out to be.  The Muslim League fought on the programme of
Pakistan, which it placed before the Muslim masses.  The Unionist
Muslims realizing the overwhelming force of the Pakistan appeal to
Muslim masses, did not oppose Pakistan but they argued, more wisely
perhaps than the Leaguers from the Muslim point of view, that to press
for a separate state of Pakistan would inevitably entail cutting off of
Hindu and Sikh areas from the Punjab and would be detrimental to the
economic interest of the Muslims themselves.  But so deeply had the
Pakistan poison seeped into the Muslim mind that the Unionist fought
everywhere a narrowly defensive battle.  The Muslims appeared to have
gone thoroughly Muslim League by this time.  The officials and the
police everywhere helped the Muslim League candidates by the usual
methods of threats and cajolery employed on the electorate.  The most
violent and vituperative abuse was employed against the Unionists.  As
the Muslim League plank was Pakistan, so naturally the Congress and the
Sikhs came in for extensive and violent abuse.  Tenseness, hate and a
communally charged atmosphere were created in the Punjab.

The League won as many as 76 seats (they claimed to have 78) in the
Punjab Assembly.  They were undoubtedly the largest single party in the
Legislature.  They hoped to form a ministry with the help of a few
defections from among the Muslim Unionists, some Indian Christians,
Anglo-Indians and Europeans. 88 in a House of 175 would give either
party a working majority.  But the Hindus and Sikhs, having already
experienced the ‘Pakistan in action’ of the Muslim-dominated Unionist
Ministry, many of whose erstwhile supporters were now on the Muslim
League side, were determined not to be ruled over by a party which stood
frankly and nakedly for Muslim rule and for the partition of India and
the subjugation of the Hindus and Sikhs for the greater glory of Islam,
as had been preached by Rahmat Ali, by Dr. Mohammad Iqbal and by the
Muslim League propagandists and press in general.  In the negotiations
for ministry-making which went on at Lahore immediately after the
elections were over, not a single Hindu or Sikh member of the Provincial
Legislature was willing to walk into the Muslim League camp.  The Indian
Christians preferred to stand with the Congress with its ideal of a
tolerant, secular state in India, rather than with the fanatical Muslim
League.  So, by a majority of nearly 100 members in the Provincial
Legislature, with Sir Khizar Hyat Khan as Premier, the Congress, the
Panthic Party and the Unionist Party in coalition formed the Coalition
Ministry in March, 1946.  The Leaguers felt furious and chagrined. 
Their campaign of hate became, if anything, more intensified than ever. 
The communal atmosphere continued to be charged more and more with
tension.

In the meanwhile in other Provinces, the League had been carrying on its
propaganda of hate in a most virulent form.  In Bengal there was a
League majority in the Legislative Assembly, and the League formed its
ministry with H. S. Suhrawardy as Premier.  In Sind the balance of power
between the League and non-League elements was maintained for some time
in the form of a trial of strength.  At last an obliging Governor
prorogued the Legislature; ordered fresh elections, and this time the
League formed a majority through its propaganda of hate against
non-Muslims.  The League won a fairly large number of seats in the
North-Western Frontier Province.  In the Central Legislative Assembly it
won all the Muslim seats. 1946 was the peak year of the success of the
Muslim League, and this success no doubt made Mr. Jinnah and the Muslim
League leaders drunk with the intoxication of achievement.  Near and
certain visions of a Pakistan in which the Muslims would have it all
their own way and in which non-Muslims would live at the sufferance of
the Muslims, began to stir the Muslim imagination.  This was exactly the
situation in which the Muslims could be aroused to terrific action to
strike what appeared then to be the final blow for the achievement of
Pakistan.  And the Muslims not long after did strike this blow.  But of
that a little later, after the story of the intervening months has been
narrated.

It was in this scene that the Cabinet Mission, consisting of the
Secretary of State, Lord Pethick-Lawrence, Sir Stafford Cripps and Mr.
A. V. Alexander, arrived in India, to negotiate for a final settlement
with India for the transfer of power.  In the protracted negotiations
that ensued the formula was evolved of having three groups in the
country-one to consist of the Hindu majority provinces of Bihar, Orissa,
the U. P., C. P., Bombay and Madras; the second of Assam and Bengal, and
the third of the Punjab, the N.-W. Frontier Province and Sind.  These
three groups were each to frame its own constitution in their respective
Assemblies to be elected on the basis of one member for one million of
population.  There was to be a weak and loose centre, which was to
control a limited number of subjects.  The three groups were to federate
for sake of the administration of these subjects.  Otherwise the groups
were to be antonomous.  In the Bengal-Assam and the Punjab-Sind- N.-W.
F. P. groups the Muslims were to be in a majority, and naturally the
Hindus and Sikhs in these would have to submit to Muslim dictation. 
There was no ground whatever for the Muslims of the Hindu-.majority
Provinces to protest against this scheme which placed them under Hindu
domination, for the Muslims through the Muslim League had asked for some
sort of partition of the country, and so must accept what arose from
such partition.  But Hindus and Sikhs had vehemently opposed the idea of
the partition of the country, and to have placed them in the
Assam-Bengal and the Punjab Sind-N.-W. F. P. groups under Muslim
domination against their wishes went hard with them.  The Sikhs
vehemently protested against this injustice.  On June 9 and 10, 1946, a
very full and representation gathering of the Sikh Panth at Amritsar
unanimously rejected the Cabinet Mission Scheme which made a gift of the
Sikhs and Hindus of the Punjab and its neighbouring Muslim-majority
Provinces to Muslim rule against their wishes. The community left no
manner of doubt on the point that it would have to struggle against
being ruled by what was described as ‘this charter of slavery’^([1](#1))
and would boycott the constituent Assembly which the Cabinet Mission
Scheme envisaged.  The Hindus of the two groups-the Eastern and the
Western-made similar and vehement protests.  But the Congress accepted
the Cabinet Mission Scheme, which anyhow did not envisage the partition
of India into two independent States, though it meant the perpetuation
within the proposed federation of more or less inharmonious autonomous
zones.  The Cabinet Mission plan paid little heed to the claims and
rights of the Sikh people.  It militated against the real well-being of
the country.  It was a big sop to the Muslim League, and while rejecting
self-determination for the Sikhs, who had such a big stake in the
economic and political life of the Punjab, it did grant full
self-determination to the Muslims of the Muslim majority Provinces. The
substance of Pakistan had been conceded in these Muslim majority areas. 
As for the constitution of the whole of India, that was to be framed by
the Constituent Assembly, to be constituted on the principle of one
member for every million of the population.  Although in such a House
the Muslims would have, on the population basis, only ninety-odd
members, yet this Constituent Assembly to be so constituted was not
sovereign.  It was limited by certain terms of reference, and could not
go beyond framing a constitution for a limited centre, which would leave
the three groups-two of them Muslim-majority-practically independent. 
The Congress reluctantly accepted these and other limitations in the
interest of reaching anyhow a peaceful settlement, and maintaining the
unity of the country.

Pakistan as demanded by the Muslim League, was rejected as impracticable
by the Cabinet Mission.  The statement issued by the Mission on the 23rd
of May, 1946 set forth the reasons why the Pakistan solution could not
be accepted.  The substantial by portion of the statement ran as under:-

“We therefore examined in the first instance the question of a separate
and fully independent sovereign State of Pakistan as claimed by the
Muslim League.  Such a Pakistan would comprise two areas; one in the
north-west consisting of the province of the Punjab, Sind, North-West
Frontier and British Baluchistan, the other in the north-east consisting
of the provinces of Bengal and Assam.  The League were prepared to
consider adjustment of boundaries at a later stage, but insisted that
the principle of Pakistan should first be acknowledged.  The argument
for a separate State of Pakistan was based, first, upon the right of the
Muslim majority to decide their method of Government according to their
wishes, and secondly, upon the necessity to include substantial areas in
which Muslims are in a minority, in order to make a Pakistan
administratively and economically workable.

“The size of the non-Muslim minorities in a Pakistan comprising the
whole of the six Provinces enumerated above would be very considerable
as the following figures show:-

**North-Western Area**

 

[TABLE]

**North-Eastern Area**

 

[TABLE]

“These figures show that the setting up a separate sovereign State of
Pakistan on the lines claimed by the Muslim League, would not solve the
communal minority problem; nor can we see any justification for
including within a sovereign Pakistan those districts of the Punjab and
of Bengal and Assam in which the population is predominantly
non-Muslim.  Every argument that can be used in favour of Pakistan can
equally in our view be used in favour of the exclusion of non-Muslim
areas from Pakistan.  This point would particularly affect the position
of the Sikhs.

“We therefore considered whether a smaller sovereign Pakistan confined
to the Muslim majority areas alone might be a possible basis of
compromise.  Such a Pakistan is regarded by the Muslim League as quite
impracticable because it would entail the exclusion from Pakistan of a
large slice of Western Bengal, including Calcutta, in which city the
Muslims form 23.6 per cent of the population.  We ourselves are also
convinced that any solution which involves a radical partition of the
Punjab and Bengal, as this would do, would be contrary to the wishes and
interests of a very large proportion of the inhabitants of these
provinces.  Bengal and the Punjab each has its own common language and a
long history and tradition.  Moreover, any division of the Punjab would
of necessity divide the Sikhs leaving substantial bodies of Sikhs on
both sides of the boundary.  We have, therefore, been forced to the
conclusion that neither a larger nor a smaller sovereign State of
Pakistan would provide an acceptable solution for the communal problem.”

What the Cabinet Mission had conceded to the Muslim League was the
substance of its demand.  But the Muslim League did not really want to
work in co-operation with the other elements in the national life of
India.  What it wanted was to dominate certain areas and to plan for the
conquest, if possible, of the rest.  Later events like the Pakistan
invasion of Kashmir and its actively abetting a war against India in the
Hindu-majority and landlocked State of Hyderabad, have conclusively
proved that such have been, for more than a decade at least, the designs
which have been shaping themselves in the programme and policy of the
Muslim League.

Apart from electing the Constituent Assembly and the Group Assemblies
immediately the Viceroy was to include in his Executive Council,
representatives of the people, with the agreed convention that these
representatives would work as a Cabinet with the Viceroy as
constitutional head; though the constitution, pending a new one to be
framed by the Constituent Assembly, was to be the same as before.  In
this Cabinet the.  Muslim League would have 5 seats out of 14 (the
Viceroy, to be called the President of the Interim Government, was to be
the fifteenth).  The Congress was to claim 5, and since one Congress
seat on the Cabinet was also to go to a Muslim (actually at one time
there were two Congress Muslims in the Cabinet), so the total Muslim
quota in the Cabinet would be quite large.  But the Muslim League
decided to reject the Cabinet Mission Scheme.  Later, finding that it
would not suit it to remain in the wilderness indefinitely, it did came
into the Interim Government, but as the history of those fateful days
shows, it came in more to struggle and disrupt from within than to
collaborate for the well-being of the country.

The Council of the All-India Muslim League met in Bombay and on July 27,
1946 it finally sealed its rejection of the Cabinet Mission Plan, and
decided to launch its famous ‘Direct Action’ for the achievement of
Pakistan, which it could not achieve by peaceful means.  The resolution
of the Council ran as follows:-

“Whereas the League has to-day resolved to reject the proposals embodied
in the Statement of the Cabinet Delegation and the Viceroy of May 16,
1946, due to the intransigeance of Congress on the one hand and the
breach of faith with the Muslim by the British Government on the other;
and whereas Muslim India has exhausted without success all efforts to
find a peaceful solution of the Indian problem by compromise and
constitutional means; whereas the Congress is bent upon setting up a
caste Hindu Raj in India with the connivance of the British, and whereas
recent events have shown that power politics and not justice and fair
play are the deciding factors in Indian affairs; whereas it has become
abundantly clear that the Muslims of India would not rest content with
anything less than the immediate establishment of an independent and
fully sovereign State of Pakistan and would resist any attempt to impose
any constitution, long-term or short-term, or setting up of any Interim
Government at the Centre without the approval and consent of the Muslim
League, the council of the All-India Muslim League is convinced that the
time has now come for the Muslim nation to resort to direct action to
vindicate their honour and to get rid of the present slavery under the
British and contemplated future of Caste Hindu domination.

“This Council calls upon the Muslim nation to stand to a man being their
sole representative organisation, the All-India Muslim League, and be
ready for every sacrifice.”

“This Council directs the Working Committee to prepare forthwith a
programme of direct action to carry out the policy initiated above and
to organize the Muslims for the coming struggle to be launched as and
when necessary.”

The Muslim League was now definitely and irrevocably on the war-path. 
Its war was declared against the Hindus and the Sikhs, against whose
opposition it was to establish its independent State of Pakistan.  The
speeches made by Mr. Jinnah and other Muslim League leaders were
provocative in the extreme, and such as to give the Muslims not only
broad hints, but clear instigation to attack non-Muslims and by this
method of warfare to bring them to their knees if possible, and to force
them into the acceptance of Pakistan.

Some of the things said by Mr. Jinnah on this occasion are these:

“What we have done to-day is the most historic act in our history. 
Never have we in the whole history of the League done anything except by
constitutional methods.  But now we are forced into this position. 
Today we bid good-bye to constitutional methods.”

Again, referring to the new threat and programme of Direct Action, he
said,

“To-day we have forged a pistol and are in a position to use it.”

Again, talking of the threat of Direct Action he said:

“We mean every word of it.  We do not believe in equivocation.”

Then he quoted the Persian Poet, Firdausi, in these words:

“If you seek peace, we do not want War.  But if you want War, we will
accept it unhesitatingly.”

Still more provocative speeches, if possible, were made by other Muslim
League leaders on this occasion.  Nawabzada Liaqat Ali Khan, now Prime
Minister of the Dominion of Pakistan, elucidating the implications of
the Direct Action threat, said:

“Direct Action means resort to non-constitutional methods, and that can
take any form which may suit the conditions under which we live.  We
cannot eliminate any methods.  Direct Action means any action against
the Law.”

Sardar Abdur Rab Nishtar, now a member of the Pakistan Government,
declared:

“Pakistan can only be achieved through shedding blood of ourselves, and
if need be, and if opportunity arose, by shedding blood of others. 
Muslims are no believers in Ahimsa.”

Raja Ghanzafar Ali Khan, lately also member of the Pakistan Government,
speaking to a huge Muslim gathering at Lahore on the 31st August, 1946
outlined the Muslim League Direct Action as the economic political and
social boycott of the Congress and ‘the following of a scorched earth
policy.’

Mr. Jinnah held out the threat that Direct Action by Muslims would lead
to one hundred times more destruction than the Direct Action of the
Hindus (meaning the Congress).

Earlier ill the Convention of Muslim Legislators held in Delhi in April
1946, equally provocative and instigatory things had been said:

Ghulam Mustafa Shah Gilani said:

“Any attempt to prevent the establishment of Pakistan would lead to
bloodshed.” Sardar Shaukat Hyat Khan said:

“The Punjab Muslims do not believe in non-violence and should not,
therefore, be given cause for grievance because once the Muslim lion is
infuriated it would become difficult to subdue him.”

Sir Feroze Khan Noon had observed:

“I tell you this much that if we find that we have to fight Great
Britain for placing us under one Central Hindu Raj, then the havoc which
Muslims will plays will put to shame what Jenghez and Halaku Khan did.”

Sir Ghulam Hussain Hadayatullah, at that time Premier of Sind and later
under Pakistan, Governor of the same Province, said:

“The Congress should understand that unless they make friends with us
and accede to our demands there will he no peace in India.”

The last words bear a special significance in view of what was destined
to happen in Bengal and the Punjab principally, and in several other
Provinces of India, not long after.

Mr. H. S. Suhrawardy, Premier of Bengal at that time, spoke words still
more ominous and pregnant with a sinister significance the full force of
which was not realized by the country perhaps at the time.

“We await the clarion call of the Qaid-i-Azam.”

The ‘Clarian Call’ was answered about a fortnight later in the shape of
the Calcutta, Noakhali and other riots in Bengal, the ghastliest and
most terrible seen till then in India, to be bettered in this respect
only by the Muslim holocaust of the minorities in the Punjab, in 1947.

To these words of defiance and provocation was joined the tremendous and
loud chorus of hate and instigation to fighting and rioting by the
platform speakers of the Muslim League and the inflammatory articles in
the League-controlled press.  The country in these weeks (the month of
August, 1946) passed through a period of foreboding and tense
expectancy.  The new Interim Government to which the Viceroy had invited
both the Congress and the Muslim League was due to take office on the
2nd of September, 1946.  The Congress accepted the offer but the League
rejected it.  All appeared to be set for the word of command on the part
of the League to let slip the blood hounds which would plunge the
country into the horrors of a terrible Civil War.  The comments of the
British Press, seldom pro-Congress in its views and very consistent in
voicing a pro-League bias, were on this occasion revealing, as they
found in this Direct Action threat of the Muslim League nothing less
than the design to plung the country into a Civil War: Said the ‘News
Chronicle’ of the 30th July, 1946, a day after the passage of the Direct
Action Resolution:

“What precisely does Mr. Jinnah think he will achieve by embracing
violence-and at a moment when so substantial a part of his claims has
been conceded?

“Does he think that communal strife will benefit India or even the
Muslim part of India?  He has only to look at other parts of Asia to see
what lies at the end of that tunnel.

“Does he want his country to become another China, ravaged and utterly
impoverished by interminable Civil War?

“It is hopeless, of course, if Mr. Jinnah is wedded to complete
intransigeance-if, as now seems the case he really is thirsting for a
holy war.

“If Mr. Jinnah nosy resorts to violence, it will be very difficult to
save India from disaster.”

In the above extract occur the prophetic words ‘Civil War’ and ‘holy
War’, and the Muslim League attitude plunged the country soon after into
both these.

The Muslim League formed a Council of Action to plan its Direct Action
Programme.  Its members were: Nawabzada Liaqat Ali Khan (now Prime
Minister of Pakistan); Nawab Iftikhar Hussain Khan of Mamdot, (lately
Premier of West Punjab), Mian Mumtaz Daulatana (lately Minister of West
Punjab), Sardar Shaukat Hyat Khan (several times Minister); Mian
Iftikharuddin, Begum Shah Nawaz, Sardar Abdur Rab Nishtar, I. I.
Cundrigar and H. S. Suhrawardy (at that time Muslim League Premier of
Bengal).

In order to implement its programme of Direct Action, which, it must be
noted, was not to take the form of Ahimsa, the Muslim League began to
make brisk preparations for attack on Hindus and equally well, Sikhs. 
The Muslim League private army called the Muslim National Guards, which
has already been referred to, began to expand.  All kinds of Muslim
riff-raff, disbanded members of the Civic Guards, and such other
elements were the favourite recruiting ground for this body.  The Muslim
criminal elements found in the National Guard a new scope for their
criminal proclivities as providing opportunity both for their
anti-social acts and the satisfaction of having done something
meritorious in the service of Islam.  The Police, which in several
provinces was overwhelmingly Muslim, helped in this recruitment, which
was not so much of a secret, and in the collection of arms, equipment
and petrol (this last for purposes of incendiarism). Jeeps and lorries
were possessed by the National Guard in the larger towns; they had
stocks of steel helmets purchased from the Disposals Department. (This
article was recovered in large numbers in the search of the Muslim
National Guards Office at Lahore in January, 1947).  Besides, large
numbers of lethal weapons, such as knives, daggers, swords and spears
were made and stocked by the Muslim National Guards.  Well-to-do Muslim
firms and individuals were reported in the months of August and
September, 1946 to have distributed daggers and knives among Muslims of
Lahore and Amritsar.  Sword-making as an industry made rapid progress
among Muslims in the Punjab, where for several years last restrictions
on the possession and carrying about of the sword bad been removed. 
Parcels of knives were frequently intercepted by the Railway Police in
the Provinces of Bombay, Central Provinces, Bihar and the United
Provinces while in transit from Wazirabad and Sialkot centres of the
cutlery industry in the Punjab, to the Muslim Leaguers of those
Provinces.  The cutlers of Wazirabad and  Sialkot were all Muslim. 
While many such parcels were intercepted, many more must have got safe
through.  In the Punjab itself where the Police force was overwhelmingly
Muslim, there was little check on the movement of these weapons, and so
the Punjabi Muslims were very well stocked with them in all districts. 
In Bengal, where a Muslim League Ministry was in the saddle, very much
the same happened.  As the Calcutta and Eastern Bengal Riots showed, the
Muslim preparation for attack and destruction had been terribly
widespread and efficient.

Besides lethal weapons, there were fairly large quantities of firearms
and means of incendiarism in the possession of Muslims.  In the Punjab,
besides smuggling arms from India with the help and connivance of the
Muslim Police, the Muslims with the same facility to hand, could do
successful gun-running from the tribal areas in the North-West.  While a
Hindu or Sikh carrying illegal weapons on him would be hauled up under
the Arms Act, Muslims were comparatively safe in so doing, unless they
happened to be detected by some non-Muslim police officer.  Large
quantities of petrol were obtained and conserved by the Muslims at a
time when petrol rationing had been in force for several years, and this
hoarded petrol was used in setting ablaze whole localities of
non-Muslims with fiendish rapidity and efficiency, and thousands were
trapped in the rapidly spreading flames and burnt alive.

The Direct Action of the Muslim League for which elaborate preparations
had by now been made, was ready to be launched on an India-wide scale.
The date fixed for launching this action was August the 16th, 1946.  The
country was awaiting the day with anxiety in view of the provocative and
inflammatory speeches of the Muslim League leaders, and open threats of
fighting.  Mr. H. S. Suhrawardy, Premier of Bengal greatly excited the
minds of the Muslims of his province by proclaiming that the Bengal
Government would declare their independence of the Central Government if
the Congress came into power.  The Sind Muslim League Premier made a
similar declaration.  Both declarations were intended to be provocative,
as otherwise these Muslim League leaders knew full well that under the
British Crown no Indian Province could claim independence of the Central
Government, and any such independence could last at best only a few
hours.  But such and other declarations had their effect in inflaming
Muslim passions against the Hindus.

The Muslim League Bengal Government declared August 16, 1946 to be a
public holiday throughout Bengal, to celebrate the “Direct Action Day”. 
The effect of this, in the very temperate and restrained language of
Shri S. L. Ghosh of the *A. B. Patrika* is described thus:

“When a political party, by virtue of its being in power, enforces its
party celebration on the whole administrative machinery by declaring a
public holiday, it is natural that some at least of its adherents should
infer from it that the party is the law of the land, and that anything
done in the name of the party is above the scope of the law,”

The police, mostly Muslim in personnel, were, if not actually in
complicity, definitely indifferent to the murder, loot and arson of the
Hindus going on around them.  Such a horrible carnage ensued as had not
been heard of in India in the three-odd decades during which communal
rioting had been heard of in India.  The Muslim mobs consisting of
people who mostly wore the uniform of the Muslim National Guards and
carried the Muslim League flag, burnt, massacred, looted and raped to
these slogans: *‘Lar Kar lenge Pakistan’; ‘Mar Kar Lenge Pakistan’;
‘Dena Hoga Pakistan’; ‘Pakistan Kayam Karo’ etc.  As the statesman* of
Calcutta in an editorial put it, the Muslim League ministry for a good
long time (for practically two days) hesitated whether a little rioting
would not after all be good; and so nothing was done to summon the
military and to quell rioting, which could not be done by the
demoralized police force, over-weighed by its Muslim personnel.

The horrors of this rioting make a harrowing story.  Mobs went about
their demonaic work, killing and burning.  During the first two days of
the rioting which lasted for more than 5 days, the Calcutta fire brigade
had to attend 900 calls for meeting cases of arson.  One eye-witness
described the scene in these words.

“A vivid picture of the panic caused by hooligans in the Calcutta riots
was given by a member of the staff of the Associated Press of India, who
escaped savage butchery or maiming and reestablished contract with the
office to-day.

“Living in the heart of a zone where murder, loot and arson raged for
two days, he said that the terror-stricken cries of victims as they were
being maimed and stabbed were still ringing in his ears as he was
relating his story.  He and his friends living in the Cosmopolitan Hotel
could not rescue them as well-armed hooligans surrounded the area.

“Equipped with plentiful supplies of petrol from a pump the owner of
which had abandoned it in his flight for safety, the mob carried out a
campaign of arson.  Buildings were set on fire and fed liberally with
looted motor fuel.

“At the hospital the dead and even more, the living maimed ones told the
story of gross cruelty.  There were deep stab wounds, heads and limbs
broken with heavy lathi blows, and cases where the bone was broken to
pieces.  Every living moment was agony.

“The body of a six-month old child killed on the spot was brought by
ambulance with his father and mother badly injured………”

This is only one glimpse of what happened for five days over a large
area.  Hooligans went about with full preparation for murder and arson. 
Petrol was in plentiful supply, and the victims were left no option but
to be burnt to ashes in their burning houses or to come out and be
stabbed.  The total number of killed in these days is estimated at 5,000
and those injured at 15,000.

The preparations for forcing the Pakistan issue which had been going on
for a pretty long time plunged Calcutta during these fateful days into
blood.  The swiftness of the attack, the large area affected, the heavy
casualties in killed and houses burnt, the Similarity of methods used by
the assailants everywhere and the readiness with which they came out to
attack-leave no manner of doubt that the League had been preparing for
this attack.  Similar but smaller outbreaks occurred at other places
also.  One such was in Delhi.

It was clear that the Muslim League was leading the country towards
Civil War.  It wanted to force its rule on unwilling and large
minorities.  It wanted to create conditions in which it would become
impossible for Muslims and non-Muslims to live together.  To effect this
consummation, it was using the methods of murder, loot and arson on a
wide and large scale.  That this was the temper and aim of the League,
is testified by the opinion of the ‘News Chronicle’ quoted above.  *The
Civil & Military Gazette of Lahore*, by no means a paper hostile to the
Muslims, said *apropos* the Calcutta riots in its editorial in its issue
of August 20, 1946 (four days after the commencement of these riots).

“We have termed the jeremiads of Muslim Leaguers ‘near hysterical
nonsense,’ but they represent a trend of thought and a psychological
attitude which hold the utmost danger for the whole country.  Words are
being broadcast everyday which will make fanatics of law-abiding
citizens and throw them into the same camp with the lowest of goondas.”

More significantly still, this same editorial says.

“Authentic reports from all parts of India describe the country as a
powder-magazine, and at the moment the Muslim League is holding a torch
which may send it sky-high.  If the spark is applied, the present League
leadership will have to shoulder responsibility for events which will
not only blast for ever all hopes of Hindu-Muslim co-operation in any
field, but which will ruin all chances of India’s progress for decades.”

That the Muslim League ministry of Bengal, and the obliging British
Governor had been criminally negligent if not actually conniving at the
attack on the non-Muslim population of Calcutta, was so strongly the
opinion held in the country, that an Enquiry Commission, presided over
by Sir Patrick Spens, Chief justice of India, was set up by the
Governor-General to inquire into the degree of responsibility of the
League Government in, if not abetting, at least conniving at the riots
and failing to take action when these broke out.

So deeply had the poison of the hatred preached by the Muslim League
seeped into the very soul of the Muslim people, and so great was the
tension in the country as a result of this, that rioting occurred all
over India on a more or less large scale.  Soon before the Direct Action
Day, there had been an attack by Muslims on Sikhs at Abbotabad, in the
N.-W. F. Province.  An account of the incident is as follows:

“(On July 28, 1946) Muslims held a public meeting in a garden near
Gurdwara Singh Sabha.  The District Magistrate and the Superintendent of
Police were present near the meeting place, but no precautions were
taken.  Stones and brickbats were exchanged between a few Sikhs in the
Gurdwara and the Muslim mob outside.

“Muslims made repeated attempts to set fire to Gurdwara shops.  These
fires were put out by the Military fire-brigade.  The Muslim mob divided
into groups and began to loot and set on fire Hindu and Sikh shops. 
More than two dozen shops were looted.

“The Muslim mob met no resistance except at two places, where a gun was
fired by a Sikh shopkeeper and a Gurkha Chaukidar.  Sikhs were being
harassed by Muslim policemen.”

This was only a foretaste of Direct Action and the Pakistan to come. 
Abbotabad and its adjoining area witnessed large-scale murder and
looting of Sikhs and Hindus not long after this in December, 1946 and
January, 1947.  And then came March, 1947 with the succeeding terrible
months.

An attack on Hindus occurred in Delhi on the 12th August, 1946.  There
was rioting in such vastly different places as Cawnpore, Bombay, Poona,
Ahmedabad, Dacca and a few others.  The lesson of it all was becoming
very abundantly clear.  The Muslim League was waging its war in earnest
on non-Muslims to achieve its Pakistan.

The statements publicly made by the top-ranking Muslim League leaders
reveal the temper and intentions of these leaders and the organization
whose policy and programme they had framed.  On September 9, 1946 only
two weeks after the Calcutta Carnage, after the attack on Sir Shafaat
Ahmed Khan, and the situation akin to Civil War which was developing
inside the country, Mr. H. S. Sahrawardy, Premier of Bengal, said:

“Muslim India means business.”

How grimly it ‘meant business’ was shown by the Calcutta killing, and
was later on shown by Noakhali, N.-W. F. P. and the Punjab.

Mr. Jinnah in a statement issued from Bombay on September 11, 1946
offered to the Hindus the choice between creating Pakistan and forcing a
Civil War in the country.

Replying to a question seeking suggestions for the restoration of peace
in India, he said:”

“In view of the horrible slaughter in various parts of India, I am of
the opinion that the authorities, both Central and Provincial, should
take up immediately the question of exchange of population to avoid
brutal recurrence of that which had taken place where small minorities
have been butchered by the overwhelming majorities.”

Thus, scouting any suggestion that there could be peace and amity in the
country, he advocated exchange of population-the uprooting of
millions-and as it later turned out to be, of over twelve millions, and
the butchering of about a million.  This was the direction in which the
Muslim League was inevitably leading the country.

What shocked the conscience of India even more than Calcutta, was the
large-scale murder, loot, arson, rape, abduction and forced marriage of
Hindu women in the Noakhali District of Eastern Bengal.  This time the
trouble came about in the October of 1946.  It appears the League
enthusiasts were on the look-out for an area of operation where they
could be sure of very little resistance and where they could demonstrate
to the Hindus in action as to what was in store for them in case they
did not accept the Muslim League demand of Pakistan.  In Calcutta the
Hindus-although on the first two days they were completely surprised,
and reeled under the sudden blow, and lost more than a thousand in
killed-yet on the subsequent days they rallied and gave the Muslims as
good as they got.  The Muslim League perhaps realized the folly of
having tried out Calcutta.  A better spot should be selected, and this
time it was Noakhali and the adjoining area of Eastern Bengal.

The district of Noakhali is almost at the extreme end of Eastern Bengal,
surrounded by heavy Muslim majority areas.  This district itself has
perhaps the lowest percentage of non-Muslim population-the Muslim
percentage being as high as 81.35. So, while it was particularly
dastardly of the Muslims of this area to have chosen to fall upon the
Hindus of this area, it was, from the point of their own scheme, a fit
choice; for its very sparse Hindu population could offer little
resistance to their onslaught.  Attacks on a scale as large as Noakhali
also occurred in the district of Tipperah, neighbouring on Noakhali, and
with a Muslim population of 77.09%.

As the trouble broke out, for some time the country did not know about
it.  Noakhali is a far-away part of Bengal, and the Muslim League
Ministry of Bengal did not allow the news of the carnage to trickle
though as long as they could help it.  So, the assailants had it all
their own way for several days, unchecked.

The horror and the underlying conspiracy of this occurrence can best be
described in the words of Shri S. L. Ghosh of the *A. B. Patrika*,
quoted above.  Says Shri S. L. Ghosh:

“The four days’ delay in receiving the news indicates at once the
magnitude of preparations of the lawless elements as well as the
criminal inefficiency of the administration machinery.[²](#2) It took
ten days, fraught with horror, disgrace and torture for nearly two lakhs
of Hindus for the Army to reach the neighbourhood of disaster, another
ten days for them to move into the inner fringe of the disturbed area,
and over a month to comb the interior of the devastated countryside.

“The horror of the Noakhali outrage is unique in modern history in that
it was not a simple case of turbulent members of the majority community
killing off helpless members of the minority community, but was one
whose chief aim (to quote Dr. Syama Prosad Mookerjee) was mass
conversion, accompanied by loot, arson and wholesale devastation……… No
section of the people has been spared, the wealthier classes being dealt
with more drastically.  Murder also was part of the plan, but it was
mainly reserved for those who were highly influential or who resisted. 
Abduction and outrage on women and forcible marriages were also resorted
to; but their number cannot be easily determined.  The slogans used and
the methods employed indicate that it was all part of a plan for the
simultaneous establishment of Pakistan.  The demand for subscriptions
for the Muslim League and for other purposes, including conversion
ceremonies, showed that mass attackers, and their leaders were inspired
by the League ideology.

“Apparently, the strategy of terrorisation adopted in Calcutta had
failed to achieve the objective of recognition of Pakistan.  The zealots
of Pakistan in Noakhali and the southern portion of Tepperah, therefore,
sought to make that muslim-majority area exclusive to a certain
community, and thus convert it into the fortress of Eastern Pakistan, by
forcible mass conversion of the other community…… (The League) leaders
tried to minimize the enormity of the crimes…… they tended to confirm
the impression that they were in close sympathy with the attackers and
their nefarious policy and that this was the second phase of the direct
action plan of the Muslim League to achieve Pakistan.

“It is false to suggest that the perpetrators were a gang of hooligans
or that they mostly consisted of outsiders.  The local people were the
perpetrators in many cases and there was a general mass sympathy for
what happened.

“The total number of evacuees, those, that is, who could leave the area
of the disturbance alive, will be somewhere between 50 to 75 thousands
including men, women and children of all conditions and castes.

“Over and above these persons, there will be another 50,000 or even more
who are still living within the danger zone in what may be called the no
man’s land.  Theirs is the most tragic fate.  They have all been
subjected to conversion and are still[³](#3) under the clutches of their
oppressors.  Most of them have lost everything, and they suffer from
both physical and mental collapse.  Their humiliation and torture know -
no limitations.  Their names have been changed; their womenfolk
insulted; their properties looted; they are being compelled to dress, to
eat and to live like their so-called new brothers in faith.  The male
members have to attend the mosques, Maulvies come and train them at
home; they are at the mercy of their captors for their daily food and
indeed for their very existence. . . .”

These occurrences shocked Mahatma Gandhi, and indeed the whole of India,
very deeply.  The Mahatma asked Acharya Kripalani; President of the
Congress, to go to Noakhali and to see what could be done to bring
relief to suffering humanity there, and to try to restore good relations
between the communities there.  Not long after, the Mahatma himself went
there, and made his famous village to village, nay house to house trek,
trying to restore good-will.  How little the Muslim League fanatics
cared for the Mahatma’s noble teaching was made abundantly clear by what
happened hardly within a month of the Mahatma’s pilgrimage to Noakhali,
in the North-Western Frontier Province, and another two months after
that in the Punjab.

Acharya Kripalani’s account of what he observed in Noakhali
substantiates the statement of Dr. Mookerjee reproduced above.  Said the
Acharya:

“Next morning (October 22, 1946) we visited the interior of one of the
affected areas.  The place was Charhaim.  Charhaim village and the
surrounding areas are occupied by Namasudras (scheduled castes)
numbering about 20,000.  It was completely destroyed.  Most of the
houses were burnt.  People were living in sheds, built from the ruins of
their houses.  All their property had been looted.  Cash, ornaments,
utensils and clothes, and cattle also, had been taken away by the
raiders.  All the males and females had only the clothes they were
wearing.  They had no food to eat.  Their condition was pitiable in the
extreme.  There had been cases of murder, but it was not possible during
the short time at our disposal to ascertain the number of the killed. 
Cases of abduction were reported to us.  Even after looting and arson
the villagers were obliged to embrace Islam; They had to perform ‘Namaz’
and recite the ‘Kalma’……… All the images of the houses were broken and
temples looted and destroyed.  The conch-shell bangles of women and
vermillion marks, signs of their married life, were removed.”

This was a fairly representative area.  Acharya Kripalani arrived at
certain conclusions regarding the Noakhali trouble, which are as
follows:-

1\. The attack on the Hindu population in the districts of Noakhali and
Tipperah was previously arranged and prepared for. It was deliberate, if
not directly engineered by Muslim League.  It was the result of Muslim
League propaganda.  The local evidence all went to prove that prominent
League leaders in the villages had a large hand in it.

2\. The authorities had warnings about what was coming.  The warnings
were conveyed to them orally and then in writing by prominent Hindus in
the areas concerned.

3\. The Muslim officials connived at the preparations going on. A few
encouraged.  There was a general belief among the Mussalmans that the
Government would take no action if anything was done against the Hindus.

4\. The *modus operandi* was for the Muslims to collect in batches of
hundreds and sometimes thousands and to march to Hindu villages or Hindu
houses in villages of mixed population.  They first demanded
subscriptions for the Muslim League and sometimes for the Muslim victims
of the Calcutta riots.  These enforced subscriptions were heavy,
sometimes amounting to Rs. 10,000 and more.  Even after the
subscriptions were realized, the Hindu population was not safe.  The
same or successive crowd appeared on the scene later and looted the
Hindu houses.  The looted houses in most cases were burnt……… Sometimes
before a house was looted the inmates were asked to embrace Islam. 
However, even conversion did not give immunity against loot and arson.

The slogans raised by the attacking Muslim crowds were those of the
Muslim League, such as ‘League Zindabad’ ‘Pakistan Zindabad’; ‘Larke
Lenge Pakistan’, ‘Marke Lenge Pakistan’.

5\. All those who resisted were butchered.  Sometimes they were shot,
for the rioters had a few shot-guns with them.

Sometimes people were killed even when there was no resistance offered
or expected I have on record cases where 50 to 60 members of one family
were brutally murdered.  Some families lost all their male members.

6\. (Is about the description and *habitat* of those who indulged in
these crimes.)

7\. Even after looting, arson and murder the Hindus in the locality were
not safe unless they embraced Islam.  The Hindu population therefore to
save themselves had to embrace Islam *en masse*……… All the images of
gods in Hindu houses were destroyed and all the Hindu temples of the
affected area were looted and burnt.

8\. There have been cases of forcible marriages There have been cases of
abduction.

9\. “For obvious reasons it was not possible for me to ascertain the
cases of rape.  But women complained to Mrs. Kirpalani of having been
roughly handled, their conch-shell bangles, the symbol of their married
life, having been broken and vermillion marks removed.  At one place
they were thrown on the ground by the miscreants who removed their
vermillion marks with the toes of their feet.”

10 to 13 are about post-riot conditions.

14\. The police did not function during the riots.  They are doing
merely patrol duty now.  They say that they had and have no orders to
fire except in self-defence.  The question of definding themselves never
arose, because they did not interfere with the rioters.

“The areas visited had already been devastated and all that I could see
were burnt houses and helpless Hindu villagers whether converted or
not.”

Scouting any suggestion that the trouble may be economic the Acharya
added, “Not a single rich Muslim house had been looted.  To me it
appeared to be absolutely communal and absolutely one-sided.”

The Congress Working Committee meeting came soon after at Delhi, and its
resolution on East Bengal contained the following observations:

“Reports published in the press and statements of public workers depict
a scene of bestiality and medieval barbarity that must fill every decent
human being with shame, disgust and anger.

“The Committee hold that this outburst of brutality is the direct result
of the politics of hate and civil strife that the Muslim League has
practised for years past and of the threats of violence that were daily
held out in past months.”

This extensive account has been given of Noakhali for this reason, that
coming soon after the Direct Action and Calcutta, this was the first
large-scale beginning of that wholesale elimination of entire
communities, that ‘genocide’ which from now on became the settled
programme and policy of the Muslim League, not expressed or admitted
officially, but nevertheless pursued and countenanced by it with vigour
and with great satisfaction.  It was clear after Noakhali as to what
India was to expect in the coming months-mass attacks on minorities in
Muslim-majority areas, co-operation of Muslim police and the officials
with the assailants, indifference of the British bureaucrats, and the
hypocritical fathering of the League leaders of the responsibility for
these occurrences on the minorities themselves.  In the case of Calcutta
the League leaders blamed it all on the Hindus-in the case of Noakhali
and Tipperah, the figures of casualties and damage were understated to
ridiculous figures, or just not noticed.  Had there been any regret
expressed by the League on these happenings, had they sat up and
realized the horror of what had  happened and had their conscience
pricked them, perhaps the recurrence of large-scale destruction like
Noakhali would not have been possible.  But the Leaguers viewed these
happenings with glee.  The programme was working according to plan.

Exactly the same pattern as in Noakhali and Tipperah was repeated during
the next five months in other parts of India.  These features were
common to all these occurrences.

1\. Places of occurrence were all heavy Muslim-majority areas-the
minority attacked were Hindu or Hindu-Sikh.  Successively they are:
Noakhali and Tipperah (October, 1946) Hazara (December, 1946 and
January, 1947); Rawalpindi (March, 1947 For several weeks); Jhelum,
Attock, Campbellpur, Dera Ismail Khan, Hazara, Multan, Gujrat,
Gujranwala, Sargodha (all as before-mentioned).  Lahore and Amritsar
towns had an overwhelming Muslim majority in their populations though in
the latter district as a whole the non-Muslims outnumbered the Muslims
by a small percentage.  In both towns from March, 1947 onwards terrible
outrages were perpetrated by Muslims on Hindus and Sikhs, the decisive
result in either case being obtained only on the partition of the
Punjab.

2\. Preparations were made by the Muslim League for attack on the
minorities in every case a good time before the actual occurrence.  Arms
had been collected and distributed.  Sufficiently large quantities of
petrol and other inflammable substances had been hoarded for
incendiarism.  Training in swift methods of arson, stabbing, disposal of
looted property and the killed had been imparted in the centres of the
Muslim National Guards.  Muslim police and officials had joined in
hatching the plans with the Muslim League leaders and Muslim National
Guard workers.  The Muslim masses had been aroused to a pitch of
anti-Hindu-Sikh fury by violent League propaganda. 

3\. The attacks were simultaneous, widespread and in places so open and
so sure of non-interference by the authorities that the assailants
collected and marched with drums beating, shouting Muslim League
slogans, and even making military formations.  There was nothing secret
about these attacks, as the police were already on the side of the
attackers.

4\. Large-scale arson, murder of males, abduction, rape and dishonour of
women, brutalities to children, looting, forcible conversions etc. all
these features were common to the localities affected.  Those attacked
were first asked to pay sums of money to pay off the invaders; then
followed more demands, and attacks by outsiders.  Local Muslims (that
is, those of the village actually attacked) sometimes out of long habits
of neighbourly intercourse, kept out of the actual attack, though of
course they were in league with the invaders and abetted and helped
them.

5\. The victims were given no quarter when beseiged.  Places of worship
were desecrated, and religious feelings were outraged with fiendish
gusto.  Shaving of Sikhs, feeding of Hindus and Sikhs on beef,
circumcision of Hindus and Sikhs, marrying away young girls and widows
of Hindus, and Sikhs to Muslims-these practices were resorted to.

6\. Police and the officials seldom appeared on the scene till long
after the beseiged had been killed and their houses burnt and looted.

7\. Muslim League leaders and Press said nothing in condemnation of
these outrages.  On the other hand, they trotted out imaginary stories
of provocation by the non-Muslims, and of supposed retaliation by
Muslims.  This in every case kept up the morale of the assailants. .

This pattern was repeated in every one of the places that have been
mentioned; and while the area of operations was necessarily limited
while British power was still there, on the establishment of Pakistan it
became general mass murder in West Punjab, in the North-Western Frontier
Province, in Sind, Baluchistan and raider-held Kashmir.

The succeeding chapters will narrate the unfolding of this great
conspiracy of the Muslim League.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))In a forceful pamphlet entitled ‘Fight this Charter of
Slavery’ signed by Master Tara Singh and several other Sikhs, including
the compiler of this volume.

^([2](#2a))But was it only such, and not complicity?

^([3](#3a))This statement was made on October 26, 1946.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
