+++
title = "24 "

+++
APPENDIX III  
Thy Kingdom is the Third World[1](#1)

Tempted by Satan to number Israel, King David ordered a census of his
people. This angered Jehovah and He offered him three alternatives to
choose from : either three years of famine, or three months of
destruction at the hand of his enemies, or the three days of the Lord.
Counting on the great mercies of Jehovah, David chose to fall into His
hand rather than into the hand of man. Consequently, the Lord "sent a
pestilence upon Israel; and there fell seventy thousand men" (I Chron.
21).

In preparing this Survey,[1](#1) Dr. Barrett has committed "David's
sin", as a census was once considered in more orthodox Christian
circles. But he is not without rival biblical support for his immense
labour. "Even the hairs of your head are numbered," assures the Bible
(Mtt. 10.30), proving Jesus's individual concern. On another occasion,
God had ordered Moses to "take the count of the booty that was taken,
both of man and of beast" (Num. 31.26). Thus biblically fortified, Dr.
Berrett has taken his counting in real earnest and, indeed, has done it
with a vengeance. Every single Christian of any sort appears as a single
digit in some "760 distinct absolute numbersâ€¦ 570 percentages, and in
around 450 further derived figures (averages)". And so does the
unbeliever for he is only the other side of the coin.

The *Encyclopaedia* is comprehensive and covers a wide span both in time
and space. It begins with the death of Jesus and, covering the next 19
centuries, arrives at our own time and, without stopping here, makes
projections till the years 2,000 A.D. It is also truly ecumenical. It
gives global data of Christianity in 8 continents, 24 major regions, 223
countries. It give the number of Christians by their skin colour (7),
race (17), ethnolinguistic family (71). It tells us how Christianity is
spreading among 8,990 peoples speaking 7,010 languages and 17,000
dialects. Since the beginning of Christianity, every soul, dead and
living, has been accounted for. And if the Church is an earthly
pre-figuration of celestial realities and, if to be baptized is also to
be saved, then the *Encyclopaedia* also provides a statistical picture
of the Last Day of Judgement, of the souls that will be finally saved
and finally damned.

Besides figures, the *Encyclopaedia* contains other useful features. It
gives a Who's Who of the Christian world, names of the more important
15,000 Christian organisations, a bibliography of 1,845 major works, a
Chronology of World Evangelization (AD 27-1983), A Survey Dictionary of
World Christianity, 1,500 maps, and 31 global tables. It is compiled by
500 experts in 190 countries; it contains 2.5 million words.

But can God's work really be surveyed in this fashion? Yes, seems to be
the answer if the work consists in catechizing and baptizing. Like a
good shepherd, the Church has been in the habit of counting its sheep,
its new acquisitions, its functionaries, its martyrs and its saints. In
the complicated world of today, enumeration has become even more
important. Only recently, the Pope spoke of the need for "accurate and
well-studied statistics". Dr. Barrett discusses the "theology of
Christian enumeration" and tells us how it is useful for missionary
"logistics". Jesus, *after* he had died and risen again, told his
Apostles to go forth "and make disciples of all nations." This divine
"mandate" and "Great Commission" calls for surveys like the present.
These "help the followers of Christ to see to what extent they have been
faithful to that commission, to perceive the magnitude of their task."

**Falsification**

Dr. Barrett is a quantifier and statician *par excellence*, but he is
not an impartial historian or a disinterested philosopher. He
unquestioningly accepts the Christian world-view and interpretative
framework and gives them a statistical veneer. For example, the
Christian establishment propagates the view that Apostle Thomas landed
in India in 52 AD; it has no scholarly support but Dr. Barrett
unhesitatingly accepts it and lends it an exactitude that belongs to
numbers. Similarly, he tells us that the population of the two Americas
was 14 millions at the time of their discovery. The new scholarship was
not unavailable to him when he was compiling his *Encyclopaedia*, but he
accepted the Christian-European view which wants to believe that they
occupied a relatively vacant land and the occupation involved little
genocide.

Quantification falsifies in another way. It covers up many sins. It
exhibits the process but hides the product. Can we adequately describe
European Imperialism in terms of its present wealth, figures of imports,
exports and investments? Similarly, can we describe the process of
Christianization in terms of its converts? Describing the beginnings of
Christianity in China, the *Encyclopaedia's* Chronology mentions 1306
A.D. as the year when "John of Montecorvino builds 2 churches in
Cambaluc"; but it forgets to mention that Christianity started its
career with the purchase of 40 Chinese slaves who formed the first
native catechists and priests. Similarly, the Chronology mentions 1498
as the year of Vasco da Gama's voyage to the East, but it fails to
mention that when he landed in India his flagship displayed a Cross and
carried twenty canons.

But here and there we do get much tragic information though having no
such sense of tragedy to Christian ears. 1518 is called the year of
"Cortes and Spanish Conquistadores" in Mexico. In 1523, Cortes is
ordered by the Spanish Monarch "to enforce mass conversion of Mexican
Indians." As a result, "Franciscans baptize one million Amerindians in
12 years since conquest, often at the rate of 7,000 a day per
missionary".

Whatever be Dr. Barrett's failings as a broader thinker and historian,
there is however no doubt that he is a zealous missionary. He looks at
everything from a missionary viewpoint. Christianity, for example, is
now split into 20,800 denominations as he tells us. A conventional view
will see in this fact signs of disunity, but our author points out the
positive side. To him, this proliferation gives Christianity many faces
and confuses the enemy. It makes it "far more difficult for hostile
regimes to comprehend the phenomenon of Christianity in order to control
it, suppress it, or eradicate it," to put it in his language.

He brings the same unconventional angle to bear on Christian
'Pilgrimage'. Seven per cent of the Christians are on the move as
religious tourists which also takes many of them even to "communist and
anti-Christian lands". To Dr. Barrett, these travellers are more than
pilgrims. They display Christian power and have an intimidating and
overawing role. They represent " a major form of witness," and, to
potential hostile regimes, "a disconcertingly effective demonstration of
the latent power of Christianity should they attempt to interfere with
it," as Barrett puts it.

**World Evangelization**

Dr. Barrett tell us that the professed goal of all Christian confession
and communion is "world evangelization". To achieve that end, Christians
have evolved many specialized institutions. These institutions train
theologians, print books, run Radio and TV stations. There are 3,000,000
full-time Christian functionaries; 4,500 major Seminaries train the
elite. Of these personnel, 250,000 are Foreign Missionaries trained in
410 world-wide "Foreign Missionary Training Centres". There are 3,100
Foreign Missionary Societies supporting their effort.

Christian Establishments are very diligent in promoting scholarship in
theological subjects, linguistics and other fields. Different Christian
denominations own and control 1,300 universities. Besides, there are
Departments of Religious Studies at 1,500 universities which are
significant for the study of Christianity, where they teach theology,
divinity, missiology and Church history. The Christian denominations run
930 Research Centres; they bring out 3,000 scholarly journals in
addition to another 20,000 magazines and newspapers of a less academic
type, of which 4,500 are Roma Catholic. Christians have an early history
of "apologetics". During medieval times, in their mutual debates, they
found scholarship a mighty weapon. The realization also soon dawned on
them that it can also be used with great effect for cultural aggression.
Christianity has been destroying other cultures with one hand, and has
been "recreating" and "rediscovering" them with the other. During the
process, the victims learn to look at themselves through Christian eyes.
All this is the silent work Christian scholarship.

Bible printing and distribution has also been an important Christian
activity. In 1980, the global distribution of the full Bible was
36,800,00 copies, and of only the New Testament during the same year
57,500,000 copies. By this year, the United Bible Societies' members had
distributed 432 million scripture selections - one for each ten persons
in the world.

In the last decade, another media has also become very important - Radio
and Television. The churches now own 1,450 Radio and TV station. In 1975
alone, they received 4,230,360 letters from the listeners of their
programmes. Students of Christianity in India probably know that one
organisation, *Vishwa Vani*, alone beams daily about six and a half
hours of Radio programme in eleven languages of India. "Radio Converts"
is now a new category on the list of mission's organisations that keep
accounts of all the souls saved.

All this labour, systematic and sustained, compels admiration. But what
supports it from behind? What is its seed-power, its psychic support? A
great lack of larger charity towards one's neighbour whose Gods are
regarded as false, who is considered damned on his own, and who has to
be saved by someone other than himself.

The *Encyclopaedia* provides a good deal of this kind of important
information but omits altogether church finance, something eminently
suitable for statistical presentation. It gives no information about the
budgets of different churches, their properties, investments, the
salaries of their priests and missionaries, the Government subsidies and
tie-ups, something which would have provided important social and
economic data. Some years ago, Time Magazine wrote that the Vatican
owned one-fifth of the industrial corporate wealth of Italy.

**Conversions**

The poor countries of the Third World which have been politically
dominated till recently continue to be the special targets of missionary
activities. Conversion is massive in Africa. Between 1970 and 1985,
Christianity has won here 1,470,000 converts annually, or about 4,000
daily. In South Asia which includes countries like India and Sri Lanka,
the annual gain, during the same period, is 447,000 converts or about
1,200 daily. In East Asia, the annual crop is 360,000, or about 1,000 a
day. Strangely enough, it is gaining converts even in the USSR - 174,182
annually, or about 450 daily.[2](#2)

But these gains are offset by losses in the rich countries of the West,
the very heartland of Christianity. In Western Europe, North America,
Australia and New Zealand, it is losing annually 1,950,000 members, or
about 5,350 daily. In terms of active, professing church-going members,
the loss is even greater - 7,600 a day for Europe and North America
alone.

We are told that the centre of gravity of Christianity is shifting from
Europe and America to the Third World. This is a euphemism for saying
that many of the countries of the Third World have been successfully
colonized, that the people of these countries have forgotten their
indigenous roots. They have even begun to be recruited to the missionary
corps and they are taken out to countries other than their own in the
Third World region for proselytizing work. They cost less and they serve
as good stool-pigeons. Such recruits already number 32,500. In India,
for example, out of a total of 5,979 foreign missionaries, 39 came from
the Communist world, and 267 came from Third World countries like Burma,
Brazil, Taiwan, Sri Lanka, Philippines, etc. In the last three hundred
years, Imperialism used its victims themselves to subdue each other.
Christianity is doing the same.

**Crypto-Christians**

We have heard of "underground communism" and "crypto-communists", but
the survey also makes us aware of a similar category of "underground
church" and "crypto-Christians". These cryptos are affiliated members of
the Church but this fact is kept a secret from their Government and even
from their neighbours. Globally they constitute 4.9% of the total
Christian population (1980). One would have thought that they existed
probably only in the hostile Communist and Muslim countries, but the
Survey reveals that they exist very much in India too where Christian
conversion is open and enjoys legal and social protection. In 1980,
about one-third (7,637,000) of the Christian population (3.9% of the
total Indian population) was crypto-Christian. And the ratio is rising
every year. During 1970-80, the average annual Christian converts were
175,000; of these more than half (88,000) conversions were secret.
Partly the motive may have been to take advantage of the benefits meant
for the Hindu depressed classes, but it may also be a policy matter of
the Christian establishment. Such a large chunk sailing under false
colours and probably working in different Government departments, civil,
police and army, makes them subject to secret and continued blackmail of
the missionaries. In any case, it is bad for their morale and morals,
and bad for national security. And as for the organisers of this
clandestine operation, it is not unworthy of a semi-secret society.

**Religious Liberty**

The UNO's Universal Declaration of Human Rights includes the principle
of religious liberty and toleration. Dr. Barrett accepts this principle
but his understanding of it is exclusively Christian. He interprets it
ecumenically. To him, it only means that the Christians should show
"genuine religious toleration to, all least, all other expressions of
faith in Christ." But so far as other, non-Christian religions are
concerned, religious toleration "does not imply that Christians should
deny their convictions about Christ and his Church, or abandon
proclamation, evangelism or conversion". The Christians retain their
right to believe other "religions false and inadequate" and to "attempt
to win (their adherents) to faith in Jesus Christ".

Dr. Barrett's understanding of religious liberty is thoroughly
Christio-centric. Therefore, to him a country is not libertarian just
because it gives liberty to all religions. Such a country ranks only
fifth in the order of liberty. On the other hand, a country where the
"state propagates Christianity" is at the very top; the second in rank
are countries where there is "massive state subsidies to churches".
There are 74 such countries where the state provides massive or limited
subsidies to churches. No wonder with this kind of definition, countries
like Venezuela, Guam, Gibralter, Greece, Guatemala, Paraguay, Peru,
Portugal, Philippines, etc. - no examples of political or religious
liberty - stand at the top.

**Hindus-Buddhists**

Hindus and Buddhists are found in significant numbers in 84 countries
each, but they are losing in number in most of them. The loss is the
greatest in their own homes. Between 1970 and 1980, Hindus and Jains
together lost in India 324,500 members; this loss was offset to some
extent by some gains in North America, Europe and to a degree in Latin
America. Thanks to the take-over of China by Communism, Buddhists have
registered a massive, global loss of 910,000 a year. Different tribal
religions, close to Hinduism and Buddhism in the spirit of tolerance,
too have been losing phenomenally - 2,200,000 annually, and the
spiritual and cultural life of many countries has been badly damaged.
Africa, for example, is now 45% Christian, and 41% Muslim, and only 12%
tribal religionist. And as Dr. Barrett says, all these mass conversions
under way "are accruing primarily to missionary religions aggressively
engaged in proselytizing".

Followers of Taoism, a great philosophy with many points of affinity
with higher Hinduism and Buddhism, have been doing so badly that they
have not even deserved a separate mention. Confucianism too is a
declining phenomenon according to Dr. Barrett's tables.

All this may be depressing to us in the East but these tables of
converts may mean very little in the deeper analysis. These tables at
best present a political-ideological map, not a religious-spiritual
picture. The Hindu-Buddhist influence is of a different kind. It works
as a leaven; it provides Yoga, meditation, and a culture of inferiority.
It tends to change people from within, without changing their outer
labels. In fact, hundreds of thousands of people in the world,
particularly in the West, are already Hindu-Buddhist-Taoist without
being so labelled. Even the agnostio-atheist movement in the West and in
the Communist countries is Hindu-Buddhist in this deeper, spiritual
sense, in so far as this movement follows intellectual honesty and wants
to take nothing for granted and rejects unproven dogmas and pretentious
claims and wants to build on "facts", though in this case facts belong
to an inner realm.

But of course Hinduism and Buddhism should become more conscious of
their role. There is no doubt that their present discomfiture is a
passing phase. Similarly, Taoism and Confucianism too will regain their
old place in the life of China once she overcomes her crisis of
identity. The spirit of the East is rising again, not to fall prey to
dubious religions and semi-religious ideologies but to make its just
contribution to the good of the world.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) World Christian Encyclopaedia, edited by David B. Barrett,
Oxford University Press, 1982, reviewed by Ram Swarup in The Times of
India dated 14 July 1985.  

[2](#2a) The USSR was a communist country when this article was written.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
