+++
title = "04 "

+++
***4. THE HINDUS : A MAJORITY IN MORAL MINORITY***

Here you have a huge majority of 850 million people, part of a culture
which is thousands of years old. A culture which has proved over the
ages its infinite tolerance towards other creeds and religions, giving
refuge to all persecuted minorities in the world, whether Parsis, Syrian
Christians, Jews, or Tibetans today. Yet Hindu-bashing has become a
favorite pastime of the Press, both Indian and Foreign – and when you
find someone such as Murli Manohar Joshi who wants to Indianize Indian
education, an aspiration which would be found natural in any country, he
is run down by his own people. Thus one finds that Hindus are
self-depreciating, tend to lack self-confidence and that they never
raise their voices in protest against the discrimination which is
practiced against them. In short, you have a huge physical majority in
moral minority. Is it because they are cowards ?

****

POOR HINDUS !

Hindus not only represent the overwhelming majority of the population of
India, but they can also boast of one the oldest cultures of the world:
Sanskrit is often thought as the mother of all languages; Hindu
philosophy has played a very important role in both the fashioning of
Greek mythology and Celtic lore (as demonstrated by French Indianist Guy
Deleury) – and these two traditions represent the foundation of all
European culture. We are all aware that the zero concept originated from
India, but who knows that the Egyptians used Hindu arithmetic concepts
to build their pyramids, that Hindus probably inspired Pythagorean
mathematics, or that French astronomers of the 18^(th) century, such as
Jean-Claude Bailly, had remarked "that Hindu calculations of the
position of the stars and of solar eclipses were so precise that we are
still using them today"?

Thus, you have a people, the Hindus, inheritors of an immense, noble and
age-old culture, who represent the massive physical (85%), social,
religious and cultural majority of the Asian superpower of the 21^(st)
century, India. And yet, one sometimes finds that the voice of Hindus is
rarely heard in India, that they are respected neither in their own
country, nor abroad; and that Hindus generally lack self-confidence.
Could it be that *Hindus are a psychological minority in India,* whereas
minorities, such as the Christians, which constitute only 3% of the
total population, wield an enormous moral power in this country, thanks
to the quality of their schools and hospitals and because of the pride
they have in their own religion and moral standards ?

Look also at Europe :all European children, be them Italian or German,
are brought-up on the values of Christianity and the greatness of Greek
philosophy. It would be impossible, in France for instance, for the
Muslim minority - immigrants from France’s ex-colonies such as Algeria
or Morocco – to impose their views and culture on the government. In
fact, Muslim girls are not allowed to wear a veil when they go to French
school: "you are in France, you have been given the French nationality,
so behave like a French first and like a Muslim in second", they are
told bluntly. Would that be possible in India? Would any Indian, except
the much-maligned RSS, have the courage to ask Muslims to be Indians
first and Muslim second? Or tell Catholics and Protestants that they
have to revert to a more Indianized Christianity, such as the one that
existed in Kerala before the arrival of the Portuguese Jesuits ? And see
how stridently Muslims and Christians – backed by most of the Media -
react when the Human Resources Minister, Dr Joshi, wants to teach Indian
children a little bit of the greatness of their culture !

Actually, it appears at times that there are two sets of standards used
in India amongst journalists and intellectuals: one for the Christians
or the Muslims; and one for the Hindus. If for example a Christian is
killed, such as the ghastly murder of Australian missionary Graham
Staines and his two sons, the Indian and foreign press will spend weeks
- if not months - in eulogizing Graham and making nazis of all Hindus
held responsible for his murder; but if a few days later twenty
laborers, as innocent as Staines’ two sons, are savagely assassinated by
Kashmir separatists, it will only warrant a few lines in Indian
newspapers, without any of the outraged comments which followed Staines’
murder. When the Ayodhya mosque was brought down, it was as if eternal
shame had descended upon India: "death of secularism, Hindu
fundamentalists have taken over the country, a Black Day in the history
of our democracy", screamed the newspapers ad infinitum… However
unfortunate the Ayodhya episode was, nobody was killed there; but the
terrible Bombay blasts which followed, orchestrated by Indian Muslims,
with the active help of Pakistan and the silent approval of Saudi
Arabia, which took the lives of hundreds of innocent Hindus, never
warranted the kind of moral indignation which followed Ayodhya.

Hindus in India are not only the object of contempt, but they are also
chased from their own ancestral lands. There were one million of them in
Kashmir in 1900 – but only a few hundred today, the rest having been
made to flee though terror. In Assam, Tripura, or Nagaland, Hindus are
being outnumbered by Bangladeshi illegal immigrants and terrorized by
pro-Christian separatist groups, such as the Bodos or the Mizos, while
local governments often turn a blind eye. Their temples are being taken
over, like in Karnataka, where soon a bill will bring more than 43,000
Hindu shrines, maths, and religious groups under the control of a
commissioner. Notice that this act does not apply to Christians and
Muslims institutions and that the Indian Government is still sponsoring
the Haj pilgrimage ! Hindus anyway take all this lying down, as they
amply demonstrated during the hijack of the Kathmandu-Delhi Indian
Airlines flight one year ago.

Is this normal ? Look again westwards: Europeans will battle tooth and
nail to defend what they consider their rights and territories, whether
it is the Spanish fighting the Basques, the British going all the way to
the Falkland islands to wrest away what should geographically belong to
the Argentineans, or the Americans going to war against Iraq because
their oil interests are threatened. Hindus should maybe become a little
prouder of themselves: there is today so much talent in India, so many
brains, that they don’t have to copy from the West. Hindu children
regularly top their schools and universities in the US, Hindus are now
the best programmers of this planet and are in demand all over the world
and Hindu expatiates are amongst the richest people in UK, the US or
Canada… Why can’t the majority of this marvelous, diverse, ancient and
extraordinary country which is India, stop behaving as if it was a moral
minority ?

****

 

THE GREAT AMBITION OF HINDUISM

It requires another foreign correspondent to provide a counterpoint to
Delhi-based American journalist John Eliott’s rather condescending
article : « can Hindus be ambitious » (*Outlook*, December 21, 1998),
where he says that Hinduism is the main obstacle to India’s
modernisation and liberalisation. Because, again, if an Indian had
answered his attacks, he would have immediately been taxed of
« nationalist », or even accused of being a follower of the Sangh
Parivhar.

Let’s first start by what John Elliott gets right :

For some mysterious reason, Hindus appear to be the most undisciplined,
collectively selfish, and nationally uncaring community in India, so
that it requires a Mother Theresa to look after their own
underprivileged. In the same way, they do, as Mr Elliott points out,
tend to extend cleanliness only to their own immediate surroundings :
their homes, or their front porches, but neglect the rest. It is
puzzling for instance how a people which has worshipped the Ganges for
thousands of years, treats it with so little respect, dumping every day
thousands of chemicals in its waters.

True again, Hindus are a tolerant people. India for example, is probably
the only country in the world where the Jews not only were not
persecuted, but were also welcomed with open arms when they fled the
destruction of Jerusalem and allowed to practise freely their religion.
True also : this tolerance can often become misguided : Naxalites ought,
for instance, to have long ago whipped in public Rahul Bajaj, who is
responsible for polluting entire cities with his Tempos, in the name of
his petty, selfish interests.

But all the rest is wrong.

Take John Elliott’s view of Hinduism for instance : Hinduism has never
been a religion, *but a way of life*, allowing countless sects,
philosophies, creeds, to develop in its fold, as long as they were
faithful to the central core of its essence - *santana dharma*. Over the
centuries, this way of life has subtly influenced even India’s invaders,
be it Christians or Muslims, who are like no other Christians and
Muslims in the world.

Mr Elliott has also not bothered to study Hinduism in depth, when he
says that « basically (!!!) Hinduism teaches fatalistic acceptance ». On
the contrary, Hinduism admits for example that one can use violence if
necessary : when one’s brothers, sisters, or country are in danger -
this is the very message of Krishna to Arjuna in the Bhavagad Gita. It
is Buddhism and Jainism which perverted that message and opened India to
the first invasions of Alexander the Great and subsequently to the
Muslim onslaughts. Later, it is Gandhi and his rigid and moralistic
attitude of *ahimsa*, refusing even to fight Nazism, the most *asuric*
force of our modern age, which paved the way for India’s splitting in
two.

« Hindus lack ambition », accuses Mr Elliott ! But Indian civilisation
not only had the loftiest of ambitions, but it also *achieved*
extraordinary realisations, which were unparalleled in the world. In the
words of Sri Aurobindo, India’s great revolutionary, philosopher, and
Sage: «  It lived with a noble, ample and vigorous order and freedom; it
developed a great literature, sciences, arts, crafts, industries; it
rose to the highest possible ideals of knowledge and culture, of arduous
greatness and heroism, of kindness, philanthropy and human sympathy and
oneness. It laid the inspired basis of wonderful spiritual philosophies;
it examined the secret of external nature and discovered and lived the
boundless and miraculous truths of the inner being; it fathomed self and
understood and possessed the world ».

Debilitating and cruel caste system ? The caste system is the most
misunderstood, the most vilified subject of Hindu society. Let us again
listen to Sri Aurobindo : "Caste was originally an arrangement for the
distribution of functions in society, just as much as class in Europe,
but the principle on which this distribution was based was peculiar to
India. A Brahmin was a Brahmin not by mere birth, but because he
discharged the duty of preserving the spiritual and intellectual
elevation of the race, and he had to cultivate the spiritual temperament
and acquire the spiritual training which alone would qualify him for the
task. So it was for the Vaishya whose function was to amass wealth for
the race and the Shudra who discharged the humbler duties of service
without which the other castes could not perform their share of labour
for the common good".

But, yes, Mr Elliott, there is no doubt that the institution of caste
degenerated : « It ceased to be determined by spiritual qualifications
and thus lost most of its meaning. The spirit of caste arrogance,
exclusiveness and superiority came to dominate it instead of the spirit
of duty, and the change weakened the nation and helped to reduce us to
our present condition ».

And of course, Mr Elliott has to feed us the *mantra* of foreign (and
sadly Indian) journalists : the « (Hindu) fundamentalists / Hindutva ».
But a bit of nationalism is indispensable for the well-being of a
nation. Most of Europe’s culture is based on its Christian heritage and
we the French are proud of our Greco-Roman tradition. Thus, India does
need to regain a little of its self-pride, after having been trampled
upon by so many invaders... and made fun by so many foreign
correspondents ! It is healthy sign that it is happening in a some small
measure today.

Finally : has India failed, as Mr Elliott implies ? But is not the very
fact that India still exists a miracle in itself ? This nation survived
ten centuries of one of the most terrible genocide ever perpetuated on a
race in the name of religion, the soul-stifling British colonial rule
and 40 years of "secular" socialism; and it **is** going to survive the
perils of industrialisation and westernisation, because, whatever Mr
Elliott and his pairs say, no country which has survived so much when
all other great civilisations, such as Greece or Egypt, are only
memories in dusty text books, can be snuffed out by the winds of
liberalism.

Thus, John Elliot’s malevolent vision of an India which will « gradually
be shaped by more materialistic forces, such as liberalisation and
satellite TV », may never come true. Thank God ! That would be the end
of this country’s uniqueness and genius - whatever its faults.

 

****

EDUCATION : WHAT THE HELL IS THE CONTROVERSY ABOUT ?

As a foreign journalist, one cannot understand all the frenzy and the
excessive noise made about the Education Agenda of Murli Manohar Joshi :
what is wrong in trying to « Indianize, nationalize and spiritualize »
education in India ? Mr Joshi's critics - and there have been many -
have called it « a hidden Hindu agenda ». So What ?

With 850 millions souls, Hindus constitute the majority of this country.
Why should Hindus then be ashamed of a « Hindu » education ?
Traditionally and historically, Hinduism has always been the most
tolerant of all religions, never trying to convert anybody, never
sending its armies or missionaries to neighboring countries, to impose
its religion and ways of life - not even by non-violence means, as the
Buddhists did all over Asia.

It should also be said that Hinduism is much more than a religion, IT'S
A WAY OF LIFE, a universal spiritual outlook, which has allowed numerous
sects, branches, philosophies, to develop within its fold, as long as
they were faithful to the central truth of Hinduism : DHARMA. It even
recognises the truth and validity of other creeds - and it's perfectly
normal for a Hindu to have pictures of Guru Govind, Christ, Buddha and
Krishna in their homes. For are they not both avatars ? And is that not
true secularism (and not the opportunistic secularism of India's
politicians, which has divided India along caste and religious lines) ?

Then why should Hindus not be proud of Hinduism ? It has not only shaped
the psyches of Hindus, but also of Indian Christians, Jains, Parsis,
even Muslims, who are like no other Muslims in the world. And why should
Indians be ashamed of their own civilisation whose greatness was
foremost Hindu? Why should they refuse to have their children read the
Vedas, which constitute one of the great fountains of spiritual wisdom,
or the Bhagavad Gita, which contains all the secrets of eternal life ?
Or the Ramanaya and the Mahabharata, which teach the great values of
human nature : courage, selflessness, spiritual endeavour, love of one's
wife and neighbours...

Are the French ashamed of their Greco-Roman inheritance? Not at all ! On
the contrary they even think that civilisation started only with the
Greeks. Would you call the Germans or the Italians « nationalists »
because they have Christian Democrats Parties? Christianity is the
founding stone of Western civilisation and nobody dares deny it. Clinton
goes to the mass and swears on the Bible and none finds anything to say.
We French are brought-up listening to the values of Homer's « Iliad »,
or Corneille's « Le Cid ». It is true that in France there has been a
separation of the State and the Church; but that is because at one time
the Church misused its massive political power and grabbed enormous
amounts of land (like it did in India under the British). But no such
thing ever happened India. The much-maligned Brahmins never interfered
in politics and today they are often a neglected lot.

When they took over India, the British set upon establishing an
intermediary race of Indians, whom they could entrust with their work at
the middle level echelons and who could one day be convenient
instruments to rule by proxy or semi-proxy. The tool to shape these «
British clones » was EDUCATION . In the words of Macaulay, the « pope »
of British schooling in India: « We must at present do our best to form
a class, who may be interpreters between us and the millions we govern;
a class of persons, Indians in blood and colour, but English in taste,
in opinions, in morals and in intellects ». Macaulay had very little
regard for Hindu culture and education : « all the historical
information which can be collected from all the books which have been
written in the Sanskrit language, is less valuable than what may be
found in the most paltry abridgement used at preparatory schools in
England ». Or : « Hindus have a literature of small intrinsic value,
hardly reconcilable with morality, full of monstrous superstitions »...

It seems today that India's Marxist and Muslim intelligentsia could not
agree more with Macaulay or with Charles Grant (1746-1823), Chairman of
the East India Company, who said : "we cannot avoid recognising in the
people of Hindustan a race of men lamentably degenerate and
base...governed by malevolent and licentious passions...and sunk in
misery by their vices". And the dream of Macaulay has come true:
nowadays, the greatest adversaries of the « Indianised and spiritualised
education » of Mr Joshi, are the descendants of these « Brown Shahibs »
: the « secular » politicians, the journalists, the top bureaucrats, in
fact the whole Westernised cream of India. And what is even more
paradoxical, is that most of them are Hindus.

It is they who upon getting independence, have denied India its true
identity and borrowed blindly from the British education system, without
trying to adapt it to the unique Indian mentality and psychology; and it
is they who are refusing to accept « an Indianisation, nationalisation
and spirtualisation » of India's education system, which is totally
western-oriented and is churning out machines learning by heart (Indian
children must be amongst those having most homework in the world) boring
academics which are of little usefulness in life. And what India is
getting from this education is a youth which apes the West : they go to
Mac Donald's, thrive on MTV culture, wear the latest Klein jeans and
Lacoste T Shirts, and in general are useless, rich parasites, in a
country which has so many talented youngsters who live in poverty. They
will grow-up like millions of other western clones in the developing
world, who wear a tie, read the New York Times and swear by liberalism
and secularism to save their countries from doom.

But then, what does makes India unique? Take the proposal of Joshi to
make Sanskrit compulsory in school. Great idea ! Sanskrit is the Mother
of all languages, so intricate, so subtle, so rich, that no other
language can equal it today. And moreover, it could become the unifying
language of India, apart from English, which is spoken only by a tiny
minority. "Sanskrit ought still to have a future as the language of the
learned and it will not be a good day for India when the ancient tongues
cease entirely to be written or spoken", admonished 50 years ago Sri
Aurobindo, India's great Sage and Seer .

A dead language, you say ! Impossible to revive?

But that's what they argued about Hebrew. And did not the Jewish people,
when they got back their land in 1948, revive their "dead" language, so
that it is spoken today by ALL Jewish people and has become alive
again?...

The same thing ought to be done with Sanskrit, but as Sri Aurobindo
points out: "it must get rid of the curse of the heavy pedantic style
contracted by it in its decline, with the lumbering impossible compounds
and the overweight of hair-splitting erudition". Let the scholars begin
now to revive and modernise the Sanskrit language, it would be a sure
sign of the dawning of the Renaissance of India. In a few years it
should be taught as the second language in schools throughout the
country, with the regional language as the first and English as the
third. Then will India again have its own unifying language.

The Ministers walked out when the Saraswati Vandanam was played. But why
should anyone object to Saraswati, the Goddess of learning, She who
bestowed so much Grace on India. In 1939, a disciple had said to Sri
Aurobindo that: "there are some people who object to the singing of
Vande Mataram as a national song; Sri Aurobindo had replied: "in that
case Hindus should give up their culture". But the disciple had
continued: "the argument is that the song speaks of Hindu gods, like
Durga and that it is offensive to Muslims". Said Sri Aurobindo: "but it
is not a religious song, it is a national song and the Durga spoken of
is India as the Mother. Why should not the Muslims accept it? In the
Indian concept of nationality, the Hindu view should be naturally there.
if it cannot find a place, the Hindus may as well be asked to give-up
their culture. The Hindus don't object to "Allah-Ho-Akbar".

It is then obvious that Education in India has to be totally revamped.
The kind of Westernised education which is standard in India, does have
its place, because India wants to be on par with the rest of the world,
and Indian youth should be able to deal confidently with the West: do
business, talk, and relate to a universal world culture. But
nevertheless, the first thing that Indian children should be taught IS
THE GREATNESS OF THEIR OWN CULTURE. They should learn to revere the
Vedas, they should be taught the genius of the Mahabharata and the
Ramanayana; they should be told that in this country everything has been
done, that it was an unsurpassed civilisation, when the West was still
mumbling its first words, that Indian civilisation reached dizzying
heights, which have been since unsurpassed. But overall they should be
taught early that India's greatness is her spirituality her world-wide
wisdom. INDIA'S NEW EDUCATION HAS TO BE SPIRITUALISED; IT HAS TO BE AN
INNER EDUCATION, WHICH TEACHES TO LOOK AT THINGS FROM THE INNER PRISM,
NOT THROUGH THE WESTERN ARTIFICIAL LOOKING GLASS.

India's Dharma, her eternal quest for truth, should be drilled in the
child from an early age. And from this firm base, everything then can be
taught -from the most modern forms of mathematics, to the latest
scientific technologies.

Finally we can only end by echoing the words of Sri Aurobindo who was
India's most ardent revolutionary and an avatar, who foresaw Humanity's
next stage of evolution : " Whoever wishes to cut of the nation from its
past, is no friend of our national growth. Whoever fails to take
advantage of the present, is losing us the battle of life. We must
therefore save for India all that she has stored up of knowledge,
character and noble thoughts in her immemorial past. We must acquire for
her the best knowledge that the West can give her and assimilate it to
her own peculiar type of national temperament. We must introduce the
best methods of teaching humanity has developed, whether modern or
ancient. And all these we must harmonise into a system which will be
impregnated with the spirit of self-reliance, so as to build up men and
not machines".

****

" SEVA AND GOVERNMENT "

In ancient India, the concept of "Seva", of service to others, was very
predominant. It was then felt that the very action of forgetting oneself
and giving one’s work towards the welfare of one’s brothers and sisters,
was one of the most powerful tools to the realisation of the inner Self.
Today, the tradition of Seva is being revived by many contemporary
spiritual movements which are creating a new avatar for Hinduism. More
than that, for the first time since independence, India has a Government
which can boast quite a few Ministers, who are bringing back the
practice of service to their country. That is to say, that they are not
in power to fill their pockets, but put the betterment of "Mother
India", before their own petty self-interests, or even those of their
parties.

One such politician is Dr Manohar Murali Joshi - and amongst all the NDA
Ministers, he is the one who has been most targeted by the Press. Yet,
Dr Joshi has a mission, an ideal - not for himself but for his own
country. The first thing that Dr Joshi feels is that "Indians lack self-
confidence", this very modern and western bend of mind which says: "we
can do it" and drives people to go beyond themselves to reach their
goals. And it is true : Indians are often self-depreciating and are
always comparing their countries to western nations and their
achievements. "Yet, says Dr Joshi, we should tell our children that
modern computers would not work unless India had not invented the
concept of the zero, or that high grade steel in ancient India was so
good that Alexander the Great wanted it to fashion his own sword, or
that rhinoplastic surgery was performed in Vedic times, long before it
was known in Europe".

Manohar Murali Joshi also believes that Indians lack "esprit de corps",
the team spirit which makes a nation great. "Look at our hockey or
crickets players, says Dr Joshi, they are great individually, but cannot
perform well collectively on a steady basis". Dr Joshi could also have
added that Indians are probably amongst the most undisciplined people in
the world: they always break queues, drive without thinking one second
about the other, clean meticulously their own front porch, but throw
their garbage in the street, and have hoarded so much black money that
if it would surface, it would make India one of the richest nations in
the world. And here again, the key is to educate : "It has been stated
that Hinduism, being too individualistic a religion, is responsible for
this lack of collective spirit, argues Dr Joshi, but nothing is further
from truth". And Murali Joshi to quote from Sri Aurobindo, India’s great
avatar of the New Age: "Indian civilisation lived with a noble, ample
and vigorous order and freedom; it developed a great literature,
sciences, arts, crafts, industries; it rose to the highest possible
ideals of spiritual knowledge "...

"It is the British, asserts Dr Joshi, who attacked and ridiculed
Hinduism, which they rightly perceived as the main obstacle to their
complete hold over India". And he could have further said that they also
created "Macaulay’s children", Indians in body, but British in mind,
whose descendants can still be found amongst Indian Intelligentsia !
"Hinduism is very community-oriented religion, contends Dr Joshi, as
apart from the concept of seva, look how collective is our temple
worship, with its bhajans, or how the old Panchayat system was
democratic from the village all the way to the top (and not like today,
where everything is decided in Delhi, with the villages having
absolutely no say in anything).

What about the environment, which is so degraded today : tigers are
being killed at the rate of one day, says a recent report; every year an
area the size of France is deforested in India; and the holy Ganges is
so polluted that it is not even fit for bathing. Are not those who
defecate in the Ganges, cut their own forests and kill tigers, mostly
Hindus ? "But on the contrary, replies Dr Joshi, the Scriptures tell us
never to urinate in the Ganges, they enjoin us to plant trees at the
time of festivities and not to kill animals. It is again the impact of
ten centuries of colonisation which has made us forget this very Hindu
respect of Nature".

Finally, unless you educate Indian children about the greatness of their
own civilisation, which taught the concept of seva, of collective
discipline and respect for Nature’s bounties, there is no way that India
is going to produce the leaps and bounds which she needs to become a
superpower. You also have to rewrite Indian history, which basically has
been crafted by British historians to further their claim of superiority
on the "natives", using false evidence, such as the theory of the Aryan
Invasion, which all recent archaeological and linguistic discoveries are
proving as false. The history of the independence of India, which has
been concocted by Congress historians to show the Congress in the best
light, should be reviewed too and Indian children should be told about
the untold horrors of ten centuries of Muslim invasions so that they can
face their own history.

And this is the task that Dr Joshi has set for himself in the true
spirit of seva. Of course, "secular" historians and journalists, who
often have such a Marxist-inspired vision of their country, will scream
every time Mr Joshi makes a move towards "Indianisation" of what is
basically a very bland copy of Western culture. But just think how seven
years ago Dr Joshi had the guts to go and raise the national flag in
Kashmir on 15^(th) of August. Remember how he was reviled and ridiculed
by the Indian Press ? Today he would be hero… "We can do it"…

****

ARE HINDUS COWARDS ?

"Muslims are bullies and Hindus cowards", the Mahatma Gandhi once said.
He was right – at least about Hindus: there has been in the past 1400
years, since the first invasions started, very few Shivaji’s and Rajput
princes to fight the bloody rule of the Moghuls, or hardly any Rani of
Jhansi’s to stand against the humiliating colonial yoke of the British.
If a nation’s soul is measured by the courage of its children, then
India is definitely doomed: without the Sikhs, whose bravery is
unparalleled in the more recent history of India, Hindus would have even
lost additional land to the Muslim invaders and there would have been
infinitely more massacres of Hindus by Muslims during the first weeks of
Partition.

Are Hindus more courageous since they have an independent nation (thanks
- not to the non-violence of Gandhi – but to the true nationalists, such
as Sri Aurobindo and Tilak, who prepared the ground for the Mahatma at
the beginning of the century)? Not at all! Because of Nehru’s absurd and
naïve "hindi-chini-bhai-bhai" policy, the Indian army was shamefully
routed in 1962 by the Chinese, a humiliation which rankles even today.
Beijing is still able to hoodwink Indian politicians, by pretending it
has good intentions, through the interviews the Chinese leaders very
generously give to the Hindu newspaper (which should rightly be called
the "anti-Hindu") and Frontline ("the mouthpiece in India for the
Chinese communist party"), while quietly keeping on giving nuclear
know-how to Pakistan, as well as the missiles to carry their atomic
warheads to Indian cities, arm separatists groups in the north-east and
continuing to claim Arunachal Pradesh or Sikkim.

Everywhere in the world, Hindus are hounded, humiliated, routed, be it
in Fiji where, once more, an elected democratic government was deposed
in an armed coup, or in Pakistan and Bangladesh, where Muslims indulge
in pogroms against Hindus every time they want to vent their hunger
against India (read Taslima Nasreen’s book "Lalja"). In Kashmir, the
land of yogis, where Hindu sadhus and sages have meditated for 5000
years, Hindus have been chased out of their ancestral home by death,
terror and intimidation: there were 25% of Hindus at the beginning of
the century in the Kashmir valley… and hardly a handful today. And how
did India start the new millennium? By surrendering as a lamb goes to
the slaughterhouse to a handful of terrorists who took over flight IC
814 from Kathmandu to Delhi (Nepal is another small inconsequential
country, which owes its culture to India, but keeps on indulging India’s
enemies, whether Pakistan or China)! India had the opportunity to storm
the plane when it landed in Amritsar, at a time when the militants had
not been furnished with explosives and more guns by the Talibans, but it
did nothing out of bureaucratic bungling and sheer incapability. And not
only did this Hindu Government make an ass of itself by calling the
Talibans "friendly", whereas all along the Talibans only helped the
terrorists, but also by its weak "Gandhian" attitude, it lost any
credibility in a world, where Might is the only criteria, as the US
proves us every day.

And what happens when there is ONE man in India - whatever his faults,
quirks, or excesses – who dares to call a spade a spade, is not afraid
of words and is ready to stand-up for his opinions? Not only, of course,
he is attacked by Christians and Muslims, but he is also hounded by his
own brothers and sisters, the "secular" Hindus, the Human Rights
activists, the journalists, the judges, the police, the (Congress)
politicians! Are Hindus so intent to show the world that not only they
are cowards, but also idiots? This man, of course, is Bal Thakeray. When
Bal Thakeray said, already many years ago, that there was no point in
playing cricket against Pakistan, as long as Islamabad was sending
militants to kill and maim into Indian territory, he was ridiculed by
the secular press as fanatic and un-sportive (and cricket is certainly
not a gentleman’s game as the recent scandal has shown). But he was
proved right, when during Kargil, India refused - for once - to play
cricket with Pakistan. When he says too, that since fourteen centuries,
Muslims always strike first against Hindus, he has another good point,
for those who live in Indian cities which have important Muslim
minorities, will tell you that *every time* there are Hindu-Muslims, it
is the Muslims who start them, either by attacking the police, or by
provoking the Hindus.

And this is exactly what took place in Bombay, after the Ayodya mosque
was brought down by Hindu militants : Muslims, angry of the "terrible"
affront done to Islam, started pelting the police with stones and
burning shops; but unfortunately for the Muslims, who have made of riots
an art (please read the passages of the Koran which deal with riots as
part of jihad), they found that for once, the Hindus under the
leadership of the Shiv Sena, retaliated blow for blow – an eye for an
eye, a tooth for a tooth – as the Israelis, who have been so long at the
receiving end of Muslim bullying, say so well. It is not for us to
condone violence: but how long can the Hindus be the butt of killings
and persecution, be sacrificial lambs that meekly go to slaughter ? For
Gandhi was absolutely right: Muslims are bullies, they have bullied
India and they continue to bully Hindu India, as Pakistan has
demonstrated by receiving a well-meaning, but naïve Vajpayee at Lahore,
while its soldiers were quietly invading the heights above Kargil; or as
Mushraraf shows, by giving gullible Indian journalists pep talk about
how he wants peace with India, while Islamabad is still training and
arming murderous jihadis for Kashmir.

And what monstrous murder is Bal Thakeray accused of ? What crime
against humanity has he committed? He is guilty of having written two
"inflammatory" editorials in the Shiv Sena’s mouthpiece. Editorials?
Inflammatory? But did Bal Thakeray ever kill anyone ? Is the man going
to be arrested for having "written" something ? Are not the leaders of
the Muslim organization which spearheaded the recent bombing of churches
in Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, to sow disharmony between Christians
and Hindus, still scot-free, by pretending that they believe in
secularism ? Has Tiger Memom, who planted deadly bombs in Bombay in
1992, ever been caught and brought to court ? Are not the Muslim
organizations, which organized the bomb attacks in Coimbatore a few
years back, still functioning under different names ? Isn’t it true that
in Kerala, every day a new mosque is built with money coming from the
Gulf and that from these mosques and madrasas the mullahs preach openly
violence and anti-Hinduism ? …

We have to say it again: there are two standards in India - one for the
Hindus; and one for the Muslims. Did the "fanatic" Hindus who brought
down Ayodhya (and brought shame onto secular India, according to the
Indian media) kill or even injure anyone in the process? No. But Muslims
do not have such qualms. When Gandhi said they were bullies, he was
being very nice or very polite. For forget about the millions of Hindus
killed during the ten centuries of Muslim invasions, probably the worst
Holocaust in world history; forget about the hundreds of thousands of
Hindu temples razed to the ground, whose destruction - whatever our
"secular" Hindus of today say - was carefully recorded by the Muslims
themselves, because they were proud of it (see Aurangzeb’s own
chronicles); forget about the millions of Hindus forcibly converted to
Islam, and who sadly are now rallying under a banner, a language, a
scripture which have nothing to do with their own ethos and culture
(\*). Yesterday and also today, when the Muslim world feels it has been
slighted, in even a small measure by Hindus, these Infidels, who
submitted meekly to Muslim rule for ten centuries, it retaliates a
*hundred* fold – this is the only way one intimidates cowards. After
Ayodhya, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia (at least in a passive way by giving
shelter for a while to Tiger Memon) with the help of Indian Muslims,
planted bombs in the heart of Bombay and killed a thousand innocent
human beings, most of them, once more, Hindus. Tomorrow, Pakistan might
wage, with the blessing of the Muslim word, the ultimate jihad against
India, which if necessary, will utilise the ultimate weapon, nuclear
bombs. For has not the Koran said "'Choose not thy friends among the
Infidels till they forsake their homes and the way of idolatry. If they
return to paganism then take them whenever you find them and kill them"
(Koran 98:51-9:5-4:89) ?

One would be tempted to say in conclusion : "Arise O Hindus, stop being
cowards, remember that a nation requires Kshatriyas, warriors, to defend
Knowledge, to protect one’s women and children, to guard one’s borders
from the Enemy"….

Do Indians need a Bal Thakeray to remind them of that simple truth ?

(\*) This is no to say that all Muslims are fanatics; on the contrary,
many of India’s Muslims are extremely gentle and their sense of
hospitality unsurpassed. The same thing can be said about Pakistan:
Pakistani politicians, for instance, are much more accessible than in
India and Pakistan has its own identity, which cannot be wished away.
No, the problem is not with Muslims, whether they are Indians or
Pakistanis, the problem is with *Islam*, which teaches Indian Muslims
from an early age, to look beyond their national identity to a country -
the Mecca, in Saudi Arabia - which is not their country, to read a
Scripture, the Koran, which is not written in their own language, to
espouse a way of thinking, Islam, which is inimical to their own roots
and indigenous culture. Indian Muslims, have to think of themselves
first as Indians and *secondly only* as Muslims. Muslim soldiers
fighting against Pakistan in Kargil, have shown the way.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
