+++
title = "07 5 From Monologue to Dialogue"

+++
**5**  
**From Monologue to Dialogue**

There is no known evidence of a dialogue between Hinduism and
Christianity before the end of the seventeenth century, though by that
time they had come into contact with one another on as many as four
occasions. If individual Hindus and Christians ever exchanged any notes
on the nature of God and soul and human destiny, the record was not kept
or has not survived or is yet to surface.

The history of Hindus goes to show that they were fond of discussing
spiritual and philosophical themes till very recent times. Hinduism
would have gladly entered into a dialogue with Christianity if the
latter had evinced an inclination in that direction. But for a long
time, Christianity was in no mood to hold a dialogue with any type of
Paganism. It was convinced that it held a monopoly of truth which others
had to accept from it in all humility. What it preferred was a
monologue, that is, it alone talked and the others were made to listen.
It was ensured in advance that the monologue was not disturbed by
arguments from the other side.

The Hindus in the far-off Roman Empire were too insignificant a minority
to disturb the Christian monologue. The Syrian Christians in Malabar
kept their counsels to themselves because the conditions were not
conducive to a monologue. They came out in the open only when the
Portuguese provided protection and saw to it that Hinduism kept mum.
Christian travellers came to India not to see what India had to show but
to secure concrete and visible proofs for what the Church Fathers had
deduced about Paganism from the first premises of Christianity. They
never felt the need to talk to Hindus in order to find out what Hinduism
really stood for.

The proper conditions for projecting a full and prolonged Christian
monologue at Hinduism became ripe only when the Portuguese military
machine arrived in Malabar.  The missionaries did their best, but in
spite of the fact that Hinduism had to observe silence, the monologue
misfired. Instead of inspiring respect for Christianity and winning
willing converts, it filled the Hindus with contempt for Christianity. 
The reports of Hindu reaction which reached the mission headquarters
through its intelligence network were far from encouraging.

The school of Francis Xavier was all for augmenting the degree of force
used in the advancement of the mission.  The experience in Europe had
proved that force could be Suite effective and Xavier and his Jesuits
were prisoners of that experience.  Frantic appeals were made to the
king of Portugal to see that the secular arm of the Church was used with
the utmost rigour and determination.  But the experiment failed partly
because Portugal did not have the manpower to match the situation and
partly because in AD 1580 Portugal became federated with the Spanish
crown which had other priorities elsewhere.

The school of Robert Di Nobili believed that the heart of Hinduism could
be reached by perfecting the fraud pioneered by Di Nobili.  Of course,
they did not use this word for their method.  They preferred to call it
*condescensio*, a Latin term coined by the Church Fathers and meaning
“stooping down to conquer.” They had drawn on the example set by St.
Paul.  The only problem which the missionaries faced was the colour of
their skins.  It was the colour of his skin which had betrayed Di
Nobili.  That difficulty had to be overcome by the use of a suitable
lotion.  Father Poenco of the Madura Mission made an appeal in his
Annual letter for 1651.  “Among my readers,” he wrote, “there will be
some who could procure for us some lotion of ointment which could change
the colour of our skin so that just as we have changed our dress,
language, food and customs, we may also change our complexion and become
like those around us, with whom we live... It is not necessary that the
colour should be very dark; the most suitable will be between black and
red or tawny.  It would not matter if it could not be removed when once
applied; we would willingly remain all our lives the ‘negroes’ of Jesus
Christ, for the greater glory of God.”^([1](#1)) But, unfortunately, no
such lotion could be found and *condescensio* remained a pious
aspiration until skin colour was eventually overcome with the induction
of native missionaries.  This also is an act of *condescensio* in the
eyes of the white masters.

A modification of the monologue was also attempted on one occasion.  An
odd missionary had a lurking suspicion that Hinduism was being allowed
to get away with the impression of remaining unconquered simply because
its spokesmen had not been permitted to have their say.  The fact,
however, was that they had nothing or very little to say, which could be
proved by bringing them to an open debate.  Annals of the mission do
record “one instance of a public debate in sixteenth century Goa, when
Jesuits, aided by a convert, deputed with pandits, forty of whom proving
obstinate, were banished.”^([2](#2)) The monologue was restored and
never disturbed again in Portuguese possessions.

The chances of the monologue yielding place to a dialogue would have
remained dim so long as the Catholic Church monopolised the mission and
the Portuguese retained their stranglehold over South India.  But
conditions started changing towards the second half of the seventeenth
century.  Portuguese power suffered a steep decline and Protestant
missionaries started coming to the trade settlements which the Dutch and
the Danes had set up on the eastern side of South India with the
permission of local Hindu Rajas.

Protestant missionaries were no less confident than their Catholic
counterparts that Christianity possessed a monopoly of truth. Given a
chance, they too would have thrust the “good news” down Hindu throats by
force.  But as there was no secular arm at their beck and call, they
settled down to investigating why Hindus were resisting Christianity. 
Some of them learnt Tamil and Sanskrit and studied Hindu texts and thus
had an opportunity to talk to Hindu Pandits who came to teach them. 
Some others travelled in the countryside to see first-hand how the
simple Hindus lived and worshipped in the villages.

A Dutch missionary, Abraham Rogerius, functioning from Pulicat between
AD 1630 and 1640, assembled in a book whatever he had learnt about Hindu
beliefs.  His book, *The Open Door to Secret Heathendom*, was published
posthumously in 1651.  It was full of the same old Christian prattle
about demons and devils, but it contained one ‘great discovery” which
took Christendom by surprise.  “Rogerius came to the definite
conclusion,” writes Dr. S. Arasaratnam, “that the Hindus possessed the
concept of a supreme divine being and paid homage to this being.  This
highest supreme being was worshipped in the form of one of the three
major deities of Vishnu, Siva and Brahma.  This led him to the general
conclusion that the knowledge of God has always been present among men. 
We see here the germs of the idea that Hindus had discovered some
eternal truths by means of natural light^([3](#3)) that God had shed on
all humanity.  This light, he would assert, has remained dim and the
vision blurred, and many have wandered away from this light.  Rogerius
ascribes the origin of this light among the Hindus to the revelation of
Christ which had penetrated to different nations and peoples of the
Indies.  Something has remained of this light and he adduces in evidence
the existence of Thomian Christians in Coromandel.”^([4](#4))

The German Lutheran missionary, Bartholomaeus Ziegenbalg, who reached
the Danish settlement at Tarankampadi (which name he soon corrupted to
Tranquebar) in 1796, would find out how “The original light of nature by
which Tamil Hindus had seen God in his true nature had been subsequently
dimmed by the wily brahmans who had surrounded it in a cocoon of foolish
beliefs, in a multiplicity of gods, other celestial beings and demons,
and a system of abstract philosophies concerning man and the
soul.”^([5](#5)) But before he could do that, he had to take the help of
the Brahmanas themselves.  That triggered the first recorded dialogue
between Hinduism and Christianity.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) ‘Roberto de Nobili and Adaption’ by S. Rajamanickam, S.J. in
*Indian Church History Review*, December 1967, p. 88.

[²](#2a) Richard Fox Young, *Resistant Hinduism*, Vienna, 1981, pp.
20-21. This scholarly Christian publication concludes that simply
because Hinduism resisted Christianity instead of accommodating it,
Hindu tolerance towards other religions is a myth.  The author sees
nothing wrong with the wanton Christian onslaught of which he himself
provides prolific proof. On the contrary, the onslaught is eulogised as
“evangelism” and treated as a duty as well as a birthright of every
Christian.

[³](#3a) Recently, Christian theologians have rephrased “natural light”
to read “Cosmic Revelation” which they gallantly concede to the Hindus. 
Consistent with the logic of this changing language, Hindus have
progressed from pagans to “natural men” to “cosmic men.” There is reason
for them to feel flattered by this continuous promotion.  Father Bede
Griffiths has written a whole book, *Cosmic Revelation*, in which he
presents this thesis.

[⁴](#4a) S. Arasaratnam, ‘Protestant Christianity and South Indian
Hinduism 1630-1730: Some Confrontations in Society and Beliefs’, *Indian
Church History Review*, June 1981, pp. 17-18.

[⁵](#5a) *Ibid.,* p. 22.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
