+++
title = "21 19 Sannyasins or Swindlers?"

+++
**19**  
**Sannyasins or Swindlers?**

*Hinduism Today*, a bimonthly^([1](#1)) published by the Saiva Siddhanta
Church with headquarters in Hawaii, U.S.A., carried an article,
‘Catholic Ashrams: Adopting and Adapting Hindu Dharma’, in its issue of
November-December, 1986. It noticed particularly the Saccidananda Ashram
at Shantivanam in the Tiruchirapally District of Tamil Nadu. “The
Shantivanam Ashram,” it said, “looks like a rishi’s home transported
from Vedic times to the bank of sacred Cauvery River… A pilgrim’s first
impressions are strong, and very Hindu; the elaborately colorful Hindu
shrine; the bearded, saffron-robed ‘swami’ seated cross-legged on a
straw mat; devotees practising yogic meditation, even chanting Hindu
scriptures. But these impressions gradually prove false. First, the eye
detects that the courtyard shrine is for Saint Paul and that ‘puja’ is
actually a daily mass, complete with incense, arati, lamps, flower
offerings and prasadam. Finally, one meets the ‘swami’, learning he is
Father Bede ‘Dayananda’ Griffiths, a Christian ‘sannyasin’ of impeccable
British background.”

The article raised an important question. “Are these places to be
endorsed by Hindus as worthy attempts to share each other’s spirituality
Or are they a spiritual oxymoron, a contradiction of terms, because
Christians are interested in sharing - dialogue is the term they use -
only as a means to conversions?” It also provided the answer by drawing
a parallel. “A comparison,” a observed, “might best illustrate Hindu
concerns. Let us imagine that one day a Muslim missionary arrives in a
poor section of America such as a part of the Catholic Hispanic (Mexican
origin) section of San Francisco. Well supplied with zeal and
petrodollars from his own country, he learns Spanish, builds a Muslim
cathedral along the lines of a Catholic building, outfitting it with
pews, organs, choirs and so forth. Preaching from a Christian Bible
appropriately edited according to the Koran, he puts on the clerical
collar and black robes of a Catholic priest and holds Sunday services
which look just like Mass, except that prayers are to Allah and Mohammed
instead of Jesus. In ministering to the local people, he tells them that
his Islamic faith is just a slight variation of Christianity, one which
puts the crowning touches on it. Their fathers’ religion, Catholicism
was, he says, flawed but it is a good preparation for Islam. He gives
loans to those in need, which need not be repaid if one joins his
Church. He opens an orphanage and raises the children as Muslims though
their parents are Christians. When accused of deceiving the people, he
says he is only adapting his religion to the local context and
expressing his Muslim charity and divine call to evangelize.”

Soon after this article appeared, an interesting dialogue developed,
independently, on the character and role of these “experiments in
cross-cultural communication” or “contemplative hermitages that revolve
round both Christian and Hindu ideals.” The Hindu point of view was
presented by Swami Devananda Saraswati of Madras. Fr. Bede Griffiths
himself came forward to present the Christian point of view.

The dialogue started when the *Indian Express* of Madras published on
March 18, 1987, the summary of a talk which a Christian theologian, Dr.
Robert Wayne Teasdale, had delivered on March 12. Describing Fr. Bede
Griffiths as “Britain’s appropriate gift to India”, Dr. Teasdale had
applauded the Saccidananda Ashram as ‘a place of dialogue reconciliation
and experience in depth’ between Christianity and Hinduism. Shantivanam,
he had said, was “the peace capital of the world.” Between March 25 and
April 30, the newspaper published five letters from its Christian
readers. Three of them supported Fr. Bede Griffiths’ experiment with
Hindu symbols and sacred texts; the other two opposed it as a pollution
and a move unauthorised by the Vatican. Finally, Dr. Teasdale came out
with a rejoinder which was published in the *Indian Express* of June 1,
1987. He praised Fr. Bede Griffiths for the latter’s study of “the
Vedas, the Upanishads, and the Gita as well as other texts sacred to the
Hindu tradition”, and explained that he (Fr. Bede) had adopted “elements
of Hindu ritual and prayer not to ‘produce his own mix’ but rather to
express the Christian faith in terms intelligible to Indians.”

It was at this point that Swami Devananda wrote a letter to the *Indian
Express*. “Ten years ago,” he said, “I suggested to a papal nuncio that
I might don a friar’s habit and preach Hinduism in the Italian
countryside. I was promptly warned that I would be charged with
impersonating a cleric and public mischief, as Roman Catholicism was the
protected state religion and in full control of Italian education.
Hinduism is neither protected nor India’s state religion and we find
priests like Bede Griffiths in the garb of Hindu sannyasis preaching
Christianity in the Tamil countryside… Bede Griffiths has no grasp at
all of the Indian psyche. It must be brought to his attention that he is
meddling with the soul of a very old and sophisticated people by
continuing his experiments at Shantivanam.”

The *Indian Express* did not publish this letter. But its copy which had
been endorsed to Fr. Bede Griffiths, elicited from him a reply on June
17. “The ochre robe,” he said, “is the sign of sannyasa and sannyasa
according to ancient Hindu tradition signifies renunciation of all
worldly ties, the transcendence of all ‘dharmas’, that is, all social
bonds, whether social or religious… Today we feel more than ever the
need to go beyond the limitations of the different religions and seek
for the source of unity which can unite them in the service of humanity.
This is how we understand sannyasa in our ashram and why we feel
justified in wearing the ochre robe. I may say that in all my more than
thirty years in India I have never before known a Hindu sannyasi object
to this… We see in this one way of bridging the gulf between Hindus and
Christians and working towards that unity among religions for which the
world is looking today.”

Swami Devananda replied on July 21. After explaining how “the sannyasin
is the very embodiment of *Sanatana Dharma*, “ he said, “The Church does
not recognise a priest outside of the apostolic succession of Peter, and
we do not recognise a priest outside the Hindu *parampara*. In that you
are a Roman priest and a Benedictine monk, you cannot possibly be a
sannyasin; it is verily a contradiction in terms... Christianity, from
its very inception to today, has subsumed and subverted the deities,
symbols, rituals and philosophies of the peoples it wishes to conquer.
This activity which is imperial and not spiritual, must cease before
hostilities and mistrust will die; hostilities, by the way, that we
never invited in the first place. By trying to justify your position as
it is now, you impugn Hinduism, slur sannyasa, rout reason, ruin
meaning, mutilate categories, transpose symbols, deny sacred convention
and usage, profane principles, philosophise, and generally present an
argument that is oxymoronic.”

Fr. Bede Griffiths wrote back on July 23: “You are anxious to establish
Hinduism as a separate religion with its own unique doctrine and symbols
which differentiate it from other religions. But most Hindus hold the
opposite view and maintain with Ramakrishna and Vivekananda that all
religions are essentially the same and differ only in accidental
characteristics which can be ignored. I have myself difficulties in
accepting this position but I would have said that it is the prevailing
view among educated Hindus to-day…^([2](#2)) Perhaps my chief quarrel
with you is that you are trying to institutionalise Hinduism, to turn it
into a sectarian religion, which seems to me to be the opposite of its
true character. I feel that you do the same to Catholicism. That
Catholicism has a strong institutional character I do not deny, but I
would say that there is something in Catholicism which transcends its
institutionalised character as there is in Hinduism and that is what
matters… Our search today is to go beyond the institutional structure of
religion and discover the hidden mystery which is at the heart of all
religion. It is this that sannyasa means to me.” He quoted in his
support what Swami Abhishiktananda (Fr. Henri la Saux), another
‘Christian sannyasin’ and his predecessor in the Saccidananda Ashram,
had written about sannyasa.

Swami Devananda replied on July 30: “I would like to give you the
benefit of the doubt (as do many of my brothers). I am not able to do so
because the inherent tolerance and secularism of Hinduism has been
abused by your kind too long. I appreciate that you do not want a
sectarian Hinduism, for that would directly threaten your own vested
interests… Church motives are always suspect when they are not openly
vicious, and the means she employs to further her own wicked ends has
never had any relationship to the ideals she preaches at others. You
have been in India long enough to know that we idolaters are more
interested in what we see than what we hear. We want action, right
action, not words... You preach the transcendence of religion but remain
yourself an official of a sectarian religion... And not only are you a
Roman priest, but the moment you get into trouble you run to mummy
Church for financial, emotional, moral, psychological, and doctrinal
aid. How is this foreign and first allegiance going to bring about the
Indianisation of Christianity, much less the transcendence of religion?
Yet you have the insolence to suggest that Hinduism not organise herself
in her hour of need. You will teach us religious transcendence from the
very pit of religious institutionalism, a pit we have not fallen into in
10,000 years. I think your motives are clear; indeed, the idea is worthy
of a Jesuit! We will transcend our dharma and the Roman Church will
happily reap the benefits of our foolishness, being already on the scene
to fill in the void we leave behind us. If you were remotely serious
about the spiritual ideals expressed in your letter, you would renounce
the Church forthwith and humbly place yourself in the hands of God.
Hinduism has always been a commonwealth of religious and spiritual
institutions, some highly sectarian, though we have avoided the curse of
centralisation. There are times when centralisation is justified, when
the Hindus of conviction must work together for a common goal. This is
not sectarianism; it is common sense. I do think Dayananda and
Vivekananda would agree with me here. Shankara himself institutionalised
sannyas for the same reason that the institution must be revitalised
today: to protect dharma. We have always maintained and practised the
spiritual ideal of transcending institutional limitations, and have
succeeded where others have failed because our spiritual disciplines
demand that the correct means be employed. The first injunction observed
by all seekers is that they do not interfere with, bastardise, or
destroy the culture, traditions, symbols, and religion that support them
on their journey, even when they have passed beyond these institutions.
And passing beyond these institutions does not mean meddling with them
on the way. God has always given us reformers when we need them. Do you
qualify, Bede Griffiths?”

Fr. Bede Griffiths wrote back on July 31: “It is clear from all you say
that you are a fundamentalists.^(3 [\#3](#3) ) Whether Hindu or
Christian or Buddhist or Muslim, a fundamentalist is one who clings to
the outward forms of religion and loses sight of the inner
spirit... Nothing could be further from the spirit of the great Hindus
of the past, Ramakrishna, Vivekananda, Mahatma Gandhi, Sri Aurobindo,
Ramana Maharshi or Ramalinga Swamigal. They remained firmly Hindu in
their religion but were open to the spirit of truth in Christianity and
in all other religions. I consider myself a Christian in religion but
Hindu in spirit, just as they were Hindus in religion while being
Christian in Spirit…^([4](#4)) It is obvious that we differ
fundamentally in our understanding both of Hinduism and of Christianity
and indeed of religion in general, so I will not continue this
correspondence.”^([5](#5))

But Swami Devananda did not give up. He wrote on August 7: “I had hoped
that when you took refuge in humbug jargon, I would at least rate above
a superstitious fundamentalist. Chinmayananda is often dubbed a
communalist, and I was looking forward to some dramatic monotheistic
curse like Great Satan or Antichrist… it remains that you have avoided
every specific issue, with generalisations and specious philosophising;
it remains that you exploit our tolerance, secularism, and hospitality;
it remains that you abuse and pervert our symbols and traditions to your
own motivated missionary ends… You have not transcended religion and you
have no intention of doing so, whatever your pious declarations. You
have an overriding ambition to subvert and subsume us with our own
spiritual concepts, just as Paul subverted and subsumed the Greeks with
their’s. As you see parallels in history, so do we, and we are thus
forearmed. We will not be meekly sold down the river like Constantine !…
I am not the protector of Sanatana Dharma; Narayana is the only
protector of Dharma. This is an awful truth for you to admit, Bede
Griffiths, and one that neither you nor I will escape.”

The dialogue remained at a standstill for some days. It was resumed
after Swami Devananda had studied the writings of Fr. J. Monchanin, the
founder of the Saccidananda Ashram, who also had taken to the ochre robe
and named himself Swami Param Arubi Anandam. He had written frankly and
in a straightforward manner that Christianity should use Hindu
philosophy and cultural forms in order to subvert Hinduism. Swami
Devananda brought these writings to the notice of Fr. Bede Griffiths. “I
discover,” he wrote on August 27, “that his writings directly confirm my
suspicions about your motives and activities in India... This being the
case, you have no moral authority to address or advise seekers of
Truth.”

Fr. Bede Griffiths replied on August 31: “Of course, if I held the same
view as Father Monchanin, you would be justified in suspecting me of
deception. But you must remember that Father Monchanin was writing forty
years ago and immense changes have taken place in the Church since
then. The Vatican Council introduced a new understanding of the relation
of the Church to other religions and all of us have been affected by
this. Swami Abhishiktananda (Fr. le Saux) in particular early separated
himself from Fr. Monchanin, especially after his profound experience
with Raman Maharshi at Tiruvanamalai...^([6](#6)) you must realise also
that the view which I hold is not peculiar to me. It is approved by the
authorities of the Church both in India and in Rome. Many Catholics, of
course, will not agree with it, but the understanding of the relation of
the Church to other religions is only slowly growing and there are many
different views in the Church today.”

Swami Devananda’s reply which he wrote on September 7, deserves to be
quoted at some length. He said:

There is no evidence that the Church has changed her wicked ways in the
last forty years. On the contrary, since the checks placed on the Church
by the British were removed, she has been busy making hay in our
tolerant secular sunshine. The methods of conversion have changed, but
the Church’s ancient ambition for world dominion has not changed. The
Pope himself contributes over fifty million dollars a year towards
missionary work worldwide, and this does not include the vaster sums of
money available to Christian evangelists of all persuasions for their
so-called charities. What has happened in the Church is that the term
‘heathen’ has been changed to ‘non-Christian’ (with the prayer that the
‘non’ will soon disappear). There have also been some unctuous
platitudes uttered about our spiritual heritage at official functions.
Rome, in her eternal conceit, thinks we will accept the facelift at face
value and not probe into the heart of the person who wears the mask.
This presumption itself is an example of patronising Christian
arrogance. If the Church had in fact changed her ways then the dirty
work of converting our poor and humble masses to Christianity would have
long ago ceased!…

You do not need Church sanction to experiment with Hindu traditions and
symbols or call yourself a sannyasin. You do need - and refuse to seek -
the sanction of traditional Hindu authorities. Hindus do not recognise
Church decrees vis-a-vis acts that affect them and their religious
culture. Your declarations of Church approval is part bluff, part
appeal. As we do not permit you to stand on our head, you seem to think
we will permit the Church to stand there instead. This is exactly the
message your bastard symbol of Omkara and cross conveys to us. We
utterly reject both the symbol and the message…

Except as a psychological curiosity, I am no more interested in your
personal beliefs than I am in those held by the political commissar at
the local Russian consulate. Like him, you will argue that my beliefs
compel me to respect your beliefs and thus accept your actions, even if
they are detrimental to my traditions. I am very interested in your
actions and how they affect Hinduism, and I do not accept them. I have
said this before and it is what lies at the heart of my letters. In
reply, you manifest that syndrome the Germans call vorbeireden,
translated as ‘talking-past-the-point’. This is a tactic to avoid
contact with relevant issues. It often involves deceit and/ or
self-deceit; but it does not mean that you misunderstand the situation.
It is a verbose device to circumvent truth; and this, I concede sadly,
is exactly what you have done. I really think it is time for some
serious introspection.

I have read *Christ in India*: your expressed attitudes and ambitions
for us are little different from Monchanin’s.”

In his book, *Christ in India*, written in 1966 and reprinted in 1986,
only an year before this dialogue took place, Fr. Bede Griffiths had
left no one in doubt that Hindu philosophies and cultural forms were to
be used for conveying Christianity. Only his language was less
straightforward than that of Fr. Monchanin. So was the language of Fr.
Henry le Saux who was the successor of Fr. Monchanin at Saccidanand
Ashram and who went about as Swami Abhishiktananda, proclaiming that he
had reconciled Hinduism and Christianity in his experience of the
Advaita!

A few more letters were exchanged. Finally, Fr. Bede Griffiths insisted
on his right to use the Hindu symbol, OM, in his letter dated October
16. He said, “Of course, Om is by no means confined to Hinduism. It is
found in Buddhism as well. Would you like to write to the Dalai Lama and
tell him to stop the Tibetan people from using their most sacred mantra;
Om mani padma hum?”^([7](#7))

Swami Devananda replied on October 21: “Apparently you know as little
about Buddhism as you do about Hinduism, both of which are Sanatana
Dharma. They have the same roots and traditions and usages and a mutual
spiritual ideal that goes far beyond their differences. This is not true
of the Semitic ideologies, which by their own definition, claim to be
superior, unique and exclusive. Voitaire warned of these closed creeds
when he wrote: ‘The man who says to me, Believe as I do or God will damn
you, will presently say to me, Believe as I do or I will kill you.’
Think about this carefully, Father Bede, for you are the ordained
representative of one of these creeds. And you seem to know even less
about *mantra* than you do about Sanatana Dharma.” 

This dialogue about Christian missionaries masquerading as Hindu
sannyasins continued, off and on, in the columns of the *Indian Express*
of Madras. Some Hindus showed awareness of the true character of
Christianity and its missionary methods. Others saw no harm in Christian
missionaries taking to the ochre robe and using Hindu symbols in their
worship; they felt that this was the way for the two religions to come
together and work for common good. Goodwill, however, is no substitute
for knowledge. And that is what most of our men of goodwill seem to
lack. They will do well by reading some of the books in which Christian
missionaries have expounded their strategies.

The article in *Hinduism Today* and the dialogue between Swami Devananda
and Fr. Bede Griffiths alerted me, and made me look up the literature on
Indigenisation (Acculturation) and the Christian Ashram Movement. Here I
hit pay-dirt as they say in detective stories. The literature was quite
frank about missionary intentions. I was, now equipped to quote chapter
and verse in proof of the stark truth that Indigenisation was no more
than a mission strategy calculated to rope in Hindu philosophies, Hindu
schools of Bhakti, and Hindu cultural forms in the service of
Christianity. The Christian Ashram Movement, I discovered, was a
predatory enterprise inaugurated in the early years of the seventeenth
century by an abominable scoundrel, Robert Di Nobili of the Society of
Jesus, who had masqueraded as a Brahmana from Rome, who had claimed to
be in possession of the lost Yajurveda, and who had succeeded in
baptising some Hindus before he was found out. The very fact that this
scoundrel became and had remained the patron saint of Indigenisation was
speaking volumes about its true character. Starting with Fr. Monchanin
of the Saccidananda Ashram at Shantivanam, Fr. Henri le Saux and Fr.
Bede Griffiths were in the same game. The book, Christ in India, by Bede
Griffiths was giving a call which was loud and clear, namely, that Hindu
civilization was to be taken over by ‘Hindu Christians’ as the ‘Greek
Fathers’ of the Church had taken over the Greek civilization.

The outcome of this research on my part was a book, *Catholic Ashrams:
Adopting and Adapting Hindu Dharma*, published by VOICE OF INDIA in
1988. It included four articles from *Hinduism Today* and the dialogue
between Swami Devananda Saraswati and Fr. Bede Griffiths. A Preface was
provided by me, documenting the Indigenisation strategy in some detail
from impeccable Christian sources. Hindu readers found the book
revealing. Christian missionary circles, on the other hand, felt upset.
Christian Ashrams had been functioning so far without any fear of Hindus
knowing their true character. Now on, they had the feeling that they
were being watched by a vigilant Hindu society. Fr. Griffiths’ stock
fell even in Christian circles. The number of visitors to his ‘Ashram’
declined. He had been found out.

I happened to be the Treasurer of the Abhishiktananda Society in Delhi
for a number of years. I had joined the Society at a time when I
believed that the talk about Hindu Christian dialogue was sincere. Now
that I had exposed it as a strategy, my Christian friends in the Society
felt pained, particularly at what I had written about Abhishiktananda
after whom the Society was named. They tried to convince me that
although Abhishiktananda had started as a missionary, he had changed in
later years. One of them, Vandana Mataji who runs a Christian Ashram at
Rishikesh and has written a book on the subject, protested, politely in
my presence but vehemently elsewhere. It became her wont to describe me
as a ‘Hindu fundamentalist’ in Christian publications in this country
and abroad. I was also attacked as a ‘Hindu fundamentalist’ by a
Catholic lady writer in a book published in Belgium in 1990. Some other
notices of the same kind were reported by friends in a few other
countries.

There was another sequel to the Devananda-Griffiths dialogue in early
1990. Shri Ram Swarup has the laudable habit of erring on the side of
generosity. He had a distinct feeling that Swami Devananda and I had
been unnecessarily hard on Fr. Bede Griffiths - Swami Devananda- in his
letters and I in my Preface to the book -, and that the man was after
all not that bad. So he decided to try out Fr. Bede on his own. He sent
to Fr. Bede a copy of his review of *The Myth of Christian Uniqueness:
Towards a Pluralistic Theology of Religion* edited by John Hick and Paul
F. Knitter and published in the USA in 1988. The review had appeared in
*The Statesman* on 14 January 1990.

Fr. Bede thanked Ram Swarup in a letter dated 17 February 1990 and
offered a few comments. “This openess to other religions,” he said, “has
always been present in Christianity from the beginning, though the
opposite attitude of rejection has generally prevailed. The Bible
itself, though it became more and more exclusive, always had an opening
for the ‘Gentiles’… The God of Izrael was always conceived as the God of
all humanity, although interest centres more and more exclusively on
Izrael. In the same way Jesus in the New Testament goes out of his way
to proclaim the presence of God among other nations…” He also struck a
personal note as he wrote, “When I was received into the Catholic Church
in 1930 it was this belief in the presence of God among all nations that
I accepted. Still I admit that it was rare and it was only at the
Vatican Council in 1960 that it was officially acknowledged by the
Church. For me this was only the formal acceptance of what I have always
believed and practised.” He concluded by saying that “we all have to
learn how to be true to our own religion while we are critical of its
limitations and to be equally true to the values of other religions
while we recognize their limitations.”

Ram Swarup replied on 31 March 1990 and commented that Fr. Bede’s
“personal history is not merely interesting but it encourages me to make
a personal confession.” He went on to relate how he, like “all or most
Hindus”, had started by believing that “all religions say the same
things”, but had to “reflect deeply on the subject” after going through
the following, among other books:

> 1\. *The Encyclopaedia of Religions and Ethics* in 12 volumes.
>
> 2\. Proceedings of a Seminar “held at Almora by Christians’ most of
> whom were “connected with ‘Ashrams’ and ‘Niketans’.”
>
> 3\. A book by Fr. Monchanin, the founder of Saccidananda Ashram,
> Shantivanam.

“It was my first contact with ‘liberal’ Christianity,” proceeded Ram
Swarup, “and I thought it was the old missionary ‘war with other means’.
After twelve years or so I wrote an article on ‘liberal’ Christianity. I
am sending a copy of this article… I find that it also mentions you
briefly.” At the same time, Ram Swarup drew Fr. Bede’s attention to how
mainstream Christianity was continuing to wage a relentless war against
other religions while maintaining the pretence of studying those
religions and holding a dialogue with them. “They talk of ‘dialogues’
but they are determined that their victims should reach the same
conclusions as they do. Their means are flexible, but their aims are
fixed. The situation and the truth of the matter demands that we look,
not on their arguments but on their mind.” He enclosed another article
with his letter. It was his review of *Seven Hundred Plans to Evangelize
the World. The Rise of Global Evangelization Movement* by David B.
Barrett and James W. Reapsome published in 1989 by the AD- 2000 Series.
The review had appeared in *The Statesman* dated 25 March 1990.

Fr. Bede was quick to come out in his true colours. “I am not quite
sure,” he barked in his letter of 6 April 1990, “what your purpose is in
your attack on Christianity and Christian Missions. Is it simply to
foment communal strife in India between Christians and Hindus, or have
you some deeper purpose? If you want to attack Christianity itself, you
will have to make a far deeper study of it than you have yet done. Above
all you have to recognise the profound wisdom and goodness to be found
in it, as all unbiased Hindus have done…”

I too had had some correspondence with Fr. Bede in 1988 before the first
edition of *Catholic Ashrams* was- published. I had found that the
Father did not want Hindus to look into missionary methods but
concentrate on the “evils in Hindu society” instead. In his reply of 6
April 1990 to Ram Swarup, Fr. Bede referred to this correspondence and
said, “I suggested to Mr. Sita Ram Goel that you should both make a
study of the shady side of Hinduism if you want to be honest… How do you
account for the fact that with all its long tradition of wisdom and
spirituality, India today is generally considered one of the most
corrupt and immoral countries in the world?… I suggested to Mr. Goel
that the Voice of India might well make a special study of various
aspects of Hinduism. I suggested as a beginning the history of human
sacrifice and temple prostitution from the earliest times to the present
day… Another institution is the practice of sorcery and magic… Above
all, of course, there is the problem of untouchability. Surely one of
the greatest crimes in the history of religion. These things should be
known and faced by those who defend Hinduism…”

It was the old story once again. - The Christian missionary was telling
the Hindus, “Please keep on with self-flagellation and breast-beating
about the wicked society in which you live. We will take care of your
salvation.” In other words, the bandit wanted his victim to look the
other way so that he could occupy the latter’s house. The ruse had
succeeded eminently. A whole battery of Hindu-baiters had come forward
to play the Christian missionary’s game. Some of them were employed by
the missionary apparatus, while most of them were doing voluntary
service to the same racket. It had become their whole time occupation to
keep Hindus on the defensive, while the Christian missionary reaped his
harvest of converts. It never occurred to these knaves and fools that
the Christian missionary whom they were aping and helping was viewed in
the modern West as a maniac whom it was better to dump abroad with a bag
of money.

Fr. Bede had sent to Ram Swarup with his first letter of 17 February
1991 a copy of his Hibbert Lecture delivered in 1989. Ram Swarup had
been impressed by it. But now he was face to face with a different Fr.
Bede. He acknowledged Fr. Bede’s letter of April 6 in his own letter of
April 24, and wrote. ‘It is so different from your Hibbert Lecture which
probably presented a more formal and public face, while the letter
revealed a more conventional traditional-Christian or missionary visage.
It was surprising that it took so little to surface so readily.’ Fr.
Bede’s accusation that Ram Swarup’s articles were aimed at creating
“communal strife between Christians and Hindus” was pinned down by him
as “the language of blackmail and even threat to which Hindus are often
subjected when they show any sign of stir.”

He proceeded to point out that Fr. Bede had said “not a word” about
“missionary Christianity, its theology, its apparatus and plans” with
which the articles sent to him had dealt. ‘As a missionary,’ conceded
Ram Swarup, “probably you think that the missionary apparatus is
innocent and indeed we should be thankful to it for the spiritual aid it
offers.” At the same time he asked, “Why do you put on hurt looks if
they \[Hindus\] do not take this apparatus at its Christian face value
and look at it in the light of historical evidence and their own
experience?”

Coming to Fr. Bede’s advice that Ram Swarup had to “make a far deeper
study” of Christianity in order to discover ‘the profound wisdom and
goodness in it’, Ram Swarup observed that he had studied Christianity
for quite some time and from its most orthodox sources. “I must admit
that to a scholar like you, my studies of Christianity must appear to be
inadequate particularly when they have not led me to your conclusions.
But I must beg you to take into consideration scores of others of
impeccable Christian scholarship, whose scholarship is at least as good
as your own, who have failed to find that ‘profound wisdom and goodness’
claimed by you in Christianity. On the contrary, they found in it
arrogance, exclusive claims, contentious spirit, superstitions, lack of
charity. Other scholars found that whatever was good and true in
Christianity was found in other cultures and traditions as well but
whatever was claimed to be special and unique to it - like virgin birth,
resurrection, sole Sonship - was just make-believe and not of much
worth…”

There was nothing new in Fr. Bede’s charge that India today is generally
considered one of the most corrupt and immoral countries in the world.
“I have no means,” commented Ram Swarup, “of ranking India in the moral
scale, but I can readily believe that its place in the missionary world
you inhabit must be very low, and it must also be low wherever the
missionary influence reaches.” Missionaries had been painting India
black for several centuries. “Vivekananda had spoken of the mud which
missionaries have thrown on India, an amount which not all the mud in
the ocean-bed will equal.” Many Christian networks in the USA at present
were singing the same tune. Pat Robertson, a presidential candidate in
the USA in 1989, had said, “Satan, beasts, demons. Destruction of soul
in hell. That is what Hinduism is all about.” Dayspring International
had described India as “without spiritual hope” and quoted Mother Teresa
as saying that Hindus were hungering for Jesus Christ.

Regarding Fr. Bede’s advice about studies to be undertaken by VOICE OF
INDIA, Ram Swarup wondered as to what was to be their scope. “Would the
proposed study of human sacrifice, for example, include religions in
which human sacrifice and even cannibalism form the central part of
their theology and where they celebrate them daily in their most sacred
rites?… Will it cover temple prostitutes, male and female, at Jerusalem
often mentioned in the Bible? Will it include nunneries and monasteries,
and the whole system of ‘consecration of virgins’ where the morals are
often described, not always without documentation, in the language you
use for the Devadasi system?… You want a study of ‘sorcery and magic’…
You must be knowing that the first Christians pastors were known to be
magicians and exorcists and that every church had its exorcists. Even
now exorcism is central to baptism... John Wesley, the founder of
Methodists, said that ‘giving up witchcraft is in effect giving up the
Bible’.”

Finally, Ram Swarup informed Fr. Bede that VOICE OF INDIA “cannot
undertake studies, you have proposed” and that Christian missionaries
should stop dictating how Hindus should look at themselves. “Too often
the missionaries have set our agenda for us. They taught us how to look
at ourselves through their eyes. What they found wrong with us, we found
wrong with ourselves. Voice of India wants that Hindus use their own
eyes in looking at themselves and - also in looking at others.”

Fr. Bede chose not to reply to Ram Swarup’s letter and carry the
dialogue further. He was not the first Christian missionary nor likely
to be the last to run away when faced with stark facts and straight
logic. But one thing must have become clear to him, namely, that Hindus
were no more in a mood to take it lying down, and that Hindus had
started seeing through the patent game of a predatory ideologies
masquerading as religion.

Christian missionaries like Fr. Bede Griffiths have been trained in and
practised double-think and double-speak for so long that they seem to
know no more the difference between honesty and deceit. Their writings
on mission strategy leave no doubt that they are out to undo Hinduism.
But in their tactical writings, particularly in Hindu journals, they
pretend to be better Hindus than the Hindus themselves. They themselves
remain tied, hand and foot, to closed dogmas and authoritarian
institutions. Yet they call upon Hindus to transcend everything and
ascend into a startosphere where anything can mean anything. They
themselves do not believe that all religions say the same things. Yet
they try to silence Hindus by presenting this proposition. Readers of
the earlier dialogues in this book know what Sri Ramakrishna, Swami
Vivekananda and Mahatma Gandhi stood for. Yet our Bede Griffiths will
have us believe that these great Hindus endorsed Christianity in the
same way as they did Hinduism. A creed which breeds such dubious and
double-faced characters raises many questions for which Hindus will have
to find adequate answers.

The exchange between Ram Swarup and Fr. Bede Griffiths was included in
the second and enlarged editions of *Catholic Ashrams* published in
1994. Meanwhile, more letters to the editor on the subject of *Christian
Ashrams* and the mission strategy of Indigenisation had come to our
notice. They were also included in the new compilation. The subtitle of
the publication was changed from *Adopting and Adapting Hindus Dharma to
Sannyasins or swindlers?* to make it more appropriate.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) It became a monthly from July 1987 onwards,

[²](#2a) This shows the mischief created by Mahatma Gandhi’s and
Ramakrishna Mission’s slogan of *sarva-dharma-samabhAva*. It also shows
the depravity of the missionary mind. Fr. Bede is not at all ashamed of
using a doctrine to which he does not subscribe.

[³](#3a) The word ‘fundamentalist’ was in the air as a pejorative term
at that time. All sorts of secularists were bandying it around without
ever explaining as to what it meant. An official of the Catholic Church
calling a Hindu sannyasin fundamentalist sounds like a Stalinist naming
Mahatma Gandhi as ‘fascist’.

[⁴](#4a) In this instance, Fr. Bede illustrates the Christian maxim of
the Devil quoting the scriptures

[⁵](#5a) The Christian missionary is always quick to run away from a
dialogue if it does not develop as per rules laid down by him.

[⁶](#6a) Here Fr. Bede was lying with a straight face. His writings as
well as those of Fr. le Saux, penned years after the Vatican II, leave
no doubt that they shared the strategy of Fr. Monchanin. The cat has now
been brought out of the bag by no less a person than Raimundo Panikkar,
the guru of the current mission strategy in India. Speaking at a seminar
in Lyons, France, held on April 5-7, 1995, he said, “Monchanin is, with
Le Saux, the founder of Shantivanam. Shantivanam lives on today in the
tradition of the Trinity transmitted by its two founders and the last
guru of the ashram, Father Bede Griffiths’ (*Bulletin of the
Abhishiktananda Society*, No. 17, January 1996, p. 115).

[⁷](#7a) Strictly speaking, ‘Om’ is not a symbol but a *mantra*. It has,
however, become one in usage over the last 20-30 years to identify
Hinduism.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
