+++
title = "Komti"

+++



**Komti**, **Komati**.—The Madras caste of traders corresponding to Banias. In 1911 they numbered 11,000 persons in the Central Provinces, principally in the Chānda and Yeotmāl Districts. The Komtis claim to be of the same status as Banias and to belong to the Vaishya division of the Aryans, but this is a very doubtful pretension. Mr. Francis remarks of them:1 “Three points which show them to be of Dravidian origin are their adherence to the custom of obliging a boy to marry his paternal uncle’s daughter, however unattractive she may be, a practice which is condemned by Manu; their use of the Purānic or lower ritual instead of the Vedic rites in their ceremonies; and the fact that none of the 102 *gotras* into which the caste is divided are those of the twice-born, while some at any rate seem to be totemistic as they are the names of trees and plants, and the members of each *gotra* abstain from touching or using the plant or tree after which their *gotra* is called.” They are also of noticeably dark complexion. Komati is said to be a corruption of Gomati, a tender of cows.2 The caste have, however, a great reputation for cunning and astuteness, and hence have arisen the popular derivations of *ko-mati*, fox-minded, and *go-mati*, cow-minded. The real meaning of the word is obscure. In Mysore the caste have the title of Setti or Chetty, which is a corruption of the Sanskrit Sreshtha, good, and in the Central Provinces their names often terminate with Appa.

The Komtis have the following story about themselves: Long ago, in the Kaliyuga era, there lived a Rājpūt king of Rājahmundry, who on his travels saw a beautiful Vaishya girl and fell in love with her. Her father refused him, saying that they were of different castes. But the king persisted and would not be denied. On which the maiden determined to sacrifice herself to save her honour, and her clansmen resolved to die with her. So she told the king that she would marry him if he would agree to the *hom* sacrifice being performed at the ceremony. When the fire was kindled the girl threw herself on it and perished, followed by a hundred and two of her kinsmen. But the others were cowardly and fled from the fire. Before she died the girl cursed the king and her caste-fellows who had fled, and they and their families were cut off from the earth. But from those who died the hundred and two clans of the Komtis are descended, and they worship the maiden as Kanika Devī. She is considered to have been an incarnation of Pārvati and is the heroine of the Kānikya Purān. It is also said that she ordained that henceforth all Komtis should be black, so that none of their women might come to harm by being desired for their beauty as she had been. It is said that the caste look out for a specially dark girl as a bride, and think that she will bring luck to her husband and cause him to make money. Another explanation of their dark colour is that they originally lived in Ceylon, and when the island was set on fire by Rāma their faces were blackened in the smoke. The hundred and two clans have each a particular kind of flower or tree which they do not grow, eat, touch or burn, and the explanation they give of this custom is that their ancestors who went into the fire were transformed into these trees and plants. The names of the plants revered by each clan in the Central Provinces appear to be the same as in Mysore. They include the brinjal, the mango, the cotton-plant, wheat, linseed and others.

The caste have several subcastes, among which are the Yajna, or those whose ancestors went into the fire; the Patti, who are apparently thread-sellers; the Jaina, or those who follow the Jain faith; and the Vidūrs, a half-caste section, who are the offspring of a Yajna father and a mother of some low caste. There is a scarcity of girls, and a bride-price of Rs. 200 to Rs. 500 is often paid. Perhaps for the same reason the obligation to give a daughter to a sister’s son is strictly enforced, and a man who refuses to do this is temporarily put out of caste. The *gotras* of the mothers of the bride and bridegroom should not be the same, and there should be no ‘Turning back of the creeper,’ as they say, that is, when a girl has married into a family, the latter cannot give a girl in marriage to that girl’s family ever afterwards. Before the regular betrothal when a girl has been selected, they appoint a day and the bridegroom’s party proceed outside the village to take the omens. If a bad omen occurs, they give up the idea of the match and choose another girl. When the bridegroom has arrived at the bride’s village, before the marriage takes place, he performs the Kāshi-Yātra or Going to Benāres. He is dressed as for a journey and carries a small handful of rice and other provisions tied up in packages in his upper garment. Thus accoutred, he sets out with a stick and umbrella on a pretended visit to Benāres, for the purpose of devoting his life to study. The parents of the bride meet him and beg him to give up the journey, promising him their daughter in marriage.3 The binding function of the marriage is the tying of the *mangal-sūtram* or piece of gold strung on a thread round the bride’s neck by the bridegroom. This gold piece is called *pushti* and must never be taken off. If a woman loses it, she should hide herself from everybody until it is replaced. On the way to her husband’s house, the bride should upset with her foot a measure of rice kept on purpose in the way, perhaps with the idea of showing that there will be so much grain in her household that she can afford to waste it.4 The Komtis did not eat in kitchens in the famines, but accepted dry rations of food with great reluctance. They wear the sacred thread and have caste-marks on their foreheads. They usually rub powdered turmeric on their face and hands, and this lends an unpleasant greenish tinge to the skin.



* * *

1 *Madras Census Report* \(1901\), p. 162.

2 *Mysore Ethnographic Survey*, Komati caste \(H. V. Nanjundayya\).

3 H. V. Nanjundayya, *loc. cit.*

4 H. V. Nanjundayya, *loc. cit.*




