+++
title = "0"
+++
## Preface: Before Taking the Plunge

This book somewhat mirrors a personal journey that transformed my life, altered the way I look at the great human endeavor, and redefined my relationship to this planet. The transition that took a couple of decades for me is unlikely to be replicated for the reader in the short span of time it takes to absorb the content of this book. Nonetheless, the framework can be laid down so that readers might begin their own journeys and perhaps arrive at some profound realizations. This preface explains the approach and some overarching principles of the text.

We live in a physical world governed by physical law. Unlike the case for civil or criminal law, we are not even afforded the opportunity to break the laws of physics, except in fiction or entertainment. We do not need to create a physics police force or build physics jails or plead cases in front of some physics court. Nature provides perfect, automatic enforcement for free.

The domains of energy, the environment, economics, etc. are no exceptions, and can be put on a physical footing. It is worth exploring the emergent framework: reflecting on scale, efficiency, and thermodynamic limits of the human enterprise. By understanding the boundaries, we can begin to think about viable long-term plans in a way that too few are doing today. Thus far, heeding physical boundaries has not been necessary for the most part, as the scale of human endeavors has only recently become significant in a planetary context. We are now entering into a new reality: one in which our ambitions are on a collision course with natural limits on a finite planet. It is a slow-motion trajectory that has been apparent to some for an embarrassingly long time [1], but not yet acute enough to have grabbed the lasting attention of the majority.

The delirious ascent in energy and resource use witnessed over the past few centuries has been accomplished via the rapid, accelerating expenditure of a one-time inheritance of natural resources- -a brief and singularly remarkable era in the long saga of human history. It has produced a dangerously distorted impression of what "normal" looks like on this planet. The fireworks show on display today is spectacular, fun, and inspirational, but also exceptionally unusual. Just as a meteorologist somehow born and trained within a 15-minute fireworks display likely cannot make useful predictions about weather and sky conditions over the next week, we are ill-equipped to intuitively understand what comes after the present phase. Luckily, science offers tools by which to transcend our narrow, warped perspectives, and can assist in discerning likely from wishful visions. The aim of this textbook is to set quantitative bounds on the present era as a way to better prepare for the possibility of a much different future. Our eventual success depends on serious attention to planetary limits.

This book is written to support a general education college course on energy and the environment. It was formulated as a physics course, but is written in the hope that it may also be accessible beyond this narrow setting. Physics is built on a mathematical foundation, and the domain of energy demands quantitative assessment. As a consequence, the book does not shy away from numbers. The math that is covered is presented in a way that aims to integrate intuition and the formality of equations. While math and quantitative elements are present throughout the book, Chapters 1, 3, and 6 are perhaps the most math-intense, featuring exponential functions, logarithms, and the lightest exposure to differential equations. But students need not master math beyond simple arithmetic operations, being able to rearrange equations, compute logarithms and exponentials, and raise a number to a power. Appendix A may serve as a useful math refresher.



An attempt is made to prevent students from equation-hunting, promoting instead development of a core understanding and intuition. This can require an adjustment on the part of students, who often treat equations as algorithmic tools to file away for use later when solving problems rather than as the embodiment of concepts to be internalized. Students often want a clear recipe so that when presented with a problem for homework, they can mimic a parallel example clearly laid out in the book. Doing so may be convenient and time-efficient, but short-circuits actual learning-bypassing the neural development that would accompany mastering the mental processes that are involved in solving a problem. Only the student can form these neural connections, and only through some struggle and effort. In this sense, learning is like climbing a hill: the only way to get to the top is by investing the effort to gain elevation-no shortcuts can bypass the inevitable climb.

Problems in this book are formulated to emphasize understanding the underlying concepts, rather than execution of a mathematical recipe. When students say they have math difficulties, it is usually not a problem carrying out the operations (+, -, X, ÷), but in formulating an approach. Therefore, the main difficulty is a conceptual one, but blamed on math because casting a problem in a mathematical framework forces a mastery of the conceptual underpinning: nowhere to hide. Given two numbers, should one divide or multiply them to get the answer sought? Resolving such questions requires a deeper understanding of the meaning behind the numbers in the problem (and associated units, often). By focusing on what the numbers represent and how they relate to each other, problems aim to build a more meaningful and permanent understanding of the content.

In soliciting feedback from students about problems, comments frequently pointed out that "Problem X used exactly the same math approach as Problem Y, so was redundant." This exposes a glaring difference in how students and instructors might view a problem. To the student providing such feedback, the problem seems to merely mirror an algorithm, devoid of contextual meaning. To the instructor, it is a window into a richer world: insight and personal ownership of the material is at stake. Problems are an opportunity to learn, as students are perhaps most actively engaged, mentally, when attempting to solve them. Instructors are trying to recreate their own learning experiences for students, through the imperfect mechanism of assigned work.

A similar revelation stems from comments that express the sentiment: "this problem has unnecessary information that is not required to solve the problem." Is the point to churn out a number, or to embed the result into a deeper context (i.e., learn)? It's a matter of context over algorithm. Context is where the real learning happens. It's where deep and lasting connections are made to the real world. The point is not to exercise a student's ability to perform mathematical operations, but to absorb a greater insight into the issue through its quantitative analysis. Math is like the airplane that delivers a skydiver to the jump. The jump/dive is the whole point, but the airplane is a necessary conveyance. When it comes time to jump, clinging to the familiar safety of the plane won't accomplish the goal. A student who bypasses the context for just the math operation has not embraced the intended experience and attendant mental growth.

The book's format sometimes weaves math and numbers into the text, which is unfamiliar to some students who are accustomed to clear delineation between math and text. Students are advised to approach sections containing mathematical developments by treating equations as statements of truth (within the appropriate context and assumptions) that help define and complete logical arguments. Or, think of equations as short-hand sentences that encapsulate a concept. Experts work to understand the concepts, by reading rather than memorizing equations. What is the equation trying to say? What truth does it impart? What relationships does it elucidate? Equations in the text are surrounded by sentences to help bring the equations to life as guides to intuition. Students who just want a step-by-step recipe to utilizing equations in an algorithmic autopilot mode are missing an opportunity



vi

to internalize ("own") the complete argument and concept. Once the concept is mastered, the equation is a natural consequence, and can be generated at need from the concept when solving a problem.

Most textbooks on energy and the environment for a general education audience stick to dry analyses of energy resources, their implementations, and the advantages and disadvantages of each. This textbook also does so, but is less reserved about providing contextual interpretations, like saying that resources such as waves, geothermal, tidal, or ocean currents are probably not worth serious attention, due to their small scale. In this sense, the book bears some resemblance to David MacKay's fabulous and inspirational Sustainable Energy: Without the Hot Air [2]. In fact, the decision to make this text fully available for free in electronic form as a PDF (available at https://escholarship.org/uc/energy_ambitions) was completely inspired by MacKay's first doing the same. The topic is too important to allow financial interests of a publisher to limit access. The price of the print version of this book-available at https://www.lulu.com/-is intended to cover production costs only. If using as a textbook for a course, consider its adaptation at https://www.kudu.com/physics_of_energy, allowing customization and unlimited editing of the

course copy.

This text also differs from others in that it attempts to frame the energy story in a broader context of other limitations facing humanity in the form of growth (physical, economic, population) and also limitations of people themselves (psychology, political barriers). In the end, students are given quantitative guidance for adaptation and encouraged to find any number of ways to reduce consumption of resources as an effective hedge against uncertainty this century. Such advice is "bad for business" and may be seen as risky in a textbook subject to financial interests and coached by market analysis—which might explain why many textbooks come off as anodyne.

The tenor of this textbook might be characterized as being pessimistic, intoning that the coming century will present many difficulties that may not be dispatched by tidy "solutions," but instead borne with resigned adaptation. We entered this century graced by a few-hundred year run of mounting prosperity and resulting sugar high-unlike anything previously experienced in human history, but may not exit this century in such a state of privilege. This sort of message may be off-putting to some (see also the Epilogue). But the stakes are important enough that it may be worth challenging assumptions and making students uncomfortable in a way that other texts might purposefully avoid. By the time students reach the end of Chapter 8, they are perhaps a little alarmed, and desperate to know "what's the answer?" Even though the book does not completely satisfy on that front-because it can't, in good faith-this is arguably exactly where an instructor would like students to be: attentive and eager. Having them carry the tension into the world is one way to help humanity take its challenges seriously and work to find a better way. Soothing their discomfort so they can emerge thinking it's all in hand is perhaps at best a wasted opportunity to create a better possible future for humanity, and at worst only contributes to humanity's fall by failing to light a fire equal to the challenge.

Tom Murphy December, 2020

San Diego, CA

## How to Use This Book
viii
This version of the book-available for free in digital form at https:// escholarship.org/uc/energy_ambitions-is prepared for electronic viewing: not differentiating between left and right pages, and thus not ideal for printing. A two-sided version better-suited for printing is also available at the aforementioned site. Most graphics in this version are vector-based and can be safely magnified to alarming proportions.

This book makes extensive use of margin space for notes,1 citations, figures, tables, and captions. Hopefully, the utilization of margins leads to a smooth reading experience, preventing parenthetical, contextual information from interrupting the flow of primary text.

References to figures and tables, glossary items, citations, chapters and sections, definitions, boxes, equations, etc. are hyperlinked within the electronic PDF document2 allowing easy navigation, appearing as blue text. To help navigate in print versions, references to material outside the chapter also include page numbers. Note that the page numbering in this electronic version differs from that in the two-sided print versions.3

The electronic version of this book is far easier to use once figuring out how to navigate "back" within the PDF viewer, so that a link-or even several in a row-may be clicked/tapped, followed by a painless return to the starting point that may be hundreds of pages away. It is therefore strongly recommended that you figure out how to navigate using your viewing platform. For instance, viewing the document in Adobe Acrobat on a Mac, the back and forward functions are accomplished with cursor/arrow keys as - and -→ In Mac Preview, H-[ and H-] go back and forward. Some mouses especially those for gaming-have additional buttons that map to forward/backward navigation.

Call-out boxes indicate places where a student might enhance their understanding by engaging in personal exploration. An information symbol() in the margin is occasionally used-mostly in Problems sections to denote supplemental content that build useful contextual links to the real world but may otherwise obscure what the problem seeks. A caution symbol (A) appears when an argument is being put forth that is likely faulty or nuanced. Students should be careful to avoid literal acceptance of these points and work to understand the subtleties of the argument.

This electronic version contains a Changes and Corrections section that lists any modifications since the original release the relevant dates being provided on page ii. Within the text, a red square■ marks the location of a change, the square being hyperlinked to the corresponding entry describing the change, which itself has a hyperlinked page reference

1: Numbered notes point to a specific loca- tion in the text.

Non-numbered notes are general asides re- lating to the paragraph.

2: A link to the electronic document is in the first paragraph, above.

3: due to the two-side rule that new parts or chapters start on right-side pages, often leaving empty (even-numbered) pages

4: ... much like the "back" button in a web

browser

5: Learn how to navigate "back" in your PDF viewer to make hyperlinks within the document more attractive.

invitation to explore

contextual information

Beware of dog.

Try it! Click on the red square!



A number of the examples (set apart in yellow boxes) are not posed in the form of a traditional question, but rather appear as a statement that captures a quantitative instance of the concept at hand. From this, students can construct multiple different questions that omit one piece of information and then solve for it using the remaining numbers. In this way, the example becomes a versatile guide to understanding. Note also the convention that≈ is used to indicate "quantitatively very close to," while ~ represents a less precise numerical value that might be read "in the neighborhood of," or "roughly."

After the primary presentation of material, an Epilogue attempts to put the tone of the textbook in context as it relates to the challenges ahead.

Appendices include supplemental information on math, chemistry, worthy tangents, and a partial answer key for problems. The answer key is constructed to discourage shortcuts. Rather than give direct numerical answers, for instance, it often provides a range within which the answer is expected to lie. In this sense, it acts more like an intuition transplant, guiding more likely correct analysis in a manner closer to the way an expert operates. This approach allows students to at least catch any glaring errors in approach, like dividing rather than multiplying, for instance.

The Bibliography at the end applies to the whole book. Clicking on a green reference number navigates to the reference entry. Each reference indicates the (hyperlinked) page or pages on which the reference is cited. Many of the entries contain hyperlinks to online resources. The ability to navigate "back" from these explorations is very useful.

A Notation section after the bibliography provides an overview of physical constants and symbols used in the text, unit pre-factors, and a table of Greek letters.

A Glossary provides a collection of important terms encountered in the text. Hyperlinked words in the text (appearing blue) lead to the glossary, whose entries are also often internally linked to other glossary items. Additionally, page numbers where entries appear in the text are linked to easily navigate to them. The "back" navigation feature is extremely helpful in this context for returning from a rabbit hole of exploration.

Finally, a full alphabetical Index appears at the end to facilitate finding information in non-electronic versions of this text.



The graphic below reflects all chapters by page count, suggesting a few different ways to approach this book. Just reading the "Upshot" for each chapter, and possibly the first few introductory paragraphs for each will convey a decent overview of the book's contents. The core message can also be picked out based on the guide below. The book has a definite quantitative slant, so it will not be possible to avoid math-laden sections completely, but the guide can help find the less numerically intense sections. Finally, different class formats might take various routes through the material, as suggested above.


6: Experts often have a pretty good sense of the answer even before a detailed analysis, which serves as a way to identify possible mistakes and force a closer look.

References often provide convenient links to data collections in the form of Wikipedia pages. Primary references are easy enough to track from there.

7: ... and in some cases singles out individ- ual sections by size and position within the chapter



## Contents
viii
xi
xi
I SETTING THE STAGE: GROWTH AND LIMITATIONS
1 Exponential Growth
1.1
Bacteria in a Jar.
1.1.1 Exponential Math
1.2 Energy Extrapolation
1.3 Thermodynamic Absurdity 1.4 Upshot: Limits to Growth
Problems
1.5
2 Economic Growth Limits
2.1 Historical Coupling
2.2 Decoupling and Substitution. 2.3 Forced Economic Limits. .
2.4 No-Growth World . . 2.5 Upshot: Growth Will End
2.6 Problems
3 Population
3.1 Population History.
3.2 Logistic Model .
3.2.1 Overshoot
3.2.2 Logistic Projection
3.3 Demographic Transition
3.3.1
Geographic Considerations.
3.3.2 Transition Cost . . .
3.4 Touchy Aspects
3.4.1 It's Personal
3.4.2 Population Policy
3.5 Upshot: It Depends on Us
3.6 Problems
4 Space Colonization
4.1 Scale of Space
4.2 The Wrong Narrative
4.3 A Host of Difficulties
4.4 Exploration's Role
4.5 Upshot: Earth First.
4.6 Problems
64
II ENERGY AND FOSSIL FUELS
5 Energy and Power Units
5.1 Energy (J)
5.2 Energy Forms & Conservation
5.3 Power (W)
5.4 Kilowatt-hour (kWh)
5.5 Calories (kcal)
5.6 British Thermal Unit (Btu)
5.7 Therms
5.8 Electrical Power
5.9 Electron Volt (eV)
5.10 Light Energy
5.11 Upshot on Units
5.12 Problems
6 Putting Thermal Energy to Work
6.1 Generating Heat
6.2 Heat Capacity
6.3 Home Heating/Cooling
6.4 Heat Engines.
6.4.1 Entropy and Efficiency Limits
6.5 Heat Pumps
6.5.1 Consumer Metrics.
6.6 Upshot on Thermal Energy 6.7
Problems
7 The Energy Landscape
7.1 The Annual Energy Review
Energy Flow
7.1.1
7.1.2
Source and Sector
7.1.3
Detailed Mix.
7.1.4
Energy Trends
7.2 Global Energy
7.2.1 U.S. Global Share
7.3 Upshot: Go to the Source
7.4 Problems
8 Fossil Fuels
8.1 The Most Important Plot Ever
Overview: Coal, Oil, and Gas
8.2
8.2.1
8.2.2
8.2.3
Coal..
Natural Gas
8.3 Chemical Energy.
Petroleum (Oil)
8.4 Fossil Fuel Pros and Cons.
8.4.1
Fossil Fuels are Amazing
8.4.2 Fossil Fuels are Terrible
8.4.3
On Balance?
8.5 The Future of Fossil Fuels.
8.5.1
8.5.2
Scenarios.
Timescales
8.5.3 Clues in the Data
8.5.4 Geopolitics
8.6 Upshot: Good, Bad, Limited
8.7 Problems
9 Climate Change
9.1 The Source of CO2
9.1.1
CO2 Measurements
9.1.2
CO2 Expectations
9.1.3
Chief Contributors
9.2 Warming Mechanism
9.3 Possible Trajectories
9.4 Consequences
9.4.1 Heating Up.
9.4.2 Heating Earth's Skin 9.4.3 Sea Level Rise
9.5 What Can Be Done?
9.6 Upshot: A Serious Problem
9.7 Problems
III ALTERNATIVE ENERGY
10 Renewable Overview
10.1 The Players
10.2 Alternatives vs. Renewables 10.3 Renewable Energy Budget 10.4 Renewable Snapshot..
10.5 Upshot: Our Path Forward
10.6 Problems

11 Hydroelectric Energy
173
11.1 Grav. Potential Energy
173
11.1.1 Comparison to Other Forms
174
11.2 Hydroelectric Energy
175
11.2.1 Theoretical Potential.
177
11.3 Hydropower in the U.S.
11.4 Global Hydropower
11.5 Upshot: Pros and Cons 11.6 Problems
12 Wind Energy
12.1 Kinetic Energy
12.2 Wind Energy
12.2.1 Wind Turbines
12.3 Wind Installations
12.4 Upshot: Not Overblown 12.5 Problems
13 Solar Energy
13.1 The Energy of Light
13.2 The Planck Spectrum
199
13.3 Photovoltaics .
201
13.3.1 Theoretical Efficiency
202
13.4 Insolation. . .
206
13.7 Photovoltaic Installations
13.5 Incredible Solar Potential
13.6 Residential Considerations
13.6.1 Configurations. . 13.6.2 Sizing and Cost
13.7.1 Pros and Cons of PV
13.8 Solar Thermal
13.8.1 Passive Solar Heat
13.8.2 Solar Thermal Electricity
13.8.3 Pros and Cons of ST.
13.9 Upshot for Solar 13.10 Problems
14 Biological Energy
14.1 Photosynthesis
14.2 Biomass.
14.3 Biofuels
211
14.3.1 EROEI
231
14.3.2 EROEI of Biofuels
234
14.4 Upshot: Nature's Burn.
235
14.5 Problems
15 Nuclear Energy
15.1 The Nucleus
15.2 Radioactive Decay
15.3 Mass Energy
15.4 Fission
15.4.1 The Basic Idea.
15.4.2 Chain Reaction.
15.4.3 Fission Accounting
15.4.4 Practical Implementations
15.4.5 Nuclear Waste ...
260
15.4.6 Weapons and Proliferation
262
15.4.7 Nuclear Safety
263
15.4.8 Pros and Cons of Fission
15.5 Fusion..
15.5.1 Fuel Abundance
15.5.2 Fusion Realities
15.5.3 Pros and Cons of Fusion
15.6 Upshot on Nuclear..
15.7 Problems
16 Small Players
16.1 Geothermal Energy
16.1.1 Sustainable Harvest
16.1.2 Geothermal Depletion
16.1.3 Geothermal Reality
16.2 Tidal Capture. .
16.3 Ocean Currents
16.4 Wave Energy
16.5 Hydrogen.
16.6 Upshot on Small Players 16.7 Problems
17 Comparison of Alternatives
17.1 Alternative Energy Matrix
17.2 Individual Tally
17.3 Student Rankings
17.4 Upshot: Fossil Fuel Gap
17.5 Problems
IV GOING FORWARD
18 Human Factors
18.1 Personality
18.1.1 Consequences and Coping
18.2 Policy vs. Individual Action.
18.3 The Energy Trap . . .
18.4 Fermi Paradox Explained? 18.5 Upshot on Humanity
18.6 Problems
19 A Plan Might Be Welcome
19.1 No Master Plan . . .
316
19.1.1 The Growth Imperative
318
19.2 No Prospect for a Plan.
319
19.2.1 Who Makes the Plan?
321
19.3 Economic Regimes..
322
19.3.1 Steady State Economy
324
19.4 Upshot on the Plan 19.5 Problems
326
326
20 Adaptation Strategies
20.1 Awareness
20.2 Communication
20.2.1 Predicament, not Problems
20.3 Guidelines for Adaptation
20.3.1 Overall Framing.
20.3.2 Energy Assessment Rules. 20.3.3 Quantitative Footprint 20.3.4 Dietary Energy.
20.3.5 Flexitarianism
20.3.6 Discretionary Summary
20.4 Values Shifts ..
20.5 Flexibility in Uncertainty
20.6 Upshot on Strategies.
20.7 Problems (Predicaments?)
Epilogue
Image Attributions
Changes and Corrections
328
V APPENDICES
A Math and Equations
358
359
A.1 Relax on the Decimals.
A.2 Forget the Rules
A.3 Areas and Volumes
A.4 Fractions
A.5 Integer Powers
A.6 Fractional Powers
366
A.7 Scientific Notation
A.8 Equation Hunting
A.9 Equation Manipulation A.10 Units Manipulation
A.11 Just the Start
B Chemistry Primer/Refresher
B.1
Moles
367
B.2 Stoichiometry
376
B.3 Chemical Energy.
B.4 Ideal Gas Law
C Selected Answers
D Alluring Tangents
379
D.1 Edge of the Universe.
. 392
D.2 Cosmic Energy Conservation
D.2.1 Cosmological Exception
D.2.2
D.2.3
Convoluted Conservation.
Lost to Heat
D.3 Electrified Transport
D.3.1 Airplanes.
D.3.2 Shipping
D.3.3 Long-haul trucking
D.3.4 Buses
D.3.5 Passenger Cars.
D.3.6 Wired Systems
D.3.7
Collected Efficiencies
D.4 Pushing Out the Moon
D.5.1
D.5 Humanity's Long View
Success vs. Failure . D.5.2 Sustainable Living. D.5.3 Time to Grow Up
393
D.5.4 Frameworks
407
D.6 Too Smart to Succeed? .
408
D.6.1 Evolution's Biggest Blunder?
411
Bibliography
412
Notation
420
Glossary
422
Alphabetical Index
439Part I

## Acknowledgments
I thank Brian Siana, David Crossley, and Barath Raghavan for extensive review and substantive suggestions on elements of the text. Allegra Swift offered tremendous help on permissions and open access publishing.

The first draft of this book was written in late 2019 and early 2020 for use in the Physics 12 general-education course on Energy and the Environment at UC San Diego in Winter quarter 2020. Students were presented with one chapter at a time in PDF form, lacking margin notes, having fewer figures and tables, and containing untested content. As part of weekly assignments, students were to read each chapter and offer substantive feedback on: confusing elements; missing content that would be interesting to include; ideas for additional graphics or tables; anything that seemed wrong or of questionable veracity; a critique of problems (for clarity, value, level of difficulty); and any typographical errors or wording suggestions. The voluminous feedback that resulted has been extremely valuable in shaping the current iteration of the book, so that each student in the class deserves acknowledgment here for hard work and keen insights.

In alphabetical order: J. Abaya, B. Arce, M. Beltran, D. Bothe, P. Buljat, T. Chung, J. Cordero, B. Espinoza Diaz, G. Fu, J. Funes, C. Goodale, T. Huang, K. Ito, A. Jhaveri, D. Kim, S. Mahlman, J. Mckinley, J. Murgo, H. Musa, J. Nam, J. Ngo, K. Nguyen, H. Ordonez, G. Osuna, C. Peach, H. Potts, P. Puno, E. Ramos, J. Song, A. Strube, D. Sun, N. Teuton, E. Tian, Q. C. Tu, Z. Tuazon, J. Wen, Z. Xu, A. Yoshinaga, S. Zweifler.


## Bibliography

412

References are in order of appearance in the book.

[1] DH Meadows et al. The Limits to Growth: A Report for the Club of Rome's Project on the Predicament
of Mankind. Universe Books, 1972 (cited on pages v, 36).
[2] David J. C. MacKay. Sustainable Energy-without the hot air. Available at https://www.
withouthotair.com. UIT Cambridge, 2008 (cited on page vii).
[3] U.S. Energy Inform. Administration. Annual Energy Review, Appendix E1. 2011. URL: https:
//www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/pdf/sec12_24.pdf (cited on page 7).
[4] G. Kopp and J. L. Lean. "A new, lower value of total solar irradiance: Evidence and climate significance". In: Geophysical Research Letters 38.1 (Jan. 2011). DOI: 10.1029/2010GL045777 (cited on pages 11, 144, 167, 206).
[5] TW Murphy. Exponential Economist Meets Finite Pysicist. Online. Accessed 2021 Jan. 8. Apr. 2012. URL: https://dothemath.ucsd.edu/2012/04/economist-meets-physicist/ (cited on page 17).
[6] List of countries by GDP (nominal). Wikipedia. Source: World Economic Outlook Database, Interna- tional Monetary Fund. Accessed 2019 Sept. 3. Oct. 2019. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/List_of_countries_by_GDP (nominal) (cited on pages 18, 19, 39).
[7] List of Countries by Total Primary Energy Consumption and Production. Wikipedia. Source: International Energy Statistics, U.S. Energy Information Administration. Accessed 2017 Feb. 12. 2016. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_total_primary_ energy consumption_and_production (cited on pages 18, 19, 43, 44).
[8] List of Countries by Population (United Nations). Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Jul. 18. July 2019.
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_population (United_ Nations) (cited on pages 18, 19, 39, 40, 42-44).
[9] TW Murphy. "Maximum spectral luminous efficacy of white light". In: Journal of Applied
Physics 111.10 (2012), p. 104909. DOI: 10.1063/1.4721897 (cited on page 21).
[10] Energypedia. Lighting Technologies. 2015. URL: https://energypedia.info/wiki/Lighting_
Technologies (cited on pages 21, 22).
[11] Luminous Efficacy. Wikipedia. Sources: various, cited from Wikipedia page. URL: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luminous efficacy (cited on pages 21, 22).
[12] TJ Garret. Rebound, Backfire, and the Jevons Paradox. Online. Accessed 2021 Feb. 1. 2014. URL: https://www.inscc.utah.edu/~tgarrett/Economics/Jevons_Paradox.html (cited on
page 23).
[13] List of Countries by Total Primary Energy Consumption and Production. Wikipedia. Sources: various, cited from Wikipedia page. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_ by_total_primary_energy consumption_and_production (cited on page 28).

[14] K Klein Goldewijk et al. "The HYDE 3.1 spatially explicit database of human-induced global land-use change over the past 12,000 years". In: Global Ecology and Biogeography 20.1 (Jan. 2011). Available via Wikipedia: Estimates of Historical World Population, pp. 73–86. DOI: 10.1111/j.1466-8238.2010.00587.x (cited on pages 30-32, 37).
[15] Estimates of Historical World Population. Wikipedia. Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base. 2017. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Estimates_of_historical_world_ population (cited on pages 30-32, 37, 45).
[16] V Smil. Energy Transitions: Global and National Perspectives. Also incorporates data from the BP Statistical Review of World Energy. 2017. URL: https://ourworldindata.org/energy (cited on pages 30, 45, 102, 110, 118, 140).
[17] Green Revolution. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Jul. 21. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Green Revolution (cited on page 31).
[18] P. R. Ehrlich and Sierra Club. The Population Bomb. A Sierra Club-Ballantine book. Ballantine
Books, 1971 (cited on page 32).
[19] List of Sovereign States and Dependent Territories by Birth Rate. Wikipedia. Source: The World Factbook. Retrieved 2014-02-21. 2016. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ sovereign_states_and_dependent_territories_by_birth_ rate (cited on pages 39-44,
50).
[20] List of Sovereign States and Dependent Territories by Mortality Rate. Wikipedia. Source: Causes of mortality, OECD Stat Health Status, OECD. 2011. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ List_of_sovereign_states_and_dependent_territories_by_mortality rate (cited on
pages 39-44, 50).
[21] J Diamond. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. Penguin Books, 2005, pp. 286-293
(cited on page 47).
[22] Bill Anders and NASA. Online. [available online at Wikimedia Commons as picture ID 81692094; Accessed 2020 Aug. 4. 1968. URL: https://spaceflight.nasa.gov/gallery/ images/apollo/apollo8/html/as08-14-2383.html (cited on pages 54, 354).
[23] List of artificial objects leaving the Solar System. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Aug. 9. 2020. URL: https: //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_artificial_objects leaving_the_Solar System
(cited on page 56).
[24] Saturn V. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Aug. 9. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Saturn V (cited on page 56).
[25] V Springel et al. "Simulations of the formation, evolution and clustering of galaxies and
quasars". In: Nature 435 (2005), p. 629. Dor: 10.1038/nature03597 (cited on pages 57, 354). [26] C Dreier. "A new accounting for Apollo: how much did it really cost?" In: The Space Review (June 2019). https://www.thespacereview.com/article/3737/1 Accessed 2020 Aug. 11 (cited on page 58).
[27] NASA Kennedy Space Center. Space Shuttle and International Space Station FAQ. Online. Accessed 2020 Aug. 11. 2017. URL: https://www.nasa.gov/centers/kennedy/about/information/ shuttle faq.html (cited on page 58).
[28] M Bartels. "NASA to pay Russia $90 million for a Soyuz seat on a crew launch this fall". In:
Space.com (May 2020). Accessed 2020 Aug. 11 (cited on page 58).
[29] F Taylor. The Scientific Exploration of Mars. Cambridge University Press, 2010, p. 306 (cited on
page 58).

413
[30] International Space Station. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Aug. 11. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/International Space Station (cited on page 59).
[31] Biosphere 2. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Aug. 3. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Biosphere 2 (cited on pages 60, 66).
[32] IPAC/NASA. NASA Exoplanet Archive. Online catalog. Accessed 2020 Aug. 9. 2020. URL:
https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu (cited on page 63).
[33] M Kleiber. "Body size and metabolic rate". In: Physiological Reviews 27.4 (1947), pp. 511–541.
DOI: 10.1152/physrev.1947.27.4.511 (cited on page 72).
[34] U.S. Energy Inform. Administration. Annual Energy Review. 2011. URL: https://www.eia.gov/ totalenergy/data/annual/index.php (cited on pages 84, 89, 102, 103, 107, 130, 170, 229, 230,
422).
[35] LLNL. Energy Flow Charts. Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 29. 2019. URL: https://flowcharts.
llnl.gov/ (cited on page 105).
[36] R M Suits, NJ Matteson, and EJ Moyer. U.S. Energy History Visualization. Online. Accessed
2021 Feb. 6. Nov. 2020. URL: https://us-sankey.rcc.uchicago.edu/ (cited on page 105). [37] International Energy Admin. Electricity Information: Overview. Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 6. July 2020. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/electricity-information - overview (cited on page 107).
[38] MK Hubbert. "Energy resources: a report to the Committee on Natural Resources of the National Academy of Sciences; National Research Council". In: (Dec. 1962). Figure 54, p. 91 (cited on page 116).
[39] U.S. Energy Inform. Admin. Coal Explained. Online. Accessed 2020 Aug. 27. 2019. URL: https:
//www.eia.gov/energyexplained/coal/ (cited on page 118).
[40] Energy Density. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Aug. 27. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Energy density (cited on page 118).
[41] JMKC Donev. In a barrel of oil. Online. In Energy Education, University of Calgory. Accessed 2020 Aug. 27. 2017. URL: https://energyeducation.ca/encyclopedia/In_a_barrel_of_oil (cited on page 119).
[42] JMKC Donev et al. Cap rock. Online. In Energy Education, University of Calgory. Accessed 2020 Nov. 13. 2019. URL: https://energyeducation.ca/encyclopedia/Cap_rock (cited on page 120).
[43] J Diamond. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. Penguin Books, 2005 (cited on
page 125).
[44] List of Countries by Proven Oil Reserves. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Nov. 9. 2020. URL: https: //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by-proven_oil_ reserves (cited on
page 126).
[45] List of Countries by Proven Natural Gas Reserves. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Nov. 9. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_natural_gas-proven_ reserves (cited on page 126).
[46] List of Countries by Proven Coal Reserves. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Nov. 9. 2020. URL: https: //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_coal_reserves (cited on pages 126,
127).

414
[47] D Rutledge. "Estimating long-term world coal production with logit and probit transforms".
In: International Journal of Coal Geology 85 (2011), pp. 23-33. DOI: 10.1016/j.coal.2010.10.012 (cited on page 127).
[48] J Laherrère. private communication. Based on several sources and corrected by Jean Laherrère to
be 2P back-dated discoveries. 2020 (cited on page 129).
[49] U.S. Energy Inform. Admin. U.S. Field Production of Crude Oil. Online. Accessed 2020 Nov. 10.
2020. URL: https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist_xls/MCRFPUS2m.xls (cited on page 130).
      [50] National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration. Trends in Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide. Global Monitoring Laboratory, online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 3. 2020. URL: https://www.esrl.noaa. gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/data.html (cited on page 139).
      [51] NASA. Global Temperature. NASA Global Climate Change: online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 3. 2019.
      URL: https://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/global-temperature/ (cited on page 139).
      [52] H Ritchie. Who has contributed most to global CO2 emissions. Online: Our World in Data. Accessed 2020 Dec. 2. Oct. 2019. URL: https://ourworldindata.org/contributed-most-global-co2 (cited on page 143).
      [53] R Rapier. The World's Top 10 Carbon Dioxide Emitters. Forbes online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 2. Dec. 2019. URL: https://www.forbes.com/sites/rrapier/2019/12/04/the-worlds-top-10- carbon-dioxide-emitters/?sh=55dd24ad2d04 (cited on page 143).
      [54] RT Pierrehumbert. "Infrared radiation and planetary temperature". In: Physics Today 63.1 (Jan.
      2011), pp. 33-38. DOI: 10.1063/1.3541943 (cited on page 143).
      [55] Atmospheric Transmission (PNG). Wikimedia Commons. Accessed 2020 Nov. 29. 2020. URL: https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=2623190 (cited on page 145).
      [56] JT Kiehl and K E Trenberth. "Earth's Annual Global Mean Energy Budget". In: Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 78.2 (Feb. 1997), pp. 197-208. DOI: 10.1175/1520- 0477 (1997)078%3C0197: EAGMEB%3E2.0.CO;2 (cited on page 145).
      [57] RealClimate: Climate science from climate scientists. The CO2 problem in 6 easy steps. Online. Primary references within; Accessed 2020 Nov. 22. 2007. URL: http://www.realclimate.org/ index.php/archives/2007/08/the-co2-problem-in-6-easy-steps/ (cited on page 147).
      [58] National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Global Climate Report. Online. Accessed 2020 Nov. 22. 2019. URL: https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/global/201913%5C# gtemp (cited on page 147).
      [59] U.S. Geological Survey. How much water is there on Earth? Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 1. URL: https://www.usgs.gov/special- topic/water-science - school/science/how-much-
      water-there-earth? (cited on page 153).
      [60] B Davies. Calculating glacier ice volumes and sea level equivalents. Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 1. 2020. URL: http://www.antarcticglaciers.org/glaciers-and-climate/estimating - glacier-contribution-to-sea-level-rise/ (cited on pages 153, 156).
      [61] R Lindsey. Climate Change: Global Sea Level. Online: NOAA. Accessed 2020 Dec. 1. Aug. 2020. URL: https://www.climate.gov/news- features/understanding - climate/climate-change- global-sea-level (cited on page 155).
      [62] K Lambeck et al. "Sea level and global ice volumes from the Last Glacial Maximum to the Holocene". In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111.43 (Oct. 2014), pp. 15296-15303. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1411762111 (cited on page 157).
      
      415
      [63] NASA. The NASA Earth's Energy Budget Poster. Online. Accessed 2020 Nov. 16. 2014. URL:
      https://science-edu.larc.nasa.gov/energy_budget/ (cited on pages 167, 168).
      [64] J Barber and PD Tran. "From natural to artificial photosynthesis". In: J. of the Royal Society Interface 10 (2013), p. 20120984. DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2012.0984 (cited on pages 167, 168).
      [65] A Kleidon. "Physical limits of wind energy within the atmosphere and its use as renewable energy: From the theoretical basis to practical implications". In: arXiV 2010.00982 (2020). https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2010/2010.00982.pdf (cited on pages 167, 168). [66] List of largest hydroelectric power stations. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 4. 2020. URL: https: //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_largest hydroelectric_power_stations (cited on
      page 176).
      [67] Study on the Importance of Harnessing the Hydropower Resources of the World. Online: Eurelectric, Brussels. Accessed 2020 Nov. 24. Apr. 1997. URL: https://silo.tips/download/study-on- the importance-of-harnessing - the-hydropower - resources-of-the-world (cited on page 178).
      [68] Life Cycle GHG Emissions. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 20. 2020. URL: https://en.
      wikipedia.org/wiki/Life-cycle_greenhouse gas emissions_of_energy_sources (cited on pages 181, 194, 218, 221, 264).
      [69] National Renewable Energy Lab. U.S. Average Annual Wind Speed at 80 Meters. Online. Accessed 2021 Jan. 16. 2011. URL: https://windexchange. energy.gov/maps - data/319 (cited on page 186).
      [70] C de Castro et al. "Global Wind Power Potential: Physical and Technological Limits". In: Energy Policy 39.10 (2011), pp. 6677-6682. DOI: 10.1016/j.enpol.2011.06.027 (cited on pages 186, 193, 295).
      [71] M Ragheb and A M Ragheb. "Wind Turbines Theory - The Betz Equation and Optimal Rotor Tip Speed Ratio". In: (2011). In Fundamental and Advanced Topics in Wind Power, ed. by R. Carriveau. DOI: 10.5772/21398 (cited on pages 188, 189, 423).
      [72] A Betz. "Wind-Energie und ihre Ausnützung durch Windmühlen". In: Göttingen, Vandenhoeck
      & Ruprecht (1926). in German (cited on pages 188, 423).
      [73] H Glauert. The elements of airfoil and airscrew theory. second ed. Cambridge University Press,
      UK, 1993 (cited on page 188).
      [74] AP Schaffarczyk. "Aerodynamics and Aeroelastics of Wind Turbines". In: WIT Transactions on State of the Art in Science and Engineering 44 (2010). https://www.witpress.com/Secure/ elibrary/papers/9781845642051/9781845642051003 FU1.pdf. DOI: 10.2495/978-1-84564- 205-1/03 (cited on pages 188, 354).
      [75] J Meyers and C Meneveau. "Optimal turbine spacing in fully developed wind farm boundary layers". In: Wind Energy 15 (Mar. 2012), pp. 305–317. DOI: 10.1002/we. 469 (cited on page 189). [76] Antonio Muñoz et al. "Short-term Forecasting in Power Systems: A Guided Tour". In: Handbook of Power Systems. Vol. 2. May 2010, pp. 129-160. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-12686-4-5 (cited on pages 190, 354).
      [77] A Fischer et al. "Statistical learning for windpower: a modeling and stability study towards forecasting". In: Wind Energy 20.12 (2017), pp. 2037-2047. DOI: 10.1002/we. 2139 (cited on pages 190, 354).
      [78] Wind Power in China. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 6. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
      org/wiki/Wind_power_in_China (cited on page 191).
      
      416
      [79] Wind Power in the United States. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 6. 2020. URL: https://en.
      wikipedia.org/wiki/Wind_power_in_the_United_States (cited on page 191).
      [80] Wind Power in Germany. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 6. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
      org/wiki/Wind_power_in_Germany (cited on page 191).
      [81] Wind Power in India. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 6. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
      org/wiki/Wind_power_in_India (cited on page 191).
      [82] Wind Power in Spain. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 6. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
      org/wiki/Wind power in Spain (cited on page 191).
      [83] Wind Power in the United Kingdom. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 6. 2020. URL: https: //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wind_power_in_the_United_Kingdom (cited on page 191).
      [84] Wind power by country. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 6. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
      org/wiki/Wind_power_by_country (cited on page 191).
      [85] U.S. Energy Inform. Admin. Electric power monthly. Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 5. 2020. URL:
      https://www.eia.gov/electricity/monthly/ (cited on pages 191, 215, 279, 426).
      [86] Shockley-Queisser Limit. Wikipedia. Accessed 2021 Jan. 17. 2021. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
      org/wiki/Shockley-Queisser_limit (cited on page 204).
      [87] M Sengupta et al. "The National Solar Radiation Data Base (NSRDB)". In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 89 (June 2018). https://www.nrel.gov/gis/solar.html, pp. 51-60. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2018.03.003 (cited on pages 207-209).
      [88] National Renewable Energy Lab. Solar Radiation Data Manual for Flat-Plate and Concentrating Collectors. Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 7. 1994. URL: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/legosti/ old/5607.pdf (cited on pages 210, 214, 224).
      [89] National Renewable Energy Lab. Solar Installed System Cost Analysis. National Renewable Energy Lab: online. Accessed 2021 Feb. 18. 2021. URL: https://www.nrel.gov/solar/solar- installed-system-cost.html (cited on pages 211, 215, 256, 267).
      [90] TW Murphy. "Home photovoltaic systems for physicists". In: Physics Today 61.7 (July 2008),
      pp. 42-46. DOI: 10.1063/1.2963010 (cited on page 213).
      [91] R Fu, D Feldman, and R Margolis. U.S. Solar Photovoltaic System Cost Benchmark: Q1 2018. National Renewable Energy Lab: online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 7. Nov. 2018. URL: https: //www.nrel.gov/docs/fy19osti/72399.pdf (cited on pages 215, 355).
      [92] Solar power by country. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 8. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
      org/wiki/Solar_power_by_country (cited on page 217).
      [93] International Energy Admin. Solar PV. Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 8. 2019. URL: https:
      //www.iea.org/reports/solar-pv (cited on page 217).
      [94] E Elhacham et al. "Global human-made mass exceeds all living biomass". In: Nature (Dec.
      2020). DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-3010-5 (cited on page 229).
      [95] CAS Hall, J G Lambert, and S B Balogh. "EROI of different fuels and the implications for society". In: Energy Policy 64 (2014), pp. 141-152. DOI: 10.1016/j.enpol.2013.05.049 (cited on page 232).
      [96] M Inman. "How to Measure the True Cost of Fossil Fuels". In: Scientific American (Apr. 2013). https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-to-measure-true-cost- fossil-
      fuels/ (cited on page 232).
      
      417
      [97] DA Pfeiffer. Eating Fossil Fuels. https://newsociety.com/books/e/eating-fossil-fuels.
      New Society Press, Oct. 2006 (cited on pages 234, 339).
      [98] D Pimentel and T Patzek. "Ethanol production using corn, switchgrass, and wood; biodiesel production using soybean and sunflower". In: Natural Resources Research 14 (2005), pp. 65–76. DOI: 10.1007/s11053-005-4679-8 (cited on page 234).
      [99] DJ Murphy et al. "Order from Chaos: A Preliminary Protocol for Determining the EROI of Fuels". In: Sustainability 3.10 (2011), pp. 1888-1907. DOI: 10.3390/su3101888 (cited on page 234).
      [100] MG Saad et al. "Algal Biofuels: Current Status and Key Challenges". In: Energies 12.10 (2019),
      p. 1920. DOI: 10.3390/en12101920 (cited on page 235).
      [101] Nuclear power by country. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 13. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
      org/wiki/Nuclear_power_by_country (cited on page 256).
      [102] Union of Concerned Scientists. The Cost of Nuclear Power. Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 13. Dec.
2015. URL: https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/nuclear-power-cost (cited on page 256).
      [103] List of Countries by Uranium Reserves. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Nov. 24. 2020. URL: https: //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_uranium_reserves (cited on page 257).
      [104] Pew Research. "Elaborating on the Views of AAAS Scientists, Issue by Issue". In: (July 2015). https://www.pewresearch.org/science/2015/07/23/elaborating-on-the-views-of- aaas-scientists-issue-by-issue/ Accessed 2020 Dec. 13 (cited on page 264).
      [105] L Zyga. Why nuclear power will never supply the world's energy needs. Online: PhysOrg. 2011. URL: https://phys.org/news/2011-05-nuclear-power-world- energy. html (cited on page 269).
      [106] H Johnston. Radioactive decay accounts for half of Earth's heat. Online. Accessed 2020 Nov. 24. 2011. URL: https://physicsworld.com/a/radioactive-decay-accounts-for-half-of-earths- heat/ (cited on page 275).
      [107] Intern'l Renewable Energy Agency. Renewable Energy Statistics 2018. Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 14. July 2018. URL: https://www.irena.org/publications/2018/Jul/Renewable - Energy - Statistics-2018 (cited on page 279).
      [108] Geothermal Heating. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 14. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
      org/wiki/Geothermal heating (cited on page 279).
      [109] Geothermal Power. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 14. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/
      wiki/Geothermal power (cited on page 279).
      [110] Volkswagen. Hydrogen or battery? A clear case, until further notice. Online. Accessed 2021 Feb. 5. Nov. 2019. URL: https://www.volkswagenag.com/en/news/stories/2019/08/hydrogen- or-battery--that-is-the-question.html (cited on page 286).
      [111] TW Murphy. "Beyond Fossil Fuels: Assessing Energy Alternatives". In: State of the World 2013: Is Sustainability Possible? Ed. by The Worldwatch Institute. Island Press, 2013. Chap. 15, pp. 172-183 (cited on page 289).
      [112] WF Pickard. "A Nation-Sized Battery?" In: Energy Policy 45 (June 2012), pp. 263–267. DOI:
      10.1016/j.enpol.2012.02.027 (cited on page 294).
      [113] E S Andreiadis et al. "Artificial Photosynthesis: From Molecular Catalysts for Light-driven Water Splitting to Photoelectrochemical Cells". In: Photochemistry and Photobiology 87.5 (2011), pp. 946-964. DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-1097.2011.00966.x (cited on page 295).
      
      418
      [114] Humanmetrics. Jung Typology Test. Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 17. URL: https://www.
      humanmetrics.com/cgi-win/jtypes2.asp (cited on page 305).
      [115] 16Personalities. Personality Types; NERIS Analytics Limited. Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 17. URL:
      https://www.16personalities.com/personality-types (cited on page 305).
      [116] Truity. Myers & Briggs 16 Personality Types. Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 17. URL: https:
      //www.truity.com/personality-type (cited on page 305).
      [117] Myers & Briggs Foundation. How Frequent Is My Type? Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 17. 2002. URL: https://www.myersbriggs.org/my-mbti-personality-type/my-mbti- results/how- frequent-is-my-type.htm (cited on page 306).
      [118] CS Weiler, J K Keller, and C Olex. "Personality type differences bet. Ph.D. climate researchers and the general public: implications for effective communication". In: Climate Change 112 (May 2012), pp. 232-242. DOI: 10.1007/s10584-011-0205-7 (cited on page 307).
      [119] Fermi Paradox. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 17. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/
      wiki/Fermi_paradox (cited on page 312).
      [120] Drake Equation. Wikipedia. Accessed 2020 Dec. 17. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/
      wiki/Drake_equation (cited on page 312).
      [121] YM Bar-On, R Phillips, and R Milo. "The biomass distribution on Earth". In: Proceedings of
      the National Academy of Sciences 115.25 (2018), pp. 6506-6511. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1711842115 (cited on page 316).
      [122] C Nunez. "Climate 101: Ozone Depletion". In: National Geographic Online (Apr. 2019). https: //www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/global-warming/ozone depletion/ Ac-
      cessed 2020 Dec. 18 (cited on page 320).
-
[123] HE Daly and J Farley. Ecological Economics: Principles and Applications, Second Edition. Island
Press, 2011 (cited on page 323).
[124] H Daly. "A Steady-State Economy". In: UK Sustainable Development Commission (Apr. 2008). http://www.pym.org/eco-justice- collaborative/wp-content/uploads/sites/58/ 2016/05/DalyteadyStateEconomy.pdf Accesses 2020 Dec. 22 (cited on page 325).
[125] SA Chang. Moving Toward a Steady State Economy. New York Society of Security Analysts: online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 18. Apr. 2010. URL: https://post.nyssa.org/nyssa-news/2010/ 04/moving-toward-a-steadystate-economy.html (cited on page 325).
[126] Nuclear Energy institute. State Electricity Generation Fuel Shares. Online. Accessed 2020 Dec. 19. 2019. URL: https://www.nei. org/resources / statistics/state- electricity - generation-fuel-shares (cited on page 335).
[127] G Eshel and P A Martin. "Diet, Energy, and Global Warming". In: Earth Interactions 10.9 (Apr.
2006), pp. 1-17. DOI: 10.1175/EI167.1 (cited on pages 339, 341).
[128] D Pimentel and M H Pimentel. Food, Energy, and Society. https://www.routledge.com/Food- Energy-and-Society/Pimentel - Pimentel/p/book/9780367388539. CRC Press, 2007 (cited
on page 339).
[129] S Sripad and V Viswanathan. "Performance Metrics Required of Next-Generation Batteries to Make a Practical Electric Semi Truck". In: ACS Energy Letters 2.7 (2017), pp. 1669-1673. DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.7b00432 (cited on page 400).


## Glossary
AC
AER
alternating current. 77, 215
Annual Energy Review. 102, 103, 105-107, 109, 170
alpha decay
(a) happens when a nucleus emits an alpha particle, otherwise known as a *He nucleus. 243, 422, 435
alpha particle
Amp
(a) is a *He (helium) nucleus, ejected from a larger nucleus in an alpha decay It therefore consists of two protons and two neutrons. 243, 245, 422
(A) is short for Ampere. 77, 293, 422, 425
Ampere
a.m.u.
(A, or Amp) is the SI unit of current, defined such that one Ampere is the same as one Coulomb per second (1 A 1C/s). 77, 422
=
atomic mass unit. 241, 246-248, 253, 254, 265, 376, 422, 432, 433, 435
Annual Energy Review
is compiled by the U.S. EIA, capturing energy use and trends for all sources and sectors [34]. 102, 170, 422
Astronomical Unit
(AU) is a unit of distance, equal to the average Earth-Sun distance of 149.6 million kilometers (1.496 x 1011 m). 56, 422
asymmetric risk
describes a condition where given the choice to pursue action B for fear of some future condition instead of the normal action A, the downside of being correct about the threat and not taking action B is far more disastrous than being wrong about the threat and pursuing route B unnecessarily. 345, 351
atomic mass unit
AU
(a.m.u.) is defined so that a single neutral carbon atom, consisting of 6 protons, 6 neutrons, and 6 electrons has exactly 12.00000 a.m.u. In other units, it is 931.4941 MeV or 1.66054 x 10-27 kg. This unit sometimes goes by the name: Dalton. 241, 376, 422, 433
Astronomical Unit. 56, 206, 420, 422
Avogadro's number
is NA = 6.022 x 1023, pertaining to one mole of particles (e.g., atoms, molecules). 375, 376, 381,
433
band gap
is the energy difference between the conduction band and the valence band, determining how much energy is needed to promote an electron out of an atom and into conduction. 203, 204, 223

422
barrel
(bbl) is a unit of volume used primarily for petroleum. It is exactly 42 U.S. gallons, amounting to 159 L of volume. A commonly used measure of energy is barrels of oil equivalent (b.o.e.), amounting to 6.1 GJ of combustion energy. 112, 120, 126, 129-131, 135, 141, 211, 266
beta decay
(B) happens when a nucleus emits either an electron (ẞ ̄) or a positron (B). 243, 245, 265, 435, 438
Betz limit
is a theoretical maximum amount of kinetic power that can be removed from wind without slowing the wind too much. It computes to 19/27, or 59%, and is independent of technology [71, 72]. 188, 189, 195
Big Bang
is the name given to the start of the universe, about 13.8 billion years in the past. 9, 55, 239, 257, 392, 394, 396
biofuel
describes a liquid chemical fuel derived from biologically grown plants: algae, sugar, corn, rapeseed, etc. The two most common forms are ethanol and biodiesel. 165, 227, 230, 231, 428
biomass
is a generic term for biological matter, but in the energy context usually means firewood or dung that may be burned for thermal energy. 170, 227, 229-231
birth rate
quantifies the number of births per 1,000 people per year, typically. Numbers tend to be in the 5-30 range. 38, 426
blackbody
is a term describing the radiative qualities for thermal emission of light (infrared radiation for "normal" temperatures, becoming visible for very hot objects). A perfect blackbody is not reflective (i.e., "black" at the wavelengths of interest) and emits energy as a function of wavelength according to the Planck spectrum. 145, 199-201, 203, 223, 434, 438
boiling water reactor
is a type of nuclear fission reactor in which water surrounding the fuel rods acts both as a moderator and as the means of transporting heat away from the nuclear fuel. 255, 256 Boltzmann constant
is a fundamental constant of nature associated with thermodynamics. In SI units, it has a value of kB = 1.38 x 10-23 J/K. 89, 199, 381
breeder reactor
is a nuclear fission reactor that transforms non-fissile nuclei into ones that are fissile by means of neutron capture and subsequent radioactive decay. 250, 262, 264, 296, 423
breeding
see breeder reactor. 259
British thermal unit
Btu
(Btu) is a unit of energy in the Imperial unit system, defined as the amount of energy required to heat one pound of water by 1°F. It is equivalent to 1,055 Joules. 75, 423, 427, 435, 437
is short for British thermal unit. 75, 97, 98, 335, 372, 423
Calorie
(Cal, or kcal) is a unit of energy, defined as the amount of energy required to heat one kilogram (1 kg, 1 L, 1,000 cm3) of water by 1°C. It is equivalent to 4,184 Joules, and is the exact same

423
thing as a kilocalorie. Note the capital C differentiates it from the calorie, which is 1,000 times smaller, making this the dumbest unit convention around, and strongly favoring the use of the equivalent kcal instead. 73
calorie
(cal) is a unit of energy, defined as the amount of energy required to heat one gram (1 g, 1 mL, 1 cm3) of water by 1°C. It is equivalent to 4.184 Joules. 73, 85, 177, 194, 424, 431
capacity factor
is the fraction of energy delivered by an installation compared to what it would deliver if operating continuously at peak operating ("nameplate") capacity. 176, 179, 180, 182, 183, 190, 191, 196, 212, 216, 217, 226, 256, 267, 279, 281, 282, 288
caprock
is a geological feature of impermeable rock that can trap oil, gas, or steam below it. 120, 278 carrying capacity
CFL
refers to the limiting population that can be supported long-term by the environment. No consensus exists for Earth's carrying capacity for humans, though standards of living have a large influence. 34, 432
compact fluorescent light. 21
chain reaction
charge
is a self-feeding process that keeps itself going. In the context of nuclear fission, neutrons released by the fission precipitate the next fission event, and so on. 251, 252, 255, 262, 425, 432
is a measure of the degree to which a particle or object is influenced by electromotive forces. Electric charge can be positive or negative, so that like charges repel and opposites attract. The unit for electric charge is the Coulomb. 77, 240, 241, 246, 395, 425, 427, 429, 433 Chart of the Nuclides
is a Periodic Table on steroids, listing the properties of every known nuclide including mass or energy, abundance (if stable), half life (if unstable), decay mode, neutron cross section, nuclear spin, and other salient properties; see https://people.physics.anu.edu.au/-ecs103/chart/. 240-242, 244, 245, 248, 251, 253, 259, 266, 270
chemical energy
is energy stored in chemical bonds, like gasoline or wood that might be burned, or in the food we eat. 70, 117, 121, 182, 227, 228, 234, 379, 395, 396
climate sensitivity parameter
relates a change in radiative forcing to the net temperature change once all the feedback mechanisms have acted. The units are °C per W/m2, and a typical value is 0.8. 147, 160 coefficient of performance
(COP) refers to the energy gain by a heat pump, usually in the context of heating rather than cooling. It is identical to Ɛheat, as defined in Eq. 6.11 (p. 95). 97, 425
compound
describes a particular combination of elements that construct a particular molecule. For instance, H2O is the compound we know as water. 376, 379, 432 concentrated solar
power
(CSP) refers to a form of solar thermal (ST) energy, employing troughs or "power towers" or any technique that focuses solar power to create high temperatures, often then used to generate electricity. 220, 425, 436

424
conduction band
is the energy level a step up from that of electrons in the valence band. Electrons in the conduction band are very loosely bound and freely wander about the crystal, hopping from one atom to the next, and therefore able to contribute to a current. 202, 203, 422, 435, 438
confinement
in the context of fusion refers to the trapping and holding of a high-temperature plasma, usually by magnetic means. 265
conservation of energy
says that energy is never created or destroyed, only shifting from one form to another. 70, 91-93, 95, 246, 393, 394, 425
conservation of mass-energy
extends conservation of energy to include mass, so that the combined mass-plus-energy of a closed system is never created or destroyed, only shifting from one form to another (mass-energy exchange via E = mc2). 246
control rod
COP
is used in a nuclear fission reactor to absorb neutrons so that the chain reaction does not get out of control and cause a meltdown. 251, 255, 256, 432
coefficient of performance. 97, 99, 335, 424
Coulomb
(C) is the SI unit of electric charge. An electron has a charge of -1.6 x 10-19 C and a proton has a charge of +1.6 × 10-19 C. 77, 422, 424, 427
coupled
refers to the tight connection often seen between energy/resource use and economic scale (as measured, for instance, by GDP). 18, 425
critical mass
CSP
is the mass of fissile material (assumed to be in spherical form) above which a self-sustained chain reaction will occur. Below this, the material poses no danger. Right at critical mass, the material will limp along in a slow chain reaction. Above this threshold-super-critical-an exponential runaway detonation will occur, and is the basis of nuclear weapons. For 235U, critical mass is 52 kg (a bit smaller than a volleyball), and for 239Pu, it is 10 kg, and about the
size of an American softball. 262
concentrated solar power. 220, 424, 436
current
is a measure of charge flow, expressed in the SI unit of Amps. 77, 85, 202, 203, 205, 422, 425, 436
D-D fusion
uses deuterons (2H nuclei) as the fuel for fusion, achieving an energy density of 137 million kcal/g. 265
death rate
quantifies the number of deaths per 1,000 people per year, typically. Numbers tend to be in the 5-30 range. 38, 426
decay chain
refers to a consecutive series of radioactive decays. 244, 245
decoupling
is the notion that economic activities need not incur a large energy or resource cost, breaking the tendency for economic scale to be tightly coupled to physical goods. 20

425
demographic transition
refers to the process in which an undeveloped country initially having high birth rate and high death rate transitions to low death rates followed by low birth rates as medical and resource conditions improve. 39, 44
deuterium
is an isotope of hydrogen, in which the nucleus (called a deuteron) contains one proton and one neutron. 248, 265, 266, 272, 274, 299, 426
deuteron
is the nucleus of deuterium, consisting of one proton and one neutron. 265, 425, 426 dietary energy factor
is the quantitative energy impact of a set of dietary choices compared to a vegetarian diet. A typical American diet has a dietary energy factor around 2, meaning it takes twice as much energy as would a vegetarian diet. This term is not in universal use. 339-341, 349, 428 differential equation
is an equation that relates functions and their derivatives. The subject is often sequenced after calculus within a curriculum. 33, 34
doping
is a process by which deliberate impurities are introduced into a semiconductor in order to change its properties with respect to transport of electrons or holes. 202, 431
doubling time
is how long it takes a system or collection to double its amount under conditions of growth, such as in exponential growth. See also the rule of 70. 2, 6, 23, 31, 32, 405
D-T fusion
combines a deuteron (2H nucleus) and a triton (3H) as the fuel for fusion, achieving an energy density of 81 million kcal/g. 265, 267
duty cycle
refers to the percentage of time something is "active." For example, a refrigerator may be on 40% of the time to maintain internal temperature, in which case its duty cycle is 40%. 88, 334
Ecological Economics
EER
EIA
is a field that builds economic theory on top of the notion that the planet offers finite resources and flows. A principle aim is that of a steady-state economy capable of indefinite planetary compatibility. 323, 324
energy efficiency ratio. 97-99, 427, 430
Energy Information Administration. 7, 75, 102, 103, 106, 107, 131, 170, 215, 422, 426 Electric Power Monthly
(EPM) is compiled by the U.S. EIA, capturing electricity production and usage at the state level from all energy sources [85]. 215, 427
electromagnetic radiation
refers to any transport of energy by electromagnetic waves, which include light, ultraviolet, infrared, X-rays, microwaves, gamma rays, and radio waves. 10, 198, 397, 426, 431, 435 electromagnetic spectrum
refers to the sweep of wavelengths or frequencies of electromagnetic radiation, including light, ultraviolet, infrared, X-rays, microwaves, gamma rays, and radio waves. 79, 392

426
electron
is a fundamental particle typically found in the outer parts of atoms, surrounding the nucleus. Electrons have negative charge equal and opposite to that of protons, but are 1,836 times lighter than the proton, at 0.511 MeV. 77, 78, 198, 202, 239, 244, 245, 255, 395, 422, 423, 425, 426, 429, 430, 433-435, 438
electron-volt
(eV) is a unit of energy, defined as the energy (work) it takes to push a charge of one fundamental charge unit (see entry for Coulomb) through an electric potential of one Volt. 1 eV is equivalent to 1.6 x 10-19 Joules. 78, 198, 223, 248, 428, 432
element
pertains to a single atom on the Periodic Table. For instance, hydrogen, helium, and carbon are all elements. 376, 379, 424, 432
energy
is defined as the capacity to do work. The SI unit is the Joule. 68, 73, 77, 174, 334, 379, 423-425, 427, 431, 434, 437, 438
energy density
describes how concentrated energy is in a substance, quantified as energy per unit mass. In chemical contexts, anything around 10 kcal/g or higher is considered energy-dense, while substances at about 1 kcal/g or lower are poor. Carbohydrates and proteins are middling, around 4 kcal/g, while fat is 9 kcal/g, and therefore among the more energy-dense substances. 121, 122, 175, 228, 230, 231, 236, 237, 254, 256, 264, 277, 290, 380, 398, 425, 426, 428 energy efficiency ratio
(EER) refers to the energy gain by a heat pump, usually in the context of cooling rather than heating. Its units are odd, defining how many British thermal units (thermal energy) may be moved per Watt-hour of input energy, but relating to Ecool (defined in Eq. 6.10 (p. 95)) by a simple numerical factor: EER = 3.41&cool. Sometimes seen as SEER to represent a seasonal average EER value. 97, 98, 426
energy intensity
measures the energy use of a society relative to its economic scale. A typical value may be about 5 MJ/$. 19, 336
energy trap
refers to a phenomenon in which energy shortage motivates aggressive pursuit of alternative energy schemes, but that pursuit requires substantial energy investment-forcing an even more acute but voluntary energy shortage, which is politically difficult. 132, 301, 310, 311
enriched
see enrichment. 258, 262
enrichment
refers to the process of increasing the concentration of a particular isotope within a sample of an element. Usually, this term is applied to the concentration of 235U from its natural 0.72% to 3-5% for power plants or >20% (typically ~85%) for weapons. 258, 427
entropy
is a measure of how many ways a system can be configured for some fixed energy level. The entropy of a closed system cannot decrease. 90, 396, 420
Environmental Economics
EPM
is an offshoot of neo-classical economics that adds a layer of pricing to capture "externalities," or environmental costs not normally included in market price. 323
Electric Power Monthly. 215, 426

427
EROEI
Energy Returned on Energy Invested: a measure of how profitable an energy source is in terms of energy, expressed as a ratio. For instance, a 9:1 EROEI means 9 units were extracted or produced for an investment of 1 unit, leaving a net gain of 8 units of energy. 1:1 is break-even, deriving no net energy benefit. 231, 235, 236, 278, 295, 297, 301, 302, 310, 311, 315, 339 estimated total resource
is an educated extrapolation of proven reserves trying to characterize the amount of resource that may be ultimately found and extracted. 127, 131, 258
ethanol
eV
(C2H5OH) is a liquid alcohol frequently produced as a biofuel having an energy density of ~7 kcal/g. 108, 230, 297, 377, 423
electron-volt. 198, 203, 248, 427, 432
exponential growth
happens when the rate of growth-as a percentage or fraction-is constant. 2, 4, 31, 33, 61, 319, 426, 434
feedback
is the response of a system when a change is made that itself influences the change: either counteracting it as in negative feedback or amplifying it as in positive feedback. 145, 147, 424
fill factor
fissile
is a generic term describing the fraction of total area occupied. For instance a polka-dot pattern of circles on a piece of fabric might have a fill factor of 15%. 189
describes a nucleus that is prodded into fission by a (slow) thermal neutron. The three fissile nuclides of interest are 233U, 235U, and 239Pu. 255, 259, 262, 423, 425, 428
fission
is a nuclear process in which a heavy nucleus splits into two lighter nuclei. Only 233U, 235U, and 239Pu are usually considered as accessible nuclides that are fissile in the presence of slow (thermal) neutrons. 85, 239, 249, 264, 289, 296, 423-425, 428, 432
flexitarianism
is the practice of pursuing dietary choices based on quantitative assessment of energy costs in an effort to keep the dietary energy factor low, without enforcing complete strictness, enjoying the occasional deviation on special occasions or just to avoid being a pain to others. 342
fossil fuel
refers to an energy source buried in the ground, in the form of coal (solid), petroleum (liquid), or natural gas (gaseous). Fossil fuels represent ancient solar energy captured in living matter, processed and stored underground over millions of years. 7, 22, 27, 31, 61, 103, 104
fracking
is slang for hydraulic fracturing, a technique used to extract "tight" oil and gas resources locked up in less permeable rock formations. High-pressure fluids are used to create cracks in the rock that the allow oil and/or gas to flow. 120, 124, 128, 130, 232
frequency
characterizes the number of cycles per second in a periodic phenomenon (often in wave phenomena). The units are Hertz, or 1/s. 79, 198, 426, 430, 434, 436
fuel rod
is a long cylinder having a high-enough concentration of fissile material to be used in a nuclear fission reactor. 255, 256, 260, 263, 272, 423

428
fusion
galaxy
is a nuclear process in which two light nuclei merge to form a larger nucleus. Repulsion of the charges in the nuclei make it exceedingly hard to achieve, requiring temperatures of many millions of degrees. 85, 239, 249, 265, 289, 299, 395, 425, 426, 437
is a collection of stars held together by mutual gravitational attraction, generally numbering in the billions of stars. 9, 54, 55, 312, 394, 438
gamma decay
(y) is when a nucleus in an energetically excited state emits a high-energy photon. 244, 429, 435
gamma ray
GDP
(y) is a high-energy photon, as may be generated by a gamma decay or by annihilation of an electron and positron. 244, 251, 255, 434, 435
Gross Domestic Product, effectively representing the total monetary flow of goods and services within a society, typically over a one year period. 18, 24, 39, 425 generator
converts mechanical motion (rotation, typically) into electrical current, generally by the relative motion of wire loops and a strong magnetic field. 89, 99, 164, 165, 175, 184, 185, 190, 250, 279, 280, 282, 285, 430, 436
geothermal
GHG
Gppl
refers to thermal energy within the earth, both from the original heat of formation and from radioactive decay. 85, 99, 108, 166, 275
greenhouse gas. 146, 151, 152, 155, 160, 161, 429
is a short-hand unit for giga-people, or billion people. 32, 37
gravitational potential energy
is the energy stored in a mass, m, lifted a height, h, above some reference in the presence of gravity, g≈ 10 m/s2. The energy amounts to mgh, and will be in Joules if the inputs are in kg, m, and s. 66, 69, 70, 77, 89, 167, 173, 174, 177, 184, 275, 280, 283, 395, 396, 438
Green Revolution
refers to the modernization of agricultural practices worldwide beginning around 1950, when fossil fuels transformed both fertilization and mechanization. 31, 37, 123, 124, 234
greenhouse gas
(GHG) absorbs infrared radiation and acts as a thermal blanket in a planetary atmosphere. H2O, CO2, 03, and CH4 are powerful greenhouse gases. 11, 12, 144-146, 151, 429
grid tied
refers to a photovoltaic system connected to the local electrical utility grid, enabling export of solar production by day and use of utility electricity by night. 213, 222
half life
is the time after which half a sample of radioactive nuclei will have undergone radioactive decay. After N half-life periods, the remaining fraction will be 1/2N. 242, 243, 257, 259, 261, 262, 270, 276, 424, 435
heat capacity
is the amount of energy it takes to raise an object's temperature by 1°C. The specific heat capacity is the heat capacity divided by mass, becoming an intrinsic property of the material. Water's

429
specific heat capacity is 4,184 J/kg/°C, intimately tied to the definition of the kilocalorie. 74, 85, 99, 147, 153, 168, 194, 271, 277, 372, 401
heat engine
is a device that converts thermal energy into another form, usually mechanical motion. Auto- mobile engines are a common example, as are power plants that create steam from a thermal source that itself drives a turbine and generator. 89, 92, 165, 239, 267, 276, 277, 286, 294, 298, 348, 396, 433, 436.
heat loss rate
as used in this book is the power per AT (in °C) required to maintain a temperature differential. Units are W/°C, and typical houses might be a few hundred W/°C. 87, 99, 100, 334 heat of fusion
is the energy barrier associated with either forming (fusing) or melting a solid from a liquid. In the case of water (ice), the heat of fusion is 334 J per gram. 152, 153
heat of vaporization
is the energy barrier associated with turning a liquid into gas. In the case of water going to water vapor, the heat of vaporization is about 2,250 J per gram. 177
heat pump
is a device that moves thermal energy from a cold environment to a hotter one, against normal flow. Some energy input is required to drive this reverse flow, but thermodynamic principles permit a small amount of input energy to drive a larger amount of thermal energy transfer. 85, 95, 297, 335, 427, 430
heating seasonal performance factor
(HSPF) refers to the energy gain by a heat pump in the context of heating, but in the same units as the EER so that HSPF is COP times 3.41, numerically. 97, 98, 430
heavy oil
Hertz
refers to oil that is very viscous-closer to tar than to gasoline. Heavy oil is more difficult to extract, process, and obtain gasoline via refinement. 131
(Hz) is the SI unit for frequency, and is equivalent to cycles per second, or 1/s. 198, 428 hockey stick
hole
HSPF
HST
is a term used to describe plots that suddenly shoot up after a very long time of relative inaction. Plots of human population, atmospheric CO2, energy use, all tend to show this characteristic which resembles an exponential curve. 31, 115
in the context of semiconductors is the absence of an electron-or an electron vacancy. When another electron fills the hole, it leaves behind another hole, and it is as if the hole moved- effectively like a positive charge able to roam through the crystal. 202, 204, 426, 435
heating seasonal performance factor. 97-99, 430
Hubble Space Telescope. 59
hydrocarbon
is a chain of carbon and hydrogen atoms such as the alkanes (methane, ethane, propane, butane, octane, etc.) having chemical formula CnH2n+2, where n = 1 for methane, 2 for ethane, 8 for octane, etc. 119, 121, 131, 229, 436
hydrological cycle
is the solar-driven process by which evaporation of water from the surface (bodies of water or moist land) forms clouds, and the clouds deliver rain back to the surface. 166, 168, 177

430infrared radiation
is the property that all objects glow in light, or electromagnetic radiation. For objects that are not "red hot," the emission is invisible to the human eye, at longer wavelengths than the visible spectrum. The power radiated obeys the Stefan-Boltzmann law. 10, 84, 143, 147, 151, 161, 169, 396, 397, 423, 429, 435, 437
insolation
is the annual average solar flux reaching flat, level ground for a particular location. A typical number is 200 W/m2, but can range from half that at high latitudes to about 350 W/m2 for arid areas at lower latitudes. 168, 178, 189, 206-208, 228, 276, 285
inverse function
is a mathematical operation that "undoes" its counterpart, like the square root undoes the square, or the natural logarithm undoes the exponential. 5, 32, 367, 370
isotope
ISS
is what we call atoms that have various nuclear configurations for the same element. That is, variants of a nucleus having the same number of protons but differing numbers of neutrons, and therefore differing mass number. See also nuclide. 240, 242, 252, 261, 266, 296, 375, 376, 426, 433, 437
International Space Station. 58-60
Jevons paradox
Joule
is named after early economist William Stanley Jevons, and describes the backfire of efficiency improvements leading to increased usage of the associated resource due to greater demand for the more attractive, efficient technology. Also called the rebound effect. 23, 435
(J) is the SI unit of work or energy, and is equivalent to Newtons times meters (Nm), or kg m2/s2. 19, 69, 159, 309, 371, 420, 423, 424, 427, 429, 431, 432, 434, 435, 437, 438 junction
kcal
describes an interface between two semiconductors that have different doping. Junctions are the basis of photovoltaic, diodes, light emitting diodes (LEDs), transistors, and many light detectors. 202, 204
kilocalorie. 74, 85, 99, 118, 121, 122, 136, 140, 228-230, 233, 236, 237, 246, 253, 254, 258, 265, 277, 290, 334, 335, 339, 340, 380, 398, 423-428, 431
Kill-A-Watt
is the name of a relatively inexpensive device that can measure instantaneous power in Watts and accumulated energy in kWh of electrical appliances. The name is a pun on units. 334 kilocalorie
(kcal) is a unit of energy, equivalent to 1,000 calories, defined as the amount of energy required to heat one kilogram (1 kg, 1 L, 1,000 cm3) of water by 1°C. It is equivalent to 4,184 Joules. 73, 84, 254, 334, 339, 424, 430, 431
kilowatt-hour
(kWh) is a unit of energy, constructed as a power (kilowatts) times time (hours). It is equivalent to 3,600,000 Joules, or 3.6 MJ. 72, 159, 172, 209, 214, 226, 343, 401, 402, 432
kinetic energy
is the energy of motion, given by mo2 for a mass, m, at velocity, v. If input units are kg and m/s, the resulting unit will be Joules. 69-71, 89, 174, 184, 185, 223, 275, 282, 284, 395, 396, 437

431
kWh
kilowatt-hour. 76, 159, 214, 272, 334, 335, 337, 338, 342, 348, 398, 431, 438
LED
light emitting diode. 21, 29, 78, 83, 431
life-cycle CO2 emission
is an assessment of how much CO2 is released from an energy source when considering the entire enterprise—including manufacture/construction, operation, etc. See the Wikipedia page on List of life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions. 181, 194, 218, 221, 264
liquefied natural gas
LNG
(LNG) is cryogenically-cooled natural gas (methane) at -160°C that can be stored much more compactly than the gaseous form, making it suitable to transport. 432
liquefied natural gas. 121, 432
logistic
describes a mathematical model in which rate of growth depends on how close the population is to the carrying capacity. The resulting population curve over time is called the logistic function, or more informally, an S-curve. 34
macro-economics
concerns itself with the allocation of goods and services across the marketplace, optimizing supply and demand, aiming to minimize surplus or deficits. 323, 324, 433
mass number
(A) is simply the total number count of protons and neutrons (nucleons) in a nucleus. For example, a carbon atom having 6 protons and 6 neutrons has A = 12. 240, 431
meltdown
MeV
refers to a failure mode of nuclear fission reactors, in which the chain reaction becomes uncontrolled due to too many neutrons triggering new fission events (as may happen if control rods are absent or insufficiently deployed). 262, 263, 425
is a mega-electron-volt, or 106 eV. In Joules, it is equivalent to 1.6 x 10-13 J. Nuclear masses are often expressed in MeV/c2 terms, where 1 a.m.u. is equivalent to 931.4941 MeV. 78, 246-248, 253, 265, 422, 427, 433, 435
micro-economics
concerns itself with the production of goods, including raw resources, marketing, and distribu- tion. 323, 324, 433
micron
(um) is 10-6 meters, or a micro-meter. 198, 200, 438 moderator
in the context of nuclear fission is a material used to slow down neutrons speeding out from the break-up so that they can become thermal neutrons and stimulate subsequent fission events in a chain reaction. Light atoms like water are a good choice for absorbing the neutron impacts. 251, 255, 256, 423
molar mass
is the mass of one mole of an element or compound. The molar mass for carbon, for instance, is 12 grams. The number is often found on a Periodic Table, in addition to the proton number for the element. 121, 138, 241, 379, 380

432
mole
is a number of atoms or molecules, tuned so that one mole of the carbon-12 isotope is exactly 12.000 grams. It takes 6.022 × 1023 atoms for this to happen, which is called Avogadro's number. 78, 83, 375, 376, 378, 422, 432
negative feedback
involves a reaction to some stimulus in the direction opposite the stimulus, performing a corrective action and leading to stability. Systems in equilibrium must have negative feedback keeping them there. 33, 123, 147, 428, 433
neo-classical economics
is the prevailing economic regime practiced today, driven by supply and demand, fueled by growth, market investment, and focus on micro-economics and macro-economics. 323, 427
neutrino
is a fundamental particle associated with the weak nuclear force that has almost no mass, travels near the speed of light, and interacts so weakly with matter that it could pass through light-years of rock before being likely to hit anything. Neutrinos from the sun stream through our bodies constantly, day and night, since Earth is transparent to them. 243, 244, 438
neutron
is one of two basic building blocks of atomic nuclei, the other being the proton. Neutrons have no electric charge, and a mass of 939.565 MeV, or 1.008665 atomic mass unit (a.m.u.). Neutrons are made up of three quarks: 1 up and 2 down. 240, 243, 244, 255, 299, 375, 376, 395, 422-426, 428, 431-433, 435, 437, 438
Newton
(N) is the SI unit of force, and is equivalent to kg m/s2. 68, 371, 431, 438
nuclear binding energy
is the energy associated with the strong nuclear force that holds a nucleus together against charge repulsion. Typical levels are 8 MeV per nucleon. 247, 248
nuclear energy
derives from reconfiguring the nuclei of atoms, releasing tremendous thermal energy that can be harnessed in a heat engine. 103, 104, 239
nucleon
is either of the two building blocks of a nucleus, meaning that it is either a proton or a neutron. 240, 247, 248, 251, 376, 432, 433, 437
nucleus
is at the center of an atom, composed of protons and neutrons and spanning~ 10-15 m. The vast majority (99.97%) of an atom's mass is in the positively charged nucleus, which attracts a cloud of negative-charge electrons to complete the neutral atom. 239, 375, 376, 422, 423, 425-429, 431-433, 435, 437
nuclide
is any bound arrangement of protons and neutrons. Every nucleus of every isotope is one of the possible nuclides, designated, for instance as C12, C-12, or 12C. 240, 242, 243, 424, 428, 431, 435
overshoot
occurs when the negative feedback in a system is delayed. After surpassing the equilibrium, oscillation may ensue. 36
parts per million
(ppm) is a unit used to measure small contributions. One ppm is 0.0001%. 61, 139, 141, 434

433
parts per million by mass
(ppmm) is a parts per million measure in terms of fractional mass. For instance, a gram is is 1 ppmm of a metric ton (1,000 kg). 141, 258
parts per million by volume
(ppm) is a parts per million measure in terms of fractional volume occupied. For instance, a cubic millimeter (1 μm, or micro-liter) is 1 ppm, of a liter. 140-142
payback time
is how long it takes to recuperate an investment by removing a chronic cost. For example, spending $1,000 to no longer pay an annual $100 charge has a payback time of 10 years. 215, 226
photon
is the smallest indivisible particle of light: a minimum quantum packet of energy. Each photon has a well defined energy, which can also be expressed as a wavelength or frequency. 21, 70, 78, 79, 198, 199, 202, 227, 243, 244, 251, 394-396, 429
photosynthesis
is the process by which living matter captures sunlight and stores some of it as chemical energy. Effectively, it takes CO2 out of the atmosphere, combines the carbon with water to make sugars, releasing oxygen back into the air. 227, 395
photovoltaic
(PV) is a semiconductor technology by which light directly drives an electrical current by interacting with electrons in the material. 165, 197, 201, 217, 218, 239, 267, 289, 292, 315, 350, 429, 431, 435
Planck spectrum
describes a mathematically precise spectrum of light emission from a blackbody, fully defined by the temperature of the blackbody. 145, 199-201, 423, 436, 438
Planck's constant
is a fundamental constant of nature associated with quantum mechanics and the world of the
very
small. In SI units, its value is h = 6.626 x 10-34 J. s. 79, 198, 199
plasma
is a gas hot enough to strip electrons from atoms to create a highly-ionized medium, such as the gas comprising the sun. 265, 267, 268, 392, 393, 395, 425, 437
positive feedback
involves a reaction to some stimulus in the same direction as the stimulus, thus amplifying the effect. Positive feedback leads to an unstable, runaway process-like exponential growth. 33, 123, 147, 428
positron
power
ppm
is an elementary particle of anti-matter, and specifically an anti-electron, having the same mass and opposite charge as the electron and will annihilate with an electron into gamma rays. 243-245, 255, 423, 429
is the rate of energy, or change in energy per change in time. The units are Joules per second (J/s), or Watts (W). 7, 10, 11, 30, 43, 71, 73, 77, 86, 110, 118, 146, 151, 171, 176, 187, 205, 280, 334, 335, 368, 373, 431, 435-438
parts per million. 61, 139, 141, 433, 437 predicament
describes a seemingly intractable situation: more than a problem, but possibly a tangled set of interconnected problems. Predicaments require responses rather than tidy solutions. 332, 436

434
proliferation
is used to describe widespread distribution of dangerous nuclear materials, which becomes difficult to control if they exist in abundance due to increased reliance on nuclear energy. 239, 260, 262, 264, 269, 296, 297
proton
is one of two basic building blocks of atomic nuclei, the other being the neutron. Protons have positive charge, equal and opposite to that of the electron. Protons have a mass of 938.272 MeV, or 1.0072765 a.m.u.. Protons are made up of three quarks: 2 up and 1 down. 77, 240, 243, 244, 375, 376, 395, 422, 425-427, 431-433, 437, 438
proven reserve
PV
qBtu
pertains to the amount of resource known to exist, having been discovered and surveyed to estimate the economically recoverable amount. 126, 127, 131, 257, 258, 267, 269, 428
photovoltaic. 165, 197, 201, 205, 217, 220, 221, 267, 269, 281, 292, 293, 434
is short for a quadrillion (1015) British thermal units, and is equivalent to 1.055 x 1018 Joules. 28, 75, 103-105, 170, 214, 229, 230, 234, 236, 277
R/P ratio
or reserves-to-production ratio is a means to assess time remaining for a resource of quantity R units, being used (produced) at a rate of P units per year. The result is years available at the present rate, absent discovery of additional resources or change in rate of use. 126, 129, 131, 133, 136, 267
radiation
is a broad term that can can describe light (e.g., electromagnetic radiation, infrared radiation, gamma rays) or particles from radioactive decay or cosmic origin. High-energy radiation of any form can cause damage to materials and biological tissues (DNA being perhaps most critical). 263
radiative forcing
is used to describe the areal power (in W/m2) of absorbed solar energy and infrared radiation to space. In equilibrium, a balance exists so that the net radiative forcing is zero. 146, 147, 151–153, 155, 160, 424
radioactive
describes a nucleus, or nuclide that is unstable and will undergo radioactive decay with some half life. 241, 257, 260, 261, 263, 268, 276, 296, 297, 299, 429
radioactive decay
involves a change in the nucleus of an atom, most commonly in the form of alpha decay, beta decay, or gamma decay. 239, 242-244, 262, 275, 297, 423, 425, 429, 435, 437 rebound effect
describes the counterintuitive process by which efficiency improvements lead to greater use of the resource as the enhanced appeal and lower cost results in more widespread adoption and use. Also called the Jevons paradox. 23, 431
recombination
is when an electron in the conduction band of a semiconductor finds a vacancy (hole) for it to settle into. By disappearing from the conduction band, it is no longer available to contribute to current, and the energy it had becomes unrecoverable. 202, 204

435
refinement
is the process by which crude oil—as it comes out of the ground-is separated by approximate hydrocarbon chain length. In order of lighter/shorter to heavier/longer chains, crude oil yields propane and butane, gasoline (around octane), kerosene, diesel, heating oil, lubricating oil, and tar. 119, 430
renewable
forms of energy are not necessarily depleted by their use. In other words, the resource is replenished naturally at some rate. The sun will still shine and wind will still blow even if we harness some of the energy. Firewood will grow back, but at a limited rate. 103, 104, 106
response
is an appropriate reaction to a predicament, which may fall well short of a solution, but still represents a reasonable compromise approach. 332, 434
rule of 70
tells us that the time it will take a system or collection to double in size is 70 divided by the percentage growth rate. The time units depend on how the time over which percentage growth is expressed-like 2% per day or 2% per year, for instance. The rule works most accurately for smaller growth rates, under 10%. 2, 5, 6, 28, 31, 405, 426
R-value
describes the thermal resistance, or insulating quality of a wall or similar barrier. It is an inverse to the U-value, numerically 5.7/U. Units are °F -ft2 hr/Btu, and larger numbers translate to better insulation. 87, 438
sea level rise
sector
is one of the inevitable consequences of climate change, as land-bound ice melts and ocean water thermally expands. 151, 155
refers to a domain of activity, typically dividing into residential, commercial, industrial, and transportation. 104, 165, 193, 337
semiconductor
SI
is a material poised between being a good conductor of electrical current and an insulator (not passing current). Silicon is the most commonly used semiconductor. 201, 202, 426, 430, 431, 435
Système International. 68, 71, 85, 88, 422, 423, 425, 427, 430, 431, 433, 434 solar constant
measures 1,360 W/m2, and is the power flux of the sun at the top of Earth's atmosphere. It is not technically a constant, but is very stable. 11, 144, 167, 203, 206, 211
solar system
refers to our own star, the sun, and the planets that surround it, including Earth. 54 solar thermal
(ST), also called concentrated solar power (CSP), typically refers to troughs or "power towers" or any technique that focuses solar power to create high temperatures, often then used to generate electricity via a heat engine and generator. 165, 197, 219, 221, 424, 436
spectrum
ST
describes a distribution, often associated with light. In this context, a light spectrum specifies how much light is present as a function of wavelength or frequency. The Planck spectrum is a good example. 145, 200, 434
solar thermal. 219-221, 269, 424, 436

436
Stefan-Boltzmann constant
(a) has a value of 5.67 x 10-8 W/m2/K4 and is used in the Stefan-Boltzmann law relating to infrared radiation. 10, 144, 199, 437
Stefan-Boltzmann law
says that the power emitted from a surface of area, A, and temperature, T will be P = AoT4, where σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. 10, 144, 199, 431, 437
stoichiometry
amounts to the counting of atoms and balancing formulas in chemical reactions to reflect the survival of every atom in a reaction: none created or destroyed. 377, 378
strong nuclear force
is the force that binds nucleons together in a nucleus, overcoming the electrical repulsion of protons. 240, 245, 247, 395, 433, 438
substitution
refers to interchangeability between goods and services, so that an unavailable or inferior resource can be replaced by an alternative, possibly superior one. 21
terraforming
is the speculative idea of transforming the atmosphere and environment of a planet hostile to human life into one that is suited to human needs. 60, 61
Therm
is a unit of energy defined as 100,000 British thermal units, and is equivalent to 1.055 × 108 Joules. 76, 335, 337, 348
thermal energy
is the energy of heat, and is really just randomized kinetic energy (motion) of atoms and molecules vibrating and zipping around. 70, 71, 84, 86, 89, 99, 165, 194, 203, 227, 246, 275, 277, 294, 334, 335, 373, 395, 396, 401, 420, 423, 427, 429, 430, 433
thermal equivalent
is a construct used to compare thermal energy sources like coal, oil, and natural gas to sources like solar, wind, and hydroelectricity, which do not derive from thermal sources. Usually in the context of electricity production, multiplying by about 2.7 puts non-thermal sources into thermal-equivalent terms. 106-108, 170, 256, 279
thermal expansion
describes how materials expand, or swell, as temperature increases. Typical rates of expansion are in the range of 5-100 ppm per °C. 155
thermal neutron
is a neutron whose kinetic energy (speed) is no greater than it would naturally possess based on the temperature of its surroundings. Sometimes it is called a "slow" neutron because it is not traveling faster than thermal jostling would establish. 250, 428, 432
tokamak
is the name of a donut-shaped chamber in which high-temperature plasma can be confined, and potentially used to generate fusion. 267
transmutation
describes the transformation of a nucleus into a different one, usually via neutron absorption- possibly followed by radioactive decay. 259, 268
tritium
is an isotope of hydrogen, in which the nucleus (called a triton) contains one proton and two neutrons. 265-268, 299, 438

437
triton
is the nucleus of tritium, consisting of one proton and two neutrons. 265, 426, 437 turbine
is essentially fan blades on a rotating shaft, which can be compelled to move by a flow of air, water, or steam through the blades. 89, 99, 164, 175, 185, 190, 250, 279, 280, 282, 295, 430
universe
refers to the entirety of our physical realm, including all galaxies. 9, 54, 55, 257, 312, 392, 423
U-value
describes the insulating quality of a wall or similar barrier, in terms of how many Watts move through each square meter of surface area for each 1°C difference in temperature across the barrier. Units are W/m2/°C, and smaller numbers mean better insulation. The U-value is an inverse measure to the R-value, numerically 5.7/R. 87, 436
valence band
Volt
is the energy level of outer electrons bound to an atom. Valance electrons stay home, as opposed to electrons in the conduction band. 203, 422, 425
(V) is a unit of voltage, or electric potential, and can be thought of as the electrical analog to gravitational potential energy, and is also somewhat like pressure in a fluid system. 77, 198, 427,
438
voltage
Watt
is a measure of electric potential energy, expressed in units of Volts. 77, 438
(W) is a unit of power, defined so that 1 W is 1J/s (one Joule per second). 7, 18, 21, 43, 71, 77, 118, 169, 196, 267, 309, 371, 431, 434, 438
watt-hour
(Wh) is a unit of energy, constructed as a power (watts) times time (hours). It is equivalent to 3,600 Joules, or 0.001 kWh. 73, 77, 97, 110, 176, 427, 438
wavelength
measures the length of a wave from crest to crest or trough to trough, and can apply to waves in water, air (sound), or electromagnetic waves (light). The symbol A (lambda) is often used to denote wavelength. The units are length (m), often expressed in microns (um). 79, 144, 198, 283, 394, 426, 431, 434, 436
weak nuclear force
Wh
joins gravity, electromagnetism, and the strong nuclear force as one of nature's four fundamental forces, responsible for beta decays and neutrino interactions. 244, 245, 433
watt-hour. 73, 97, 98, 110, 175, 176, 438
Wien law
work
describes the wavelength for which the Planck spectrum is at maximum brightness. It is roughly 2.9 mm divided by the blackbody temperature, in Kelvin. 199
is a mechanical expression of energy, defined as a force (Newtons) times distance (meters) through which the force acts (along the same direction). The resulting unit is the Joule. 68, 84, 89, 174, 248, 379, 427

## Greek Letters, with Pronunciation
Character Name
Character
Name
a, A
alpha AL-fuh
v, N
B, B
nu NEW
beta BAY-tuh
E'S
γ, Γ
xi KSIGH
gamma GAM-muh
0,
O
δ, Δ
delta DEL-tuh
π,
Π
€, ε, E
pi PIE
epsilon EP-suh-lon
P, P
C, Z
zeta ZAY-tuh
σ, Σ
7 H
eta AY-tuh
T,
T
0,0
theta THAY-tuh
υ, γ
L, I
iota eye-OH-tuh
omicron OM-uh-CRON
rho ROW
sigma SIG-muh
tau TOW (as in cow)
upsilon OOP-suh-LON
Φ, Φ
K, K
kappa KAP-uh
phi FEE, or FI (as in hi)
X,X
λ, Λ
lambda LAM-duh
chi KI (as in hi)
4,4
mu MEW
psi SIGH, or PSIGH
ω, Ω
omega oh-MAY-guh

## Notation
This list describes several symbols that are commonly used within the body of the book.
Speed of light in a vacuum inertial frame: 2.99792458 × 108 m/s ≈ 3 x 108 m/s
Ε Efficiency; typically 0 ≤ & ≤ 1; unitless
bo
acceleration due to gravity: 9.8 m/s2 or ~10 m/s2
Planck's constant: 6.626 × 10-34 J. S
h
KB
Boltzmann's constant: 1.38 x 10-23 J/K
ΝΑ
Avogadro's number: 6.022 × 1023 particles per mole
AQ
Change in thermal energy, in Joules
Re
Radius of Earth: 6,378 km
Ro
Radius of Sun: 695,700 km
reo
Earth-Sun distance (1 AU): 149.6 million km
σ
AS
Stefan-Boltzmann constant: 5.67 x 10-8 W/K/m2
Change in entropy, in J/K
AT
Change in temperature, typically in °C or Kelvin (K)
AW
Change in energy-work performed, in Joules
Scale Factor Prefixes
Factor Letter Prefix Factor Letter Prefix
10-2 10-18
-21
Z zepto 1021
Z zetta
a
atto
1018
E
exa
10-15
f
femto
1015
P
10-12
peta
P
pico 1012
T
tera
10-9
n
nano 109
G
10-6
giga
μ
micro 106
M
10-3
mega
m
milli
103
k
kilo

## Alphabetical Index
acid rain, 320
adaptation, see behavioral adaptation airplanes, 212, 290, 398
alternative energy, 106, 164-165, 165, 166
attributes, 290-294
comparison matrix, 293, 289–299 gap to fossil fuels, 126, 300
summary, 294-299
Antarctica, 140, 153, 156
asymmetric risk, 345, 345, 349
awareness, 328-330
backpacking, 60, 346
bacteria, 3, 411
barrels, oil, 120
Bartlett, Al, 2
battery
capacity, 78, 136, 175
energy density, 122, 277, 290
lifetime, 213, 215
behavioral adaptation, 332-343 attitude guidance, 333 energy principles, 334-337 flexibility, 344-346
quantitative energy, 337-343
Betz limit, 188
Big-5, see personality, Big-5 biofuels, 165, 230-235, 297
biodiesel, 234
EROEI, 234, 234-235, 295, 297 ethanol, 230-231, 297
from corn, 234, 234-235
pros
and cons, 235-236, 295 usage, 106, 108, 109, 230 biological energy, 165
photosynthesis, 167
biomass, 165, 229-230
firewood, 229
planetary scale, 229, 235 pros and cons, 235-236
usage, 106, 108, 109, 229
birth rate, see population, birth/death rate
buses, 400
capacity factor, 176
geothermal, 279
hydroelectric, 176, 180
nuclear, 256
solar, 217 tidal energy, 281 wind, 190, 191, 193 carrying capacity, 34 cars, 213, 400
cats, destroyers of sofas, 317 chemistry
chemical energy, 121, 379-380 ideal gas law, 89, 381-382
molecules, 377
moles, 375-376
periodic table, 375 reactions, 378
stoichiometry, 376-379
China's one-child policy, 47 climate change, 123, 138-158, 291
climate sensitivity parameter, 147 CO2 expectations, 140-143 CO2 measurements, 139-140 CO2 source, 138-139
CO2
CO2 spectrum, 145
consequences, 150-157 contributing countries, 143 feedback, 147
geo-engineering, 157 heating, 151-155
Kyoto Protocol, 139, 320
mitigating, 157-158
Paris Agreement, 139, 320
possible trajectories, 148–150
radiative forcing, 146, 146, 147, 151, 151
sea level rise, 155–157
warming mechanism, 143–147
atmospheric spectrum, 145
contributing countries, 143
conversion from power, 140, 141 expectations, 140-143

439
fossil fuel intensity, 138
historical emissions, 139, 142, 143
life cycle emissions, 181, 194, 218, 221,
264
measurements, 139-140
oceanic uptake, 142, 143
possible trajectories, 148-150
coal, see fossil fuels, coal
communication, 46-47, 310, 330-332
concentrated solar power, see solar thermal
Concorde, 22, 58
conservation, see behavioral adaptation cooling, 88, 95, 95, 98
COP (heat pump), 97
COVID-19 pandemic, 33, 351
current, see electrical, current
Daly, Herman, 322, 323
death rate, see population,birth/death rate
decoupling, 20-21, 23
deer, see logistic model, deer examples democracy, 309, 319, 330
demographic transition, 39, 38-46
benefits, 39, 40, 48
geography, 41-44
limitations, 41, 44-46, 48
population surge, 44-45
resource implications, 45
time sequence, 44
trajectory, 40
density
air, 185
energy, see energy density
water, 176
diet, see food
doubling time, see exponential, doubling
time
Dyson Sphere, 9
Earth energy budget, 11, 166, 167
Earth, cost of, 317
economic
decoupling, 20-21, 23
end of growth, 27 growth, 17, 24-27, 318-319
monopoly, 25
pioneers, 27
rabbits, 22, 124
regimes, 323, 322-325 services, 20
steady state, 324-325 substitution, 21
U.S. history, 18
EER (heat pump), 97-98
efficiency
electricity generation, 94, 104, 106, 170 geothermal, 276-277
heat engine, 94
heat pump, 95
human metabolism, 397
hydroelectricity, 175
lighting, 21
limits, 23
photosynthesis, 228-229
photovoltaics, 204
rebound, 23
solar thermal, 220
thermodynamic limits, 90-94
transportation, 402
wind energy, 188-189
Ehrlich, Paul, 32
EIA, see Energy Information Administration
electric transportation, 212, 290, 291,
electrical
397-402
current, 77, 202, 205
power, 76-78, 205
electricity, 165
generation efficiency, 94, 104, 106, 170
sector, 104
electron charge, 78
energy
chemical, 121, 227, 379-380
comparison matrix, 292, 293, 289–299
conservation of, 69, 69-71, 91, 246,
393-396
conservation principles, 334-337
conservation, quantitative, 337-343
definition, 68
efficiency, see efficiency
familiar scales, 69
food labels, 74, 81, 121, 380 forms, 70, 164
global scale, 7, 12, 168
global usage, 108-110
gravitational, 174, 173-175
2022 T. W. Murphy, Jr.; Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International Lic.; Freely available at: https://escholarship.org/uc/energy_ambitions.
440historical use, 7, 30, 107-111 kinetic, 184, 184-185
mass-energy, 246, 246-249 matrix, 289-299
mix, 106, 108
money analog, 70
sectors, 104
thermal, 71, 84-88, 396
thermal equivalent, 106, 170
trap, see energy trap trends, 107-111
U.S. usage, 7, 102-108, 110-111
units, see units
energy density, 118, 121, 121, 122, 122, 175, 254,
277, 290, 380, 398
Energy Information Administration, 7, 102
energy intensity, 18-21, 24
energy return on investment, see EROEI
energy trap, 132, 301, 310-311
entertainment, 54, 58, 330
entropy, 90, 91
arrow of time, 91
change, 92
Second Law, 91
equations, see formula hunting
EROEI, 231-235, 295, 310-311
estimates, 232, 234
food, 233
estimation, value of, 156, 186, 334 exponential, 2
absurdity, 9
bacteria, 3
doubling time, 2
energy extrapolation, 8
interest, 5
math, 4-6, 32
rule of 70, 2, 6
thermal extrapolation, 12
feedback
delay, 36
negative, 33, 36, 48, 50 positive, 33, 50
Fermi paradox, 312-313, 408 Feynman, Richard, 353
fireworks, v, 116, 120, 169
fission, see nuclear, fission
flexibility, see behavioral adaptation,
food
flexibility
diet choices, 341-342
dietary energy factor, 340
energy, 74, 81, 121, 380, 380
energy input, 123, 233, 339-341
flexitarianism, 342
formula hunting, v-vi, 74, 368 fossil fuels, 117-134, 292
blip, 115-116
case studies, 128-130 cheap, 122
chemical reactions, 121 coal, 117
discovery, 117, 128-130
finite nature, 115, 124, 126-130
food production, 123, 136, 233 fracking, 124, 128, 130
future prospects, 125–132
gap to alternatives, 126, 300
geology, 120, 128
geopolitics, 131
historical usage, 118, 140
key plot, 116
making more, 169
natural gas, 120
oil, see fossil fuels, petroleum
overview, 117
peak oil, 116, 129, 133
petroleum, 118
price control, 133
pros and cons, 125, 122-125, 292
R/P ratio, 126-129
reserves, 126, 127
running out, 133
share of energy, 106-111
superiority, 300
fracking, see fossil fuels, fracking
fusion, see nuclear, fusion
future
fossil fuels, see fossil fuels, future
prospects
hard to predict, 117, 126, 130, 404–408
GDP, 18
generator, 89, 175, 185, 250 geothermal

441
heat pump, 99, 297
geothermal energy, 165, 167, 275-280, 295 depletion mining, 277-278, 297 energy density, 277
origin, 275
practical implementation, 278-280, 295 production statistics, 279
sustainable harvest, 276-277, 297 usage, 106, 108
global energy scale, 7, 168
gravitational potential energy, 174, 173-175
weakness, 174-175
Greek letters, 421
Green Revolution, 31, 123, 124 greenhouse effect, 12, 144, 146, 151 greenhouse gases, 145, 146, 144-146, 151 Greenland, 140, 153, 156
growth, see also exponential
dependence upon, 318-319 historical, 7
limits to, 13
thermodynamic limits, 12
hair, collective, 284, 322
half life, see nucleus, radioactive decay, half
life
heat, 73-76
capacity, 85-86, 152 generation, 84-85
home heating, 86-88, 96, 334
loss rate (homes), 87
loss rate(homes), 334
of fusion, ice, 152
of vaporization, 177 R-value, 87
waste, 10, 84, 396-397
heat engine, 90, 92, 88-94
0 K limit, 94 efficiency, 93-94
heat pump, 95, 95-99
> 100% magic?, 96
COP, 97
EER, 97-98
efficiency, 95-97
geothermal, 99
HSPF, 98
historical growth, see growth, historical
hockey stick curve, 31, 115
hotting up, see climate change HSPF (heat pump), 98
Hubbert, M. King, 116, 130
human
adaptation, see behavioral adaptation awareness, 328-330
communication, 46-47, 310, 330-332 diet choices, 341-342
evolution, 58, 312, 318, 408-411
long term prospects, 117, 404-410 metabolism, 11, 72, 74, 104, 168, 397 personality, see personality
values, 343-344
hydroelectric power, 164, 173-181, 295
capacity factor, 176 dam concept, 175 efficiency, 176
global usage, 180
in the U.S., 106, 108, 109, 178-179
pros and cons, 180, 295 theoretical potential, 177–178 hydrogen fuel, 122, 286 hydrological cycle, 177
ice melt, 152, 153, 154, 156, 156, 156 ideal gas law, 89, 381-382
individual action, 309-310, 332-343
infrared radiation, 10, 145, 146, 143-146, 147
universality, 11
intensity, energy, 18-21, 24
interest, see exponential, interest inverse functions, 5, 370
Jevons paradox, 23
Jevons, William Stanley, 23
Keeling curve, 139, 139, 142, 142
Keeling, Dave, 139
kinetic energy, 184, 184-185
Las Vegas, 120, 169
light
energy, 79, 197-199
photons, 79, 198, 199
Planck spectrum, 200, 199-201
Wien law, 199
logarithm, 5
logarithmic plot, 7
logistic model, 33-35

442
caveats, 38
deer examples, 33-36
fit to data, 37 math, 33-34
overshoot, 35
MacKay, David, vii
Malthus, Thomas, 27
math refresher
areas and volumes, 362-363
equation manipulation, 369-370 formula hunting, 368 fractional powers, 366-367
fractions, 363-365
integer powers, 365-366
intuitive rules, 361-362
scientific notation, 367-368
units manipulation, 370-373 unnecessary precision, 359-361
Milky Way Galaxy, 9, 55, 312
mole, 78, 375-376
Mt. Everest, 58, 62
Myers-Briggs, see personality, Myers-Briggs
natural gas, see fossil fuels, natural gas notation, 420
nuclear
accidents, 263, 263
attitudes, 264
binding energy, 247, 249, 247-249 breeding, 259, 258-260, 296
cost, 256
fission, 165, 249-264, 296
accounting, 251-255 basics, 250-251
chain reaction, 251 plutonium, 259-260, 262 products, 250, 252, 253 pros and cons, 264, 296 thorium, 260, 296
uranium, 257, 257-258
fusion, 165, 167, 264-269, 299
cost, 267
deuterium, 266
fuel abundance, 266-267
hydrogen bomb, 266
ITER, 267
mindset, 267-268
NIF, 267
pros and cons, 268-269, 299 realities, 267-268
tritium, 266
waste, 268
implementations, 256
power plant, 250, 255, 255-257 proliferation, 262-263
radioactive waste, 261, 260-261
safety, 263, 263
strong force, 240, 245, 247
weak force, 245
weapons, 262-263, 266
nuclear energy, 106, 108
usage, 108, 109
nucleus, 240, 239-241
binding energy, 247, 249, 247-249
Chart of the Nuclides, 240, 241, 240-241,
242, 245, 259
labeling, 240
radioactive decay, 243, 244, 245, 242-245,
261 alpha, 243
beta, 244
gamma, 244
half life, 242
ocean currents, 165, 281-282, 298 oil, see fossil fuels, petroleum
oil prices, 132 overshoot, 35-38 ozone, 145, 320
pandemic, 33, 351
Passive House, 87, 219 peak oil, 116, 129, 133 periodic table, 375 personality, 304-308 Big-5, 305
Myers-Briggs, 306, 307, 305-307 petroleum, see fossil fuels, petroleum photons, 21, 79, 198, 199, 227, 394 photosynthesis, 227-229
efficiency, 228-229
mass origin, 228
potato example, 228
photovoltaics, 201-206, 294
I-V curve,
205
© 2022 T. W. Murphy, Jr.; Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International Lic.; Freely available at:
https://escholarship.org/uc/energy_ambitions.
443
capacity factor, 216, 217 cell structure, 202, 205 concept, 201-203 efficiency, 204
installations, 215-217
losses, 203, 204
panel tilt, 208, 208-210, 210
panels, 205-206
peak watts, 210
pros and cons, 217-218, 294
residential, see solar, residential
series vs. parallel, 205
theoretical efficiency, 204, 202-205
plan for the future, 27, 316
difficulties, 319-322
growth dependence, 318-319
lack of, 316-318
who would make?, 321-322
Planck spectrum, 199, 200
policy, 47-48, 309-310, 320
population
birth/death rate, 38, 39, 40
demographic transition, see demographic
transition
history, 31-32
one-child policy, 47
overshoot, 35-38
personal issues, 46-47
policy, 47-48
selfish?, 46
Tikopia, 47
power, 71-72
electrical, 76-78
power plant, 89, 90, 219, 250
predicament, 332
propane, 76, 335
R-value, 87
rabbits out of a hat, 22, 124
radioactive decay, see nucleus, radioactive
decay
rebound effect, 23
renewable energy, 106, 108, 109, 165, 169
salvation?, 116
share of total, 108-111
resource war, 132, 308
resources, physical, 17, 27
rule of 70, see exponential, rule of 70
Sagan, Carl, 54
scientific notation, 367-368
sea level rise, see climate change, sea level
ships, 399
solar
rise
batteries, 215
capacity factor, 216, 217
constant, 11, 167, 203, 206, 206, 211
cost, 211, 215
Earth budget, 11, 166, 167, 211
energy, 106, 108, 109, 165, 197, 211-213
/
full-sun-equivalent hours, 209
heating, 168
insolation, 168, 207, 206-210
intermittency, 211-212, 221
luminosity, 9, 206
photovoltaics, see photovoltaics
residential, 213–215
configurations, 213
sizing, 213-215
suitability, 212
thermal, see solar thermal
transportation?, 212
solar constant, 11, 167, 203, 206, 211
solar thermal, 218-221
space
concentration, 219
efficiency, 220
electricity generation, 219, 219–221, 294
installations, 220-221
passive heating, 218-219, 294
power tower, 220
pros and cons, 221, 294
trough plant, 220
accomplishments, 59
cosmic scales, 57
costs, 58
exploration's role, 61-63
like backpacking, 60 ocean comparison, 60 orbit heights, 59
other planets, 4
planet atmospheres, 61 scale, 54-58
scale factors, 55
Space Shuttle, 59, 62
student questions, 63

444
terraforming, 60 timeline, 59
travel times, 56 twenty one piløts, 62
unmet challenges, 60
speedometer analogy for kWh, 73 steady state economy, 26-27, 324-325 Stefan-Boltzmann
constant, 10, 199
law, 10, 144, 199
strong nuclear force, 240, 245, 247
substitution, 21-23
symbols, 420
temperature
absolute zero, 94
Celsius, 10, 73, 381
Fahrenheit, 10, 75
Kelvin, 10, 94, 381
terraforming, 60
thermal energy, 70, 84-88, 219, 277
geothermal, see geothermal
thermal equivalent, see energy, thermal
equivalent
thermodynamic growth limit, 12
tidal energy, 165, 166, 280, 280-281, 296,
402-404
capacity factor, 281
implementations, 281
Tikopia, 47, 316
transportation, 212, 230, 290-292, 337, 338,
397-402
trucks, 399
twenty one piløts, 62
uncertainty, see behavioral adaptation,
flexibility
units, 68-80
Ampere (A), 77
barrels, 120
British Thermal Unit (Btu), 75, 75-76
Calorie, see units, kilocalorie (kcal)
calorie (cal), 73, 73-75
Coulomb (C), 77
electron volt (eV), 78, 78
Joules (J), 68, 69
kilocalorie (kcal), 73, 73-75 kilowatt vs. kilowatt-hour, 73
kilowatt-hour (kWh), 72-73, 109, 335
speedometer analogy, 73 manipulation, 69, 370-373 Newton (N), 68, 69 prefixes, 72, 420
qBtu, or quads, 75, 104, 109 Therms, 76, 337 Volt (V), 76
Watt (W), 71-72
universe, 9, 55, 257, 312
Big Bang, 392, 394, 396 edge, 392-393
energy, 393-395
values, see human, values voltage, 76
war, see resource war
waste heat, see heat, waste
Watt, James, 118
wave energy, 165, 282-285, 298
derivation, 283-284
weak nuclear force, 245
Wien law, 199
wind energy, 164, 185-194, 295
Betz limit, 188
capacity factor, 190, 189-190, 193
derivation, 185-187
efficiency, 188, 188-189
estimated potential, 186, 193
installations, 191-192
intermittency, 190, 189-190
performance data, 190
potential (map), 186 power density, 189
pros and cons, 193-194, 295 spacing turbines, 189, 189 speed limits, 190, 190-191 turbines, 187-191
usage, 106, 108, 109
wolf, crying, 27, 351
horsepower (hp), 72, 185, 213
Y2K scare, 329, 351

445