---
title: 04 IR part4

---
<div class="Section1">

IV

1929-1938

(At the end of 1926, Sri Aurobindo withdrew completely, leaving the
material responsibility of the disciples and the growing Ashram to
Mother. Apart from three and later four yearly “darshans,” Sri Aurobindo
kept in external touch with the disciples through letters—thousands of
letters in which he tirelessly dealt with their questions or
difficulties or revolts.

This section consists mostly of excerpts from some of Sri Aurobindo's
letters.)

Undated

        Man is a transitional being; he is not final....

        The step from man to superman is the next approaching
achievement in the earth's evolution. It is inevitable because it is at
once the intention of the inner Spirit and the logic of Nature's
process....

        Supermanhood is not man climbed to his own natural zenith, not a
superior degree of human greatness, knowledge, power, intelligence,
will, character, genius, dynamic force, saintliness, love, purity or
perfection. Supermind is something beyond mental man and his limits; it
is a greater consciousness than the highest consciousness proper to
human nature.

        Man in himself is little more than an ambitious nothing. He is a
littleness that reaches to a wideness and a grandeur that are beyond
him, a dwarf enamoured of the heights. His mind is a dark ray in the
splendours of the universal Mind. His life is a striving, exulting,
suffering, an eager passion-tossed and sorrow-stricken or a blindly and
dumbly longing petty moment of the universal Life. His body is a
labouring perishable speck in the material universe. This cannot be the
end of the mysterious upward surge of Nature. There is something beyond,
something that mankind shall be.⁹²

\*

        The world is not either a creation of Maya or only a play,
*lila*, of the Divine, or a cycle of births in the ignorance from which
we have to escape, but a field of manifestation in which there is a
progressive evolution of the soul and the nature in Matter and from
Matter through Life and Mind to what is beyond Mind till it reaches the
complete revelation of Sachchidananda[\[1\]](#_ftn1) in life. It is this
that is the basis of \[Sri Aurobindo's\] Yoga and gives a new sense to
life.⁹³

\*\*\*

October 23, 1929

(From a letter to a Muslim disciple who started making violent demands
which he tried to justify on “religious” grounds.)

        You say that you ask only for the Truth and yet you speak like a
narrow and ignorant fanatic who refuses to believe in anything but the
religion in which he was born. All fanaticism is false, because it is a
contradiction of the very nature of God and of Truth. Truth cannot be
shut up in a single book, Bible or Veda or Koran, or in a single
religion. The Divine Being is eternal and universal and infinite and
cannot be the sole property of the Mussulmans or of the Semitic
religions only,—those that happened to be in a line from the Bible and
to have Jewish or Arabian prophets for their founders. Hindus and
Confucians and Taoists and all others have as much right to enter into
relation with God and find the Truth in their own way. All religions
have some truth in them, but none has the whole truth; all are created
in time and finally decline and perish. Mahomed himself never pretended
that the Koran was the last message of God and there would be no other.
God and Truth outlast these religions and manifest themselves anew in
whatever way or form the Divine Wisdom chooses. You cannot shut up God
in the limitations of your own narrow brain or dictate to the Divine
Power and Consciousness how or where or through whom it shall manifest;
you cannot put up your puny barriers against the divine Omnipotence.
These again are simple truths which are now being recognised all over
the world; only the childish in mind or those who vegetate in some
formula of the past deny them.

        You have insisted on my writing and asked for the Truth and I
have answered. But if you want to be a Mussulman, no one prevents you.
If the Truth I bring is too great for you to understand or to bear, you
are free to go and live in a half-truth or in your own ignorance. I am
not here to convert anyone; I do not preach to the world to come to me
and I call no one. I am here to establish the divine life and the divine
consciousness in those who of themselves feel the call to come to me and
cleave to it and in no others.⁹⁴

\*\*\*

January 14, 1932

        The traditions of the past are very great in their own place, in
the past, but I do not see why we should merely repeat them and not go
farther. In the spiritual development of the consciousness upon earth
the great past ought to be followed by a greater future.

        ...

        I am concerned with the earth, not with worlds beyond for their
own sake; it is a terrestrial realisation that I seek and not a flight
to distant summits.⁹⁵

\*\*\*

February 11, 1932

        ... The conception of the Divine as an external omnipotent Power
who has "created" the world and governs it like an absolute and
arbitrary monarch—the Christian or Semitic conception—has never been
mine; it contradicts too much my seeing and experience during thirty
years of sadhana. It is against this conception that the atheistic
objection is aimed,—for atheism in Europe has been a shallow and rather
childish reaction against a shallow and childish exoteric religionism
and its popular inadequate and crudely dogmatic notions. But when I
speak of the Divine Will, I mean something different,—something that has
descended here into an evolutionary world of Ignorance, standing at the
back of things, pressing on the Darkness with its Light, leading things
presently towards the best possible in the conditions of a world of
Ignorance and leading it eventually towards a descent of a greater power
of the Divine.... This Divine may lead us often through darkness,
because the darkness is there in us and around us, but it is to the
Light he is leading and not to anything else.⁹⁶

\*\*\*

July 31, 1932

 (From an unpublished letter.)

        As for Gandhi, why should you suppose that I am so tender for
the faith of the Mahatma? I do not call it faith at all, but a rigid
mental belief and what he calls soul-force is only a strong vital will
which has taken a religious turn. That, of course, can be a tremendous
force for action, but unfortunately Gandhi spoils it by his ambition to
be a man of reason, while in fact he has no reason in him at all, never
was reasonable at any moment in his life and, I suppose, never will be.
What he has in its place is a remarkable type of unintentionally
sophistic logic. Well, what this reason, this amazingly precisely
unreliable logic brings about is that nobody is even sure and, I don't
think, he is himself really sure what he will do next.[\[2\]](#_ftn2) He
has not only two minds but three or four minds, and all depends on which
will turn up topmost at a particular moment and how it will combine with
the others. There would be no harm in that, on the contrary these might
be an advantage if there were a central Light somewhere choosing for him
and shaping the decision to the need of the action. He thinks there is
and calls it God—but it has always seemed to me that it is his own mind
that decides and most often decides wrongly. Anyhow I cannot imagine
Lenin or Mustapha Kemal not knowing their own minds or acting in this
way—even their strategic retreats were steps towards an end clearly
conceived and executed. But whatever it be it is all mind action and
vital force in Gandhi. So why should he be taken as an example of the
defeat of the Divine or of a spiritual Power?[\[3\]](#_ftn3) I quite
allow that there has been something behind Gandhi greater than himself
and you can call it the Divine or a Cosmic Force which has used him, but
then there is that behind everybody who is used as an instrument for
world ends,—behind Kemal and Lenin also; so that is not germane to the
matter.

\*\*\*

August 30, 1932

        \[The Mother and myself\] do not found ourselves on faith alone,
but on a great ground of knowledge which we have been developing and
testing all our lives. I think I can say that I have been testing day
and night for years upon years more scrupulously than any scientist his
theory or his method on the physical plane. That is why I am not alarmed
by the aspect of the world around me or disconcerted by the often
successful fury of the adverse Forces who increase in their rage as the
Light comes nearer and nearer to the field of earth and Matter.⁹⁸

\*\*\*

May, 1933

        ... But what a floundering confusion the intellect of man has
brought itself into now-a-days—whether in thought or in the field of
practical life! An infant crying in the night when he is not hitting
other infants in the stomach in order to bring the *golden age*. (I am
referring to infants like Hitler, Mussolini and other.)⁹⁹

\*\*\*

August 10, 1933

(A disciple:) I am disconcerted at what is happening in the world.
Everywhere misery is rampant, people are losing faith in everything and
even the intellectuals like Tagore, Russell and Rolland are clamouring
for an end of the age....

        Even if all smashed, I would look beyond the smash to the new
creation. As for what is happening in the world, it does not upset me
because I knew all along that things would happen in that fashion, and
as for the hopes of the intellectual idealists I have not shared them,
so I am not disappointed.¹⁰⁰

\*\*\*

January 14, 1934

        \[The aim of the yoga I practise\] is to manifest, reach or
embody a higher consciousness upon earth and not to get away from earth
into a higher world or some supreme Absolute. The old yogas (not quite
all of them) tended the other way—but that was, I think, because they
found the earth as it is a rather impossible place for any spiritual
being and the resistance to change too obstinate to be borne.... But the
fundamental proposition in this matter was proclaimed very definitely in
the Upanishads which went so far as to say that Earth is the
foundation[\[4\]](#_ftn4) and all the worlds are on the earth and to
imagine a clean-cut or irreconcilable difference between them is
ignorance: here and not elsewhere, not by going to some other world, the
divine realisation must come.¹⁰¹

\*\*\*

March 24, 1934

        Tagore, of course, belonged to an age which had faith in its
ideas and whose very denials were creative affirmations.... Now all that
idealism has been smashed to pieces by the immense adverse event and
everybody is busy exposing its weaknesses—but nobody knows what to put
in its place. A mixture of scepticism and slogans, “Heil-Hitler” and the
Fascist salute and the Five-Year-Plan and the beating of everybody into
one amorphous shape, a disabused denial of all ideals on one side and on
the other a blind “shut-my-eyes and shut-everybody's-eyes” plunge into
the bog in the hope of finding some firm foundation there, will not
carry us very far. And what else is there? Until new spiritual values
are discovered, no great enduring creation is possible.¹⁰²

\*\*\*

Undated (1934)

        As for the Hindu-Muslim affair, I saw no reason why the
greatness of India's past or her spirituality should be thrown into the
waste paper basket in order to conciliate the Moslems who would not at
all be conciliated by such policy. What has created the Hindu-Moslem
split was not Swadeshi, but the acceptance of the communal principle by
the Congress (here Tilak made his great blunder), and the further
attempt by the Khilafat movement to conciliate them and bring them in on
wrong lines. The recognition of that communal principle at Lucknow made
them permanently a separate political entity in India which ought never
to have happened; the Khilafat affair made that separate political
entity an organised separate political power.^(103 [\[5\]](#_ftn5))

\*\*\*

October 2, 1934

        I do not care a button about having my name in any blessed
place. I was never ardent about fame even in my political days; I
preferred to remain behind the curtain, push people without their
knowing it and get things done. It was the confounded British Government
that spoiled my game by prosecuting me and forcing me to be publicly
known and a “leader”. Then, again, I don't believe in advertisement
except for books etc., and in propaganda except for politics and patent
medicines. But for serious work it is a poison. It means either a stunt
or a boom—and stunts and booms exhaust the thing they carry on their
crest and leave it lifeless and broken high and dry on the shores of
nowhere—or it means a movement. A movement in the case of a work like
mine means the founding of a school or a sect or some other damned
nonsense. It means that hundreds or thousands of useless people join in
and corrupt the work or reduce it to a pompous farce from which the
Truth that was coming down recedes into secrecy and silence. It is what
has happened to the “religions” and is the reason of their failure. If I
tolerate a little writing about myself, it is only to have a sufficient
counter-weight in that amorphous chaos, the public mind, to balance the
hostility that is always aroused by the presence of a new dynamic Truth
in this world of ignorance. But the utility ends there and too much
advertisement would defeat that object. I am perfectly “rational”, I
assure you, in my methods and I do not proceed merely on any personal
dislike of fame. If and so far as publicity serves the Truth, I am quite
ready to tolerate it; but I do not find publicity for its own sake
desirable.¹⁰⁴

\*\*\*

Undated

        It is not by these means \[modern humanism and humanitarianism,
idealism, etc.\] that humanity can get that radical change of its ways
of life which is yet becoming imperative, but only by reaching the
bed-rock of Reality behind,—not through mere ideas and mental
formations, but by a change of the consciousness, an inner and spiritual
conversion. But that is a truth for which it would be difficult to get a
hearing in the present noise of all kinds of many-voiced clamour and
confusion and catastrophe.

        ...

        Science has missed something essential; it has seen and
scrutinised what has happened and in a way how it has happened, but it
has shut its eyes to something that made this impossible possible,
something it is there to express. There is no fundamental significance
in things if you miss the Divine Reality; for you remain embedded in a
huge surface crust of manageable and utilisable appearance. It is the
magic of the Magician you are trying to analyse, but only when you enter
into the consciousness of the Magician himself can you begin to
experience the true origination, significance and circles of the Lila.

        ...

        Another danger may then arise \[once materialism begins to give
way\]—not of a final denial of the Truth, but the repetition in old or
new forms of a past mistake, on one side some revival of blind fanatical
obscurantist sectarian religionism, on the other a stumbling into the
pits and quagmires of the vitalistic occult and the
pseudo-spiritual—mistakes that made the whole real strength of the
materialistic attack on the past and its credos. But these are phantasms
that meet us always on the border line or in the intervening country
between the material darkness and the perfect Splendour. In spite of
all, the victory of the supreme Light even in the darkened
earth-consciousness stands as the one ultimate certitude.¹⁰⁵

\*

        I find it difficult to take these psycho-analysts at all
seriously when they try to scrutinise spiritual experience by the
flicker of their torch-lights,—yet perhaps one ought to, for
half-knowledge is a powerful thing and can be a great obstacle to the
coming in front of the true Truth. This new psychology looks to me very
much like children learning some summary and not very adequate alphabet,
exulting in putting their a-b-c-d of the subconscient and the mysterious
underground super-ego together and imagining that their first book of
obscure beginnings (c-a-t cat, t-r-e-e tree) is the very heart of the
real knowledge. They look from down up and explain the higher lights by
the lower obscurities; but the foundation of these things is above and
not below, *upari budhna esam* \[*Rig-Veda*, 1.24.7\]. The
superconscient, not the subconscient, is the true foundation of things.
The significance of the lotus is not to be found by analysing the
secrets of the mud from which it grows here; its secret is to be found
in the heavenly archetype of the lotus that blooms for ever in the Light
above. The self-chosen field of these psychologists is besides poor,
dark and limited; you must know the whole before you can know the part
and the highest before you can truly understand the lowest. That is the
promise of the greater psychology awaiting its hour before which these
poor gropings will disappear and come to nothing.¹⁰⁶

\*

        Wanton waste, careless spoiling of physical things in an
incredibly short time, loose disorder, misuse of service and materials
due either to vital grasping or to tamasic inertia are baneful to
prosperity and tend to drive away or discourage the Wealth-Power. These
things have long been rampant in the society and, if that continues, an
increase in our means might well mean a proportionate increase in the
wastage and disorder and neutralise the material advantage. This must be
remedied if there is to be any sound progress.

        Asceticism for its own sake is not the ideal of this yoga, but
self-control in the vital and right order in the material are a very
important part of it—and even an ascetic discipline is better for our
purpose than a loose absence of true control. Mastery of the material
does not mean having plenty and profusely throwing it out or spoiling it
as fast as it comes or faster. Mastery implies in it the right and
careful utilisation of things and also a self-control in their use.¹⁰⁷

\*

        There is a consciousness in \[things\], a life which is not the
life and consciousness of man and animal which we know, but still secret
and real. That is why we must have a respect for physical things and use
them rightly, not misuse and waste, ill-treat or handle with a careless
roughness. This feeling of all being consciousness or alive comes when
our own physical consciousness—and not the mind only—awakes out of its
obscurity and becomes aware of the One in all things, the Divine
everywhere.¹⁰⁸

\*\*\*

December 25, 1934

        As to whether the Divine seriously means something to happen, I
believe it is intended. I know with absolute certitude that the
supramental is a truth and that its advent is in the very nature of
things inevitable. The question is as to the when and the how. That also
is decided and predestined from somewhere above; but it is here being
fought out amid a rather grim clash of conflicting forces. For in the
terrestrial world the predetermined result is hidden and what we see is
a whirl of possibilities and forces attempting to achieve something with
the destiny of it all concealed from human eyes. This is, however,
certain that a number of souls have been sent to see that it shall be
now. That is the situation. My faith and will are for the now.¹⁰⁹

\*\*\*

January 25, 1935

        I know it is the Russian explanation of the recent trend to
spirituality and mysticism that it is a phenomenon of capitalist society
in its decadence. But to read an economic cause, conscious or
unconscious, into all phenomena of man's history is part of the
Bolshevik gospel born of the fallacy of Karl Marx. Man's nature is not
so simple and one-chorded as all that—it has many lines and each line
produces a need of his life. The spiritual or mystic line is one of them
and man tries to satisfy it in various ways, by superstitions of all
kinds, by ignorant religionism, by spiritism, demonism and what not, in
his more enlightened parts by spiritual philosophy, the higher occultism
and the rest, at his highest by the union with the All, the Eternal or
the Divine.... With the deeper minds the dissatisfaction with the ideals
of the past or the present, with all mental or vital or material
solutions of the problem of life has increased and only the spiritual
path is left. It is true that the European mind having little light on
these things dallies with vital will-o'-the-wisps like spiritism or
theosophy or falls back upon the old religionism; but the deeper minds
of which I speak either pass by them or pass through them in search of a
greater Light....¹¹⁰

\*\*\*

February 10, 1935

        It is not for personal greatness that I am seeking to bring down
the Supermind. I care nothing for greatness or littleness in the human
sense. I am seeking to bring some principle of inner Truth, Light,
Harmony, Peace into the earth-consciousness; I see it above and know
what it is—I feel it ever gleaming down on my consciousness from above
and I am seeking to make it possible for it to take up the whole being
into its own native power, instead of the nature of man continuing to
remain in half-light, half-darkness. I believe the descent of this Truth
opening the way to a development of divine consciousness here to be the
final sense of the earth evolution.¹¹¹

\*\*\*

August 8, 1935

        From the spiritual point of view such temporary phenomena as the
turn of the educated Hindus towards materialism are of little
importance. There have always been periods when the mind of nations,
continents or cultures turned towards materialism and away from all
spiritual belief.... These waves come because of a certain necessity in
human development—to destroy the bondage of old forms and leave a field
for new truth and new forms of truth and action in life as well as for
what is behind life.¹¹²

\*\*\*

August 18, 1935

        I regard the spiritual history of mankind and especially of
India as a constant development of a divine purpose, not a book that is
closed and the lines of which have to be constantly repeated. Even the
Upanishads and the Gita were not final though everything may be there in
seed.... I may say that it is far from my purpose to propagate any
religion, new or old, for humanity in the future. A way to be opened
that is still blocked, not a religion to be founded, is my conception of
the matter.¹¹³

\*\*\*

Undated

        Human reason is a very convenient and accommodating instrument
and works only in the circle set for it by interest, partiality and
prejudice. The politicians reason wrongly or insincerely and have power
to enforce the results of their reasoning so as to make a mess of the
world's affairs: the intellectuals reason and show what their minds show
them, which is far from being always the truth, for it is generally
decided by intellectual preference and the mind's inborn
education-inculcated angle of vision; but even when they see it, they
have no power to enforce it. So between blind power and seeing impotence
the world moves, achieving destiny through a mental muddle.¹¹⁴

\*

        War and conquest are part of the economy of vital Nature, it is
no use blaming this or that people for doing it—everybody does it who
has the power and the chance. China who now complains[\[6\]](#_ftn6) was
herself an imperialist and colonising country through all the centuries
in which Japan kept religiously within her own borders.... If it were
not profitable, I suppose nobody would do it. England has grown rich on
the plundered wealth of India. France depends for many things on her
African colonies. Japan needs an outlet for her over-abundant population
and safe economic markets nearby. Each is pushed by forces that use the
minds of rulers and peoples to fulfil themselves—unless human nature
changes no amount of moralizing will prevent it.¹¹⁵

\*\*\*

September 10, 1935

        There is no connection between the spiritual truth and knowledge
in which I live and Mahatma Gandhi's ideals and ways of life. If it were
so, then I would have to live like him—for surely you do not suppose
that my truth and knowledge are only in the mind and are not intended to
have a practical manifestation in life? I have always written that my
Yoga is intended for the manifestation of a new principle of life and
works are an essential part of my Yoga. If that manifestation were
already there, there would be no need for my bringing down into life
this new spiritual principle. Mahatma Gandhi's life expresses his own
ideas of the true truth and the true knowledge. These ideas are not
mine.[\[7\]](#_ftn7)

        The principle of life which I seek to establish is spiritual.
Morality is a question of man's mind and vital, it belongs to a lower
plane of consciousness. A spiritual life therefore cannot be founded on
a moral basis, it must be founded on a spiritual basis. This does not
mean that the spiritual man must be immoral—as if there were no other
law of conduct than the moral. The law of action of the spiritual
consciousness is higher not lower than the moral,—it is founded on union
with the Divine and living in the Divine Consciousness and its action is
founded on obedience to the Divine Will.¹¹⁶

\*\*\*

September 16, 1935

(A disciple:) It is rather depressing to hear about the atrocities
committed by some Mohamedans on Hindu families in Bengal. With the
coming of Independence I hope such things will stop.... In your scheme
of things do you definitely see a free India?...

        That is all settled. It is a question of working out only. The
question is what is India going to do with her Independence? The above
kind of affair? Bolshevism? Goonda-raj? Things look ominous.¹¹⁷

\*\*\*

October 8, 1935

        If going beyond the experiences of past seers and sages is so
shocking, each new seer or sage in turn has done that shocking
thing—Buddha, Shankara, Chaitanya, etc. all did that wicked act....
Truly, this shocked reverence for the past is a wonderful and fearful
thing? After all, the Divine is infinite and the unrolling of the Truth
may be an infinite process or at least, if not quite so much, yet with
some room for new discovery and new statement, even perhaps new
achievement, not a thing in a nutshell cracked and its contents
exhausted once for all by the first seer or sage, while the others must
religiously crack the same nutshell all over again, each tremblingly
fearful not to give the lie to the “past” seers and sages.¹¹⁸

\*\*\*

October 17, 1935

        There is nothing noble besides in fanaticism—there is no
nobility of motive, though there may be a fierce enthusiasm of motive.
Religious fanaticism is something psychologically low-born and
ignorant—and usually in its action fierce, cruel and base. Religious
ardour like that of the martyr who sacrifices himself only is a
different thing.¹¹⁹

\*\*\*

October 19, 1935

(A disciple sought Sri Aurobindo's comments on the following statement
of Gandhi in response to a call by Dr. Ambedkar for mass conversions
among the depressed classes: “But religion is not like a house or a
cloak which can be changed at will. It is more an integral part of one's
self than of one's body. Religion is the tie that binds one to one's
Creator, and while the body perishes as it has to, religion persists
even after that.”)

        If it is meant by the statement that the form of religion is
something permanent and unchangeable, then it cannot be accepted. But if
religion here means one's way of communion with the Divine, then it is
true that that is something belonging to the inner being and cannot be
changed like a house or a cloak for the sake of some personal, social or
worldly convenience. If a change is to be made, it can only be for an
inner spiritual reason, because of some development from within. No one
can be bound to any form of religion or any particular creed or system,
but if he changes the one he has accepted for another, for external
reasons, that means he has inwardly no religion at all and both his old
and his new religion are only an empty formula. At bottom that is I
suppose what the statement drives at. Preference for a different
approach to the Truth or the desire of inner spiritual self-expression
are not the motives of the recommendation of change to which objection
is made by the Mahatma here; the object proposed \[by Dr. Ambedkar\] is
an enhancement of social status and consideration which is no more a
spiritual motive than conversion for the sake of money or marriage. If a
man has no religion in himself, he can change his credal profession for
any motive; if he has, he cannot; he can only change it in response to
an inner spiritual need. If a man has a bhakti for the Divine in the
form of Krishna, he can't very well say, “I will swap Krishna for Christ
so that I may become socially respectable.”¹²⁰

\*\*\*

May 17, 1936

        There is no necessity to reveal one's plans and movements to
those who have no business to know it, who are incapable of
understanding or who would act as enemies or spoil all as a result of
their knowledge.... No moral or spiritual law commands us to make
ourselves naked to the world or open up our hearts and minds for public
inspection. Gandhi talked about secrecy being a sin but that is one of
his many extravagances.¹²¹

\*\*\*

September 13, 1936

        No doubt, hatred and cursing are not the proper attitude. It is
true also that to look upon all things and all people with a calm and
clear vision, to be uninvolved and impartial in one's judgments is a
quite proper yogic attitude. A condition of perfect *samata*
\[equanimity\] can be established in which one sees all as equal,
friends and enemies included, and is not disturbed by what men do or by
what happens. The question is whether this is all that is demanded from
us. If so, then the general attitude will be of a neutral indifference
to everything. But the Gita, which strongly insists on a perfect and
absolute *samata*, goes on to say, “Fight, destroy the adversary,
conquer.” If there is no kind of general action wanted, no loyalty to
Truth as against Falsehood except for one's personal sadhana, no will
for the Truth to conquer, then the *samata* of indifference will
suffice. But here there is a work to be done, a Truth to be established
against which immense forces are arrayed, invisible forces which can use
visible things and persons and actions for their instruments. If one is
among the disciples, the seekers of this Truth, one has to take sides
for the Truth, to stand against the forces that attack it and seek to
stifle it. Arjuna wanted not to stand for either side, to refuse any
action of hostility even against assailants; Sri Krishna, who insisted
so much on *samata*, strongly rebuked his attitude and insisted equally
on his fighting the adversary. “Have *samata*,” he said, “and seeing
clearly the Truth, fight.” Therefore to take sides with the Truth and to
refuse to concede anything to the Falsehood that attacks, to be
unflinchingly loyal and against the hostiles and the attackers, is not
inconsistent with equality.... It is a spiritual battle inward and
outward; by neutrality and compromise or even passivity one may allow
the enemy force to pass and crush down the Truth and its children. If
you look at it from this point, you will see that if the inner spiritual
equality is right, the active loyalty and firm taking of sides is as
right, and the two cannot be incompatible.¹²²

\*\*\*

September 19, 1936

        I do not take the same view of the Hindu religion as Jawaharlal
\[Nehru\]. Religion is always imperfect because it is a mixture of man's
spirituality with his endeavours that come in in trying to sublimate
ignorantly his lower nature. Hindu religion appears to me as a
cathedral-temple, half in ruins, noble in the mass, often fantastic in
detail but always fantastic with a significance—crumbling or badly
outworn in places, but a cathedral-temple in which service is still done
to the Unseen and its real presence can be felt by those who enter with
the right spirit. The outer social structure which it built for its
approach is another matter.¹²³

\*\*\*

December 24, 1936

        The view taken by the Mahatma in these matters is Christian
rather than Hindu—for the Christian, self-abasement, humility, the
acceptance of a low status to serve humanity or the Divine are things
which are highly spiritual and the noblest privilege of the soul. This
view does not admit any hierarchy of castes; the Mahatma accepts castes
but on the basis that all are equal before the Divine; a Bhangi
\[scavenger\] doing his dharma is as good as the Brahmin doing his,
there is division of function but no hierarchy of functions. That is one
view of things and the hierarchic view is another, both having a
standpoint and logic of their own which the mind takes as wholly valid
but which only corresponds to a part of the reality. All kinds of work
are equal before the Divine and all men have the same Brahman within
them is one truth, but that development is not equal in all is another.
The idea that it needs a special *punya* to be born as a Bhangi is, of
course, one of those forceful exaggerations of an idea which are common
with the Mahatma and impress greatly the mind of his hearers. The idea
behind is that his function is an indispensable service to the society,
quite as much as the Brahmin's, but, that being disagreeable, it would
need a special moral heroism to choose it voluntarily and he thinks as
if the soul freely chose it as such a heroic service and as reward of
righteous acts—but that is hardly likely. The service of the scavenger
is indispensable under certain conditions of society, it is one of those
primary necessities without which society can hardly exist and the
cultural development of which the Brahmin life is part could not have
taken place. But obviously the cultural development is more valuable
than the service of the physical needs for the progress of humanity as
opposed to its first static condition, and that development can even
lead to the minimising and perhaps the entire disappearance by
scientific inventions of the need for the functions of the scavenger.
But that, I suppose, the Mahatma would not approve of, as it would come
by machinery and would be a departure from the simple life. In any case,
it is not true that the Bhangi life is superior to the Brahmin life and
the reward of a special righteousness. On the other hand, the
traditional conception that a man is superior to others because he is
born a Brahmin is not rational or justifiable. A spiritual or cultured
man of pariah birth is superior in the divine values to an unspiritual
and worldly-minded or a crude and uncultured Brahmin. Birth counts, but
the basic value is in the man himself, in the soul behind, and the
degree to which it manifests itself in his nature.¹²⁴

\*\*\*

November 17, 1938

        All this[\[8\]](#_ftn8) promises a bad look-out when India gets
purna Swaraj. Mahatma Gandhi is having bad qualms about Congress
corruption already. What will it be when purna Satyagraha reigns all
over India?¹²⁵

\*\*\*

Undated

(The last two lines of a poem, “The Tiger and the Deer”)

        ...

        The mighty perish in their might;

        The slain survive the slayer.¹²⁶

\*\*\*

</div>

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) *Sachchidananda:* the eternal divine principle of
Existence (*sat*), Consciousness (*chit*) and Delight (*ananda*).

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) This was also noted by many of those who approached
Gandhi. Nehru, for instance, wrote: “I told him \[Gandhi, in March,
1931\] that his way of springing surprises upon us frightened me, there
was something unknown about him which, in spite of the closest
association for fourteen years, I could not understand at all and which
filled me with apprehension. He admitted the presence of this unknown in
him, and said that he himself could not answer for it or foretell what
it might lead to.”⁹⁷

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) The disciple was probably referring to the second
Round Table Conference, which Gandhi attended in London at the end of
1931 and which ended in failure. The British government in response
unleashed a reign of terror, caning and firing on demonstrators,
jailing, whipping and torturing tens of thousands. It then promulgated
its “Communal Award,” which further hardened the division between Hindus
and Muslims, also among the Hindus on the basis of caste.

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) “Earth is his footing” (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad,
I.1.1), “in matter he has taken his firm foundation” (Mundaka Upanishad,
II.2.8).

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) Tilak, released in 1914 from a six-year-long
deportation to Burma, launched in 1916 the Home Rule agitation and led a
few months later the re-entry of the Nationalists into the Congress at
its Lucknow session. The Muslim League also met at Lucknow at the same
time, and agreed to work with the Congress in exchange for the
concession of separate electorates and fixed numbers of seats for
Muslims in the Provincial and Imperial Legislative Councils (the
so-called “Lucknow Pact”).

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) Japan, at war with China, was then occupying a large
part of North-East China.

</div>

<div id="ftn7" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) This first paragraph is published here for the first
time.

</div>

<div id="ftn8" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) Sri Aurobindo is referring to certain dishonest
financial practices.

</div>

</div>

  
  
  

**[Part III](IR_part3.htm)      [Front Page](IR_frontpage.htm)    [VOI
Online Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.org/books/)     [Part
V](IR_part5.htm)**
