---
title: 05 IR part5

---
<div class="Section1">

V

1938-1940

(In the night of November 23-24, 1938, Sri Aurobindo fell down while
walking in concentration and broke his right leg. In the years that
followed, a small group of disciples, mostly attendants and physicians,
met him every day. Two of them recorded the informal talks that ensued,
which often touched on the Indian political scene, the rising threat of
Nazism, and then World War II which Sri Aurobindo followed closely.

A few excerpts from these talks are presented here.)

December 23, 1938

        Every time the Light has tried to descend it has met with
resistance and opposition. Christ was crucified.... Buddha was denied;
sons of Light come, the earth denies them, rejects them, and afterwards
accepts them in name to reject them in substance.

\*\*\*

December 25, 1938

        I have no faith in government controls, because I believe in a
certain amount of freedom—freedom to find out things for oneself in
one's own way, even freedom to commit blunders. Nature leads us through
various errors and mistakes; when Nature created the human being with
all his possibilities for good and ill she knew very well what she was
about. Freedom for experiment in human life is a great thing. Without
the freedom to take risks and commit mistakes there can be no
progress....

        \[But\] everything is moving towards mechanization in Europe.
The totalitarian States do not believe in any individual variation and
even non-totalitarian States are obliged to follow them; they do it for
the sake of efficiency—but whose efficiency? It is the efficiency of the
State as an organized machine, not that of the individual. The
individual has no freedom, he doesn't grow. Organize by all means, but
there must be scope for freedom and plasticity.

        ...

        Do you think that the average man of today is better than a
Greek of 2500 hundred years ago, or than an Indian of those times? Look
at the condition of Germany today \[under Hitler\]—you can't say that it
is progressing.

        I have come in contact with the Indian masses and found them
better than the Europeans of the same class. They are superior to the
European working classes. The latter may be more efficient, but that is
due to external reasons.... The Irish doctor who was in our jail \[at
Alipore\] could not think how the young men who were so gentle and
attractive could be revolutionaries. I found even the ordinary criminal
quite human and better than his counterpart in Europe.

        ...

        It is curious how a thing gets spoiled when it gets recognition.
Democracy was something better when it was not called democracy. When
the name is given the truth of it seems to go out....

> (A disciple:) Communism began with a high ideal and it is certainly
> better than Fascism or Nazism.

        In which way better? Formerly people were unconscious slaves,
now under Communism they are conscious slaves.... They are bound to the
State, the dictator and the party. They can't even choose the dictator.
And whoever differs from them is mercilessly suppressed.... The whole
thing—whatever its name—is a fraud. It is impossible to change humanity
by political machinery—it can't be done.

\*\*\*

December 27, 1938

        The old Indian system grew out of life, it had room for
everything and every interest. There were monarchy, aristocracy,
democracy; every interest was represented in the government. While in
Europe the Western system grew out of the mind: they are led by reason
and want to make everything cut and dried without any chance of freedom
or variation. If it is democracy, then democracy only—no room for
anything else. They cannot be plastic.

        India is now trying to imitate the West. Parliamentary
government is not suited to India. But we always take up what the West
has thrown off....

> (A disciple:) What is your idea of an ideal government for India?

        My idea is like what Tagore once wrote. There may be one
Rashtrapati at the top with considerable powers so as to secure a
continuity of policy, and an assembly representative of the nation. The
provinces will combine into a federation united at the top, leaving
ample scope to local bodies to make laws according to their local
problems.

        ...

        The Congress at the present stage—what is it but a Fascist
organization? Gandhi is the dictator like Stalin, I won't say like
Hitler: what Gandhi says they accept and even the Working Committee
follows him; then it goes to the All-India Congress Committee which
adopts it, and then the Congress. There is no opportunity for any
difference of opinion, except for Socialists who are allowed to differ
provided they don't seriously differ. Whatever resolutions they pass are
obligatory on all the provinces whether the resolutions suit the
provinces or not; there is no room for any other independent opinion.
Everything is fixed up before and the people are only allowed to talk
over it—like Stalin's Parliament. When we started the \[Nationalist\]
movement we began with the idea of throwing out the Congress oligarchy
and open the whole organization to the general mass.

> Srinivas Iyengar retired from Congress because of his differences with
> Gandhi....

        He made Charkha a religious article of faith and excluded all
people from Congress membership who could not spin. How many even among
his own followers believe in his gospel of Charkha? Such a tremendous
waste of energy just for the sake of a few annas is most unreasonable.

        ...

        Give \[people\] education, technical training and give them the
fundamental organic principles of organization, not on political but on
business lines. But Gandhi does not want such industrial organization,
he is for going back to the old system of civilization, and so he comes
in with his magical formula “Spin, spin, spin.” C. R. Das and a few
others could act as a counterbalance. It is all a fetish.

\*\*\*

December 30, 1938

        The Japanese have a wonderful power of self-control. They don't
lose their temper or quarrel with you, but if their honour is violated
they may kill you. They can be bitter enemies.... The Japanese also have
a high sense of chivalry.... But these things perhaps belong to the
past. It is a great pity that people who have carried such ideals into
practice are losing them through contact with European civilization.
That is a great harm that European vulgarizing has done to Japan. Now
you find most people mercantile in their outlook and they will do
anything for the sake of money.....

> (A disciple:) Has European civilization nothing good in it?

        It has lowered the moral tone of humanity.... The ancients tried
to keep to their ideals and made an effort to raise them higher, while
Europe lost all her ideals after the \[first World\] War. People have
become cynical, selfish, etc.... I suppose it is all due to
commercialism.

\*\*\*

January 6, 1939

        Are not all governments robbers? Some do the robbing with
legislation, some without.

\*\*\*

January 8, 1939

> (A disciple:) Gandhi writes that non-violence tried by some people in
> Germany has failed because it has not been so strong as to generate
> sufficient heat to melt Hitler's heart.

        I am afraid it would require quite a furnace!... The trouble
with Gandhi is that he had to deal only with Englishmen, and the English
want to have their conscience at ease. Besides, the Englishman wants to
satisfy his self-esteem and wants world-esteem. But if Gandhi had had to
deal with the Russians or the German Nazis, they would have long ago put
him out of their way.

\*\*\*

January 15, 1939

        It is easy to see that the process of evolution is universal and
human evolution cannot be bound down to a set of philosophical ideas or
rules of practice. No epoch, no individual, no group has the monopoly of
truth. It is the same with religion—Christian, Mohammedan, etc.

        ...

        The Greeks had the sense of beauty; their life was beautiful.
The one thing that modern Europe has not taken from the Greeks is
beauty. You can't say modern Europe is beautiful—in fact, it is ugly.

        What can be said of ancient Greece can be said also of ancient
India. She had beauty, much of which she has since lost. The Japanese
are the only race that can be said to have preserved beauty in their
life. But now even they are fast losing it under European influence.

        The setback to the human mind in Europe is amazing.... We had
thought during the last years of the nineteenth century that the human
mind had attained a certain level of intelligence and that it would have
to be satisfied before any new idea could find acceptance. But it seems
one can't rely on common sense to stand the strain. We find Nazi ideas
being accepted; fifty years back it would have been impossible to
predict their acceptance. Then, again, the ease with which the best
intellectuals accept psychoanalysis and Freud's ideas is surprising.

        ...

        Throughout the course of history a small minority has been
carrying the torch to save humanity in spite of itself.

\*\*\*

January 16, 1939

> (A disciple:) Nana Saheb Sinde of Baroda has spoken to a youth
> conference emphasizing the need of military training for the defence
> of the country. His speech was against the current vogue of
> non-violence.

        It is good that someone raises his voice like that when efforts
are being made to make non-violence the method of solving all
problems.... This non-violent resistance I have never been able to
fathom.... To change the opponent's heart by passive resistance is
something I don't understand....

        I am afraid Gandhi has been trying to apply to ordinary life
what belongs to spirituality. Non-violence or ahimsa as a spiritual
attitude and its practice is perfectly understandable and has a standing
of its own. You may not accept it in toto but it has a basis in reality.
You can live it in spiritual life, but to apply it to all life is
absurd.... It is a principle which can be applied with success if
practised on a mass scale, specially by unarmed people like the Indians,
because you are left with no other choice. But even when it succeeds it
is not that you have changed the heart of the enemy, but that you have
made it impossible for him to rule....

        What a tremendous generalizer Gandhi is! Passive resistance,
charkha and celibacy for all! One can't be a member of the Congress
without oneself spinning!

\*\*\*

January 18, 1939

        There is a spiritual solution which I propose; but it aims at
changing the whole basis of human nature. It is not a question of
carrying on a movement, nor is it a question of a few years: there can
be no real solution unless you establish spirituality as the basis of
life.

        It is clear that Mind has not been able to change human nature
radically. You can go on changing human institutions infinitely and yet
the imperfection will break through all your institutions.

\*\*\*

January 21, 1939

        She \[Nivedita\] took up politics as a part of Vivekananda's
work.... Vivekananda himself had ideas about political work and spells
of revolutionary fervour.... It is curious how many Sannyasins at that
time thought of India's freedom.[\[1\]](#_ftn1)

\*\*\*

January 24, 1939

> (A disciple:) There are so many difficulties \[in finding out the
> cause of poverty\], political, economic, etc.

        I don't think it is so insoluble a problem as all that. If you
give the people education—by education I mean proper education, not the
modern type—then the problem can be solved. People in England or France
don't have the kind of poverty we have in India. That is because of
their education—they are not so helpless.

        ...

        Modern artists are putting an end to art. Vulgarization
everywhere!... When this craze for utility comes, beauty goes to the
dogs. This is the modern tendency.

\*\*\*

January 26, 1939

> (A disciple:) \[In India\] the forests are being depleted of animals.

        The forests have to be preserved and also the wildlife. China
destroyed all her forests and the result is that there is flood every
year.

        ...

        In Socialism you have the State which intervenes at every step
with its officials who rob money.... It is the State bureaucracy that
dictates the policy irrespective of the good of the commune. In
Communism they hold the land as the common property of the whole unit,
and each one is entitled to labour and to have his share from the
produce.

        In India we had a kind of communism in the villages. The whole
village was like a big family and the lowest had his right as a member
of the family. The washerman, the carpenter, the blacksmith, the barber,
all got what they needed. That is the only communism that is
practicable. Each such commune can be independent and many such units
can be scattered all over the country and they can combine or coordinate
their activities for a common purpose.

\*\*\*

January 29, 1939

        You know what \[C. R.\] Das said about criminals? He said, “In
my whole legal career I have not met worse types of criminals than in
politics.”

        ...

        It is better not to destroy the capitalist class as the
Socialists want to: they are the source of national wealth. They should
be encouraged to spend for the nation. Taxing is all right, but you must
increase production, start new industries, and also raise the standard
of living; without that if you increase the taxes there will be a state
of depression.

\*\*\*

February 2, 1939

        Nowadays people want the modern type of democracy—the
parliamentary form of government. The parliamentary system is doomed. It
has brought Europe to its present sorry pass....

        \[In India\] one should begin with the old Panchayat system in
the villages and then work up to the top. The Panchayat system and the
guilds are more representative and they have a living contact with
people; they are part of the people's ideas. On the contrary, the
parliamentary system with local bodies—the municipal councils—is not
workable: these councils have no living contact with the people; the
councillors make only platform speeches and nobody knows what they do
for three or four years; at the end they reshuffle and rearrange the
whole thing, making their own pile during their period of power.

\*\*\*

November 28, 1939

> (A disciple:) X was lamenting over the plight of Bengali Hindus. He
> says there is a cultural conquest taking place.

        How? Hindus are becoming Muslims?

> No, not religious conquest but cultural, Hindu culture being replaced
> by Muslim. At schools and colleges, books on Muslim culture are being
> forced on the students.

        Why don't the Hindus react?

> (Another disciple:) Instead of lamenting they should also organize
> something.

        Quite so.

\*\*\*

December 30, 1939

> (A disciple:) There are some people who object to “Vande Mataram” as a
> national song. And some Congressmen support the removal of some parts
> of the song.

        In that case the Hindus should give up their culture.

> The argument is that the song speaks of Hindu gods, like Durga, and
> that is offensive to the Muslims.

        But it is not a religious song: it is a national song and the
Durga spoken of is India as the Mother. Why should not the Muslims
accept it?[\[2\]](#_ftn2) It is an image used in poetry. In the Indian
conception of nationality, the Hindu view would naturally be there. If
it cannot find a place there, the Hindus may as well be asked to give up
their culture. The Hindus don't object to “Allah-ho-Akbar”....

        Why should not the Hindu worship his god? Otherwise, the Hindus
must either accept Mohammedanism or the European culture or become
atheists....

        I told C. R. Das \[in 1923\] that this Hindu-Muslim question
must be solved before the Britishers go, otherwise there was a danger of
civil war. He also agreed and wanted to solve it....

        Instead of doing what was necessary the Congress is trying to
flirt with Jinnah, and Jinnah simply thinks that he has to obstinately
stick to his terms to get them. The more they try, the more Jinnah
becomes intransigent.

\*\*\*

January 3, 1940

> (A disciple:) X who is an I.C.S. is said to be brilliant.

        Then why did he go in for the I.C.S. to waste himself?... In
that official routine work all the brilliant qualities are lost. There
is no scope for them.

\*\*\*

February 5, 1940

> (A disciple:) Dominion status Subhas Bose calls a compromise; he wants
> independence.

        It is a compromise on the surface, but it is practically
independence; you get all you want without any unnecessary struggle.
When you can secede at your will from the British connection, it is
practically independence.[\[3\]](#_ftn3) Independence is all right if
you are prepared for a revolution, but is the country ready for it?

\*\*\*

April 2, 1940

*        (Smiling)* Have you seen the report of the All India Sweepers'
Conference at Lahore under Sardul Singh's presidentship? They have
protested against Jinnah's Muslim India scheme and said that if India
was going to be divided they must also have a separate India. I was not
quite wrong when I said that barbers also would now start an agitation
for an India of their own?...

\*\*\*

May 5, 1940

        Now they \[the Muslim League\] say that they are the sole
representatives of the Muslims, and the Government strongly supports
them. The Congress is also half-hearted against \[the scheme of\]
Pakistan....

        The Congress and other people are shouting old slogans in
changed conditions. At one time the Independence cry was all right, but
now Dominion status is almost equivalent to that and in time you can be
virtually independent. Besides, it is the best chance under the present
conditions in opposition to charkha and non-violence....

> (A disciple:) If Hitler invades India, Gandhi will declare we are all
> non-violent.

        Hitler will be delighted at it.

> Yes, he will sweep off everybody with machine guns. Gandhi believes he
> can be converted.

        It is a beautiful idea, but not credible. Does anybody really
believe in his non-violence?... Will he face an army with his charkha?

\*\*\*

May 17, 1940

        It seems it is not five or six of our people \[the Ashram's
disciples\] but more than half that are in sympathy with Hitler and want
him to win.[\[4\]](#_ftn4)

> (A disciple, laughing:) Half?

        No, it is not a matter to laugh at. It is a very serious matter.
... If these people want that the Ashram should be dissolved, they can
come and tell me and I will dissolve it instead of the police doing it.
They have no idea about the world and talk like children. Hitlerism is
the greatest menace that the world has ever met—if Hitler wins, do they
think India has any chance of being free? It is a well-known fact that
Hitler has an eye on India. He is openly talking of world-empire....

        I hear K. \[a disciple\] says that Russia can come now and
conquer India. It is this kind of slave mentality that keeps India in
bondage. He pretends to spirituality; doesn't he know that the first
thing that Stalin will do is to wipe out spirituality from India?...

\*\*\*

May 18, 1940

> (A disciple:) D. was being jeered at \[by other “disciples”\] for
> being pro-Ally. When he said he was sad at Holland's defeat, they
> remarked, “You are pro-Ally?”

        They are glad that Holland was occupied? Very strange, and yet
they want freedom for India? That is one thing I can't swallow. How can
they have sympathy with Hitler who is destroying other nations, taking
away their liberty? It is not only pro-Ally sympathy but sympathy for
humanity that they are jeering at.

\*\*\*

May 21, 1940

> (A disciple:) Gandhi writes in the Harijan that there is not much to
> choose between Imperialism and Fascism. He finds very little
> difference.

        There is a big difference. Under Fascism he wouldn't be able to
write such things or say anything against the State. He would be shot.

> And he still believes that by non-violence we can defend our country.

        Non-violence can't defend. One can only die by it.

> He believes that by such a death a change of heart can take place in
> the enemy.

        If it does, it will be after two or three centuries.

\*\*\*

May 28, 1940

        Have you read what Gandhi has said in answer to a correspondent?
He says that if eight crores of Muslims demand a separate State, what
else are the twenty-five crores of Hindus to do but surrender? Otherwise
there will be civil war.

> (A disciple:) I hope that is not the type of conciliation he is
> thinking of.

        Not thinking of it, you say? He has actually said that and
almost yielded. If you yield to the opposite party beforehand, naturally
they will stick strongly to their claims. It means that the minority
will rule and the majority must submit. The minority is allowed its say,
“We shall be the ruler and you our servants. Our *harf* \[word\] will be
law; you will have to obey.” This shows a peculiar mind. I think this
kind of people are a little cracked.

\*\*\*

June 17, 1940

> (The German troops entered Paris a few days earlier; on the 17^(th)
> Pétain proposed an armistice.)

> (A disciple:) I think everybody realizes the danger if Hitler occupies
> France.

        Does India realize it? Everybody seems to be busy with his own
interest and none considers anything in the light of the world
situation. The Congress Committee is now in session; will it realize the
danger?

> (Another disciple:) I think it will.

        Let us hope so. Nehru seems to shut his eyes and calls all these
fears a bogey of foreign invasion.

\*\*\*

June 18, 1940

> (A disciple:) Some people in India defend France's peace
> offer.[\[5\]](#_ftn5) They say, “What can the French do? Their army
> was being annihilated....”

        That is the typical Indian mentality. That is why India is under
subjection. Just because an army has been defeated, must it surrender?
Then, will a subject nation always be a subject nation? Won't it fight
for freedom?... The greatness lies in not giving up the struggle and
refusing to accept the defeat as final.

\*\*\*

June 21, 1940

        In Kashmir, the Hindus had all the monopoly. Now if the Muslim
demands are acceded to, the Hindus will be wiped out.[\[6\]](#_ftn6)

\*\*\*

June 25, 1940

        The greatest preoccupation of modern man seems to be to find out
means of destruction as well as means of escaping destruction....

> (A disciple:) Have you read what Jawaharlal says?

        Yes, that he doesn't think there is the slightest likelihood of
a major invasion of India. Only a minor invasion from Afghanistan and
such places perhaps?...

> If Nehru says like that, how can we blame \[others\]? Nehru who is
> supposed to have international politics at his fingertips?

        All the knowledge most Indian politicians have of the
international situation is some illusions about extreme political ideas,
which have been shattered everywhere.

\*\*\*

July 4, 1940

> (A disciple:) Gandhi has offered his help through the Viceroy to the
> British government and asked the British to lay down their arms and
> practise non-violence.

        He must be a little cracked.

> While asking them to lay down their arms, he wants them to keep up
> their spirit.

        And be subjected in practice![\[7\]](#_ftn7)

\*\*\*

July 7, 1940

        With \[Subhas\] Bose on one side and Gandhi on the other, future
unity will be difficult. If Hindus and Muslims had now made a united
demand the Government would have had to submit.[\[8\]](#_ftn8)

\*\*\*

October 7, 1940

> (A disciple:) It is because of the British divide-and-rule policy that
> we can't unite.

        Nonsense! Was there unity in India before the British rule?

> But now since our national consciousness is more developed there is
> more chance of unity if the British don't bolster up Jinnah and his
> Muslim claims.

        Does Jinnah want unity?... What he wants is independence for
Muslims and if possible rule over India. That is the old spirit.... But
why is it expected that Muslims will be so accommodating? Everywhere
minorities are claiming their rights. Of course, there may be some
Muslims who are different, more nationalistic in outlook: even
\[Maulana\] Azad has his own terms, only he sees Indian unity first and
will settle those terms afterwards.

\*\*\*

October 12, 1940

> (A disciple:) But how long can Hitler keep these races \[in the
> countries he invaded\] in subjection? They will rise in revolt one
> day.
>
> /
>
> >         What about Poland and Czechoslovakia? They are two of the
> > most heroic nations in the world and yet what can they do?...
> >
> > > The trouble about India is that the British government has not
> > > kept a single promise so far. So nobody trusts it.
> >
> >         The fact is that the British don't trust India to help them
> > if she is given Dominion status. Otherwise they would have given it.
> >
> > > I don't think India will refuse to help if we get something.
> >
> >         You think so? I am not sure. What do you think of the
> > left-wingers, Communists, Subhas Bose, for instance? And it is not
> > true that they \[the British\] have given nothing.... They gave
> > provincial autonomy and didn't exercise any veto power. It is the
> > Congress that spoiled everything by resigning.[\[9\]](#_ftn9) If
> > without resigning they had put pressure at the Centre they would
> > have got by now what they want. It is for two reasons I support the
> > British in this war: first in India's own interest and secondly for
> > humanity's sake, and the reasons I have given are external reasons,
> > there are spiritual reasons too.[\[10\]](#_ftn10)
> >
> > \*\*\*
> >
> > November 28, 1940
> >
> > (After hearing the text of Gandhi’s recent “political will”.)
> >
> >         Something in him takes delight in suffering for its own
> > sake. Even the prospect of suffering seems to please him.... It is
> > the Christian idea that has taken hold of him.
> >
> >         Besides, he seems to think that after him his theory and
> > creed of non-violence will continue. I don’t think so. A few people
> > will be there, but anything like a wide-scale influence like that of
> > his personality does not seem possible....
> >
> >         Fast and satyagraha changing the heart of the opponent is
> > absurd. What they can do is exert pressure and secure some
> > concession.
> >
> >         ...
> >
> >         The English are not quite wrong when they say that the
> > Indians must settle their own differences. The Lucknow
> > Pact[\[11\]](#_ftn11) has become a big political blunder. The
> > Mahomedans, they want to rule India.
> >
> > \*\*\*

</div>

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) It is noteworthy that one of the very first attempts
to overthrow British rule was made in eastern India in the last decades
of the eighteenth century by organized groups of Sannyasins.

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Even today, the verses of *Vande Mataram* mentioning
Durga as the personification of Mother India are omitted from most
official recitations.

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) In 1942, Sri Aurobindo publicly supported the Cripps
proposal to grant India Dominion status (see note 1, part VI).

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) A sympathy shared by many in India at the time, which
stemmed from a justified anti-British feeling but veiled the reality of
what was at stake.

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) Not a “peace offer” but Pétain's capitulation to
Hitler.

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) This is exactly what happened in the decades
following Independence: Hindus were either slaughtered or driven out of
Kashmir. Even today, thousands of them have to live in refugee camps
farther south.

</div>

<div id="ftn7" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) This refers to an open letter which Gandhi addressed
to the British a few days earlier: “I appeal for cessation of
hostilities ... because war is bad in essence. You want to kill Nazism.
Your soldiers are doing the same work of destruction as the Germans. The
only difference is that perhaps yours are not as thorough as the Germans
... I venture to present you with a nobler and a braver way, worthy of
the bravest soldiers. I want you to fight Nazism without arms or ...
with non-violent arms. I would like you to lay down the arms you have as
being useless for saving you or humanity.... Invite Herr Hitler and
Signor Mussolini to take what they want of the countries you call your
possessions. Let them take possession of your beautiful island with your
many beautiful buildings. You will give all these but not your souls nor
your minds....” (*Amrita Bazar Patrika*, July 4, 1940, “Method of
Non-violence—Mahatma Gandhi's appeal to every Briton.”)

</div>

<div id="ftn8" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) To submit to granting independence to a united India,
as Britain needed India's cooperation during the War.

</div>

<div id="ftn9" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) By resigning from all the provincial ministries in
October-November 1939, as the Congress declared itself unable to lend
support to Britain in the war.

</div>

<div id="ftn10" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) A few days earlier, Sri Aurobindo issued a public
declaration in support of the Allies.

</div>

<div id="ftn11" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) See note 5, part IV.

</div>

</div>
