+++
title = "07 NOTE ON ATTACK ON GURDWARA DEHRA SAHIB"

+++
**NOTE ON ATTACK ON GURDWARA**  
**DEHRA SAHIB**

Firing continued to be directed against the famous Dehra Sahib Gurdwara
of Lahore, site of the martyrdom of Sri Guru Arjan Dev, fifth Guru of
the Sikhs.  This, in spite of the fact that this place is situated at a
distance of hardly five yards from the Lahore Fort, Headquarters of the
Additional Police and military pickets for the city.  Water-taps
supplying water to the Gurdwara estate were cut off, so that the inmates
about 150 in number, should be left to die through sheer thirst.  After
firing for some time, the Muslim National Guards advanced towards the
Gurdwara, and set fire to the building adjoining the Gurdwara.  The
whole area was ablaze in a few minutes’ time.  Some Sikhs had taken
shelter in the Samadh (Mausoleum) of Maharaja Ranjit Singh, which is
separated from the Gurdwara by a distance of about 30 yards.  Here the
Muslim crowd, amid cries of “Pakistan zindabad” etc. and filthy abuse
directed against the Sikhs battered at the Gates of the Samadh.  Several
Sikhs were shot dead.  The gates of the Gurdwara and Samadh were
perforated with bullets.  These happenings occurred on the 13th August. 
On the 14th the Gurdwara was put under the guard of the Boundary Force
of General Rees.

Baoli Sahib Gurdwara, situate in Dabbi Bazar, and close to two thickly
populated Muslim areas, was burned on the 4th June.  The place was in
flames, and such Sikhs as were inside it were shot dead or roasted
alive.

Gurdwara Janam Asthan was subjected to continuous attacks since June. 
Muslim police pickets posted ostensibly for the purpose of protection of
this place abetted arson and attacks on the Gurdwara.  On August 11,
Baulch Military entered the Gurdwara on pretext of finding out supposed
bombs concealed inside the Gurdwara, and there bayoneted or shot dead 13
Sikhs.

This is part of the systematic campaign of terror and destruction
carried on by Muslims against Sikhs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
