+++
title = "03 2. Ashoka and Pushyamitra, iconoclasts?"

+++
**2. Ashoka and Pushyamitra, iconoclasts?**

One of the diversionary tactics employed by the “eminent historians” in
order to shield Islamic iconoclasm from the public eye is to allege that
Hinduism itself is the guilty religion, viz. of persecuting minority
religions such as Buddhism.  So much is this accusation now taken for
granted, that any attempt to stick to the historical record fills the
secularists with exasperation at such Hindu fanatical blindness.  Thus,
Tavleen Singh challenges us: “Try, for instance, to get a BJP leader to
admit that Hindus did to Buddhist shrines pretty much what Muslims were
later to do with Hindu temples and you will find that it is nearly
impossible.”^([1](#1))

Sadly, some Buddhists have taken the bait and interiorized this line of
anti-Hindu polemic, which also ties in neatly with the pro-Buddhist bias
in Nehruvian and Western Indology.  How painfully ungrateful.  While
Hinduism has received from Islam nothing but murder and destruction,
Buddhism owes a lot to Hinduism.  Apart from its very existence, it has
received from Hinduism toleration, alms by Hindu laymen, sons and
daughters of Hindus to fill its monasteries and nunneries, land grants
and funding by Hindu rulers, protection by Hindu rulers against
lawlessness and against the Islamic invaders between the mid-7th and the
late 12th century.  In many cases, Buddhist temples formed part of large
pluralist temple-complexes, and Hindu codes of art and architecture
dealt with Buddha on a par with Shiva and other objects of depiction and
worship.^([2](#2))

Whatever the facts, we are now faced with a massive propaganda alleging
Hindu persecution of Buddhism.  Let us study one example: the story of
alleged Hindu persecution of Buddhism by Pushyamitra, a general in the
service of the declining Maurya dynasty, who founded the Sunga dynasty
after a *coup d’état*.  This story provides the standard secularist
“refutation” of the “myth” that Hinduism has always been tolerant.

Thus, the Marxist historian Gargi Chakravartty writes: “Another myth has
been meticulously promoted with regard to the tolerance of the Hindu
rulers.  Let us go back to the end of second century B.C. Divyavadana,
in a text of about the second-third century A.D., depicts Pushyamitra
Shunga as a great persecutor of Buddhists.  In a crusading march with a
huge army he destroyed stupas, burnt monasteries and killed monks.  This
stretched up to Shakala, i.e. modern Sialkot, where he announced a
reward of 100 gold coins to the person who would bring the head of a
Buddhist monk.  Even if this is an exaggeration, the acute hostility and
tensions between Pushyamitra and the monks cannot be denied.”^([3](#3))

We need not comment on Chakravartty’s misreading of *Divyâvadâna* as a
person’s name rather than a book title.  Remark the bias in the
assumption that the supposedly “undeniable” conflict between the king
and the monks proves the king’s intolerance; for what had been their own
contribution to the conflict?  When Shivaji had a conflict with the
Brahmins (a well-known episode)^([4](#4)), all secularists and most
Hindus blame the “wily, greedy” Brahmins; there is no good reason why
the Buddhist monks should, by contrast, be assumed to be blameless when
they came in conflict with a king.

The story is in fact given in two near contemporaneous (2nd century
A.D.) Buddhist histories, the *Asokâvadâna* and the *Divyâvadâna*; the
two narratives are almost verbatim the same and very obviously have a
common origin.^([5](#5)) This non-contemporary story (which surfaces
more than three centuries after the alleged facts) about Pushyamitra’s
offering money for the heads of Buddhist monks is rendered improbable by
external evidence: the well-attested historical fact that he allowed and
patronized the construction of monasteries and Buddhist universities in
his domains, as well as the still-extant stupa of Sanchi.^([6](#6))
After Ashoka’s lavish sponsorship of Buddhism, it is perfectly possible
that Buddhist institutions fell on slightly harder times under the
Sungas, but persecution is quite another matter.  The famous historian
of Buddhism Etienne Lamotte has observed: “To judge from the documents,
Pushyamitra must be acquitted through lack of proof.”^([7](#7))

In consulting the source texts I noticed a significant literary fact
which I have not seen mentioned in the scholarly literature (e.g.
Lamotte, just quoted), and which I want to put on record.  First of all,
a look at the critical edition of the *Asokâvadâna* (“Illustrious Acts
of Ashoka”) tells a story of its own concerning the idealization of
Buddhism in modern India.  This is how Sujitkumar Mukhopadhyaya, the
editor of the *Asokâvadâna*, relates this work’s testimony about Ashoka
doing to a rival sect that very thing of which Pushyamitra is accused
later on:

“At that time, an incident occurred which greatly enraged the king.  A
follower of the Nirgrantha (Mahâvîra) painted a picture, showing Buddha
prostrating himself at the feet of the Nirgrantha.  Ashoka ordered all
the Ajivikas of Pundravardhana (North Bengal) to be killed.  In one day,
eighteen thousand Ajivikas lost their lives.  A similar kind of incident
took place in the town of Pataliputra.  A man who painted such a picture
was burnt alive with his family.  *It was announced that whoever would
bring to the king the head of a Nirgrantha would be rewarded with a
dînâra (a gold coin)*.  As a result of this, thousands of Nirgranthas
lost their lives.”^([8](#8)) Only when Vitashoka, Ashoka’s favourite
Arhat (an enlightened monk, a Theravada-Buddhist saint), was mistaken
for a Nirgrantha and killed by a man desirous of the reward, did Ashoka
revoke the order.

Typically, Mukhopadhyaya refuses to believe his eyes at this
demythologization of the “secular” emperor Ashoka: “This is one of the
best chapters of the text.  The subject, the style, the composition,
everything here is remarkable.  In every *shloka* there is a poetic
touch.( ... ) But the great defect is also to be noticed.  Here too
Ashoka is described as dreadfully cruel.  If the central figure of this
story were not a historic personage as great and well-known as Ashoka,
we would have nothing to say.  To say that Ashoka, whose devotion to
*all* religious sects is unique in the history of humanity (as is
well-known through his edicts) persecuted the Jains or the Ajivikas is
simply absurd.  And why speak of Ashoka alone?  There was no Buddhist
king anywhere in India who persecuted the Jains or the Ajivikas or any
other sect.”^([9](#9))

Contrary to Mukhopadhyaya’s confident assertion, there are a few
attested cases of Buddhist-Jain conflict.  The *Mahâvamsa* says that the
Buddhist king Vattagamini (2917 B. C.) in Sri Lanka destroyed a Jain
vihara.  In the Shravana-Belgola epitaph of Mallishena, the Jain teacher
Akalanka says that after a successful debate with Buddhists, he broke a
Buddha statue with his own foot.^([10](#10)) The same (rare, but not
non-existent) phenomenon of Buddhist fanaticism can be found outside
India: the introduction of Buddhism in Tibet and Mongolia is associated
with a “forceful suppression” of the native Shamanism.^([11](#11)) In
recent decades in Sri Lanka, Buddhist monks have been instrumental in
desecrating and demolishing Hindu temples.  None of this proves that
Buddhist doctrine incites its followers to persecution of non-Buddhists,
but neither should anything human be considered alien to Buddhist human
beings.

Mukhopadhyaya’s refusal to face facts about Ashoka’s misconduct just
goes to show how far the idealization of Buddhism and Ashoka has gotten
out of hand in Nehruvian India.  When the modern myth of Ashoka as the
great secular Buddhist ruler is contradicted by an ancient source, even
one outspokenly favourable to Buddhism and Ashoka, which shows him
persecuting rival schools of thought, the modem scholar (a Hindu Brahmin
by birth) still insists on upholding the myth, and dismisses the actual
information in the ancient source as a “great defect”.

It is at the end of the *Asokâvadâna* that we find the oft-quoted story
that Pushyamitra offered one *dînâra* for every *sramanasirah*, “head of
a Buddhist monk”.^([12](#12)) Not that he got many monks killed, for,
according to the account given, one powerful Arhat created monks’ heads
by magic and gave these to the people to bring to Pushyamitra’s court,
so that they could collect the award without cutting off any real monk’s
head.  So, even according to the only story cited as source for
Pushyamitra’s persecution, the Hindu villain is a ridiculous failure at
killing Buddhists.

At any rate, the striking fact, so far not mentioned in the Pushyamitra
controversy, is that the main line of the narrative making the
allegation against Pushyamitra *is a carbon copy* of the just-quoted
account of Ashoka’s own offer to pay for every head of a monk from a
rivalling sect.  Hagiographies are notorious for competitive copying
(e.g. appropriating the miracle of another saint, multiplied by two or
more, for one’s own hero); in this case, it may have taken the form of
attributing a negative feat of the hero onto his enemy.

But there are two differences.  Firstly, in the account concerning
Pushyamitra, a miracle episode forms a crucial element, and this does
not add to the credibility of the whole.  And secondly, Ashoka belongs
to the writer’s own Buddhist camp, whereas Pushyamitra is described as
an enemy of Buddhism.  When something negative is said about an enemy
(i.c. Pushyamitra), it is wise to reserve one’s acceptance of the
allegation until independent confirmation is forthcoming; by contrast,
when a writer alleges that his own hero has committed a crime, there is
much more reason to expect the allegation to be correct.  In the absence
of external evidence, the best thing we can do for now is to draw the
logical conclusion from the internal evidence: the allegation against
Pushyamitra is much less credible than the allegation against Ashoka.

Mukhopadhyaya can only save Ashoka’s secular reputation by accusing the
*Asokâvadâna* author of a lie, viz. of the false allegation that Ashoka
had persecuted Nirgranthas.  Unfortunately, a lie would not enhance the
author’s credibility as a witness against Pushyamitra, nor as a witness
for the laudable acts of Ashoka which make up a large part of the text. 
So, Mukhopadhyaya tries to present this lie (which only he himself
alleges) as a hagiographically acceptable type of lie: “in order to show
the greatness of Buddhism, the orthodox author degraded it by painting
the greatest Buddhist of the world as a dreadful religious  
fanatic.”^([13](#13))

However, contrary to Mukhopadhyaya’s explanation, there is no hint in
the text that the author meant to “show the greatness of Buddhism” by
“painting the greatest Buddhist as a religious fanatic”.  By this
explanation, Mukhopadhyaya means that the writer first made Ashoka
commit a great crime (the persecution of the Nirgranthas) to illustrate
the greatness of Buddhism by sheer contrast, viz. as the factor which
made Ashoka give up this crime.  There is an famous analogy for this:
the cruelty of Ashoka’s conquest of Kalinga was exaggerated by scribes
in order to highlight the violence-renouncing effect of Ashoka’s
subsequent conversion to Buddhism.  But in this passage, Buddhism plays
no role in Ashoka’s change of heart: it is only the sight of his own
friend, killed by mistake, which makes him revoke the order.  And it is
his commitment to Buddhism which prompts Ashoka to persecute the
irreverent Nirgranthas in the first place.

Buddhism does not gain from this account, and if a Buddhist propagandist
related it nonetheless, it may well be that it was a historical fact too
well-known at the time to be omitted.  By contrast, until proof of the
contrary, the carbon-copy allegation against Pushyamitra may very
reasonably be dismissed as sectarian propaganda.  But a 20th-century
Hindu scholar will twist and turn the literary data in order to uphold a
sectarian and miracle-based calumny against the Hindu ruler Pushyamitra,
and to explain away a sobering testimony about the fanaticism of Ashoka,
that great secularist patron of Buddhism.  Such is the quality of the
“scholarship” deployed to undermine the solid consensus that among the
world religions, Hinduism has always been the most tolerant by far.  
 

**Footnotes:**

> ^([1](#1a))Tavleen Singh: “Running out of control”, *Indian Express*,
> 25-7-1993.
>
> ^([2](#2a))E.g. Varahamihira: *Brihatsamhitâ*, ch.57, 59.
>
> ^([3](#3a))Gargi Chakravartty “BJP-RSS and Distortion of History”, in
> Pratul Lahiri, ed.: *Selected Writings on Communalism*, People’s
> Publishing House, Delhi 1994, p. 166-167.
>
> ^([4](#4a))J. Sarkar: *Shivaji and his Times*, Orient Longman, Delhi
> 1992 (1919), p.161, 165-167.
>
> ^([5](#5a))*Avadâna*, “narrative”, is the Buddhist equivalent of
> *Purâna. Divyâvâdana* = “divine narrative”.
>
> ^([6](#6a))The same argument exists in the reverse direction
> concerning the Kushana king Kanishka (lst-2nd century A.D.). This
> patron of Mahayana Buddhism is sometimes accused of persecuting
> Brahmins, but the sparse physical testimony argues against this: on
> his coins, he honoured Greek, Zoroastrian and Brahmanic deities along
> with the Buddha.
>
> ^([7](#7a))E. Lamotte: *History of Indian Buddhism*, Institut
> Orientaliste, Louvain-la-Neuve 1988 (1958), p. 109.
>
> ^([8](#8a))S. Mukhopadhyaya: *The Ashokavadana*, Sahitya Akademi,
> Delhi 1963, p.xxxvii. In footnote, Mukhopadhyaya correctly notes that
> the author “seems to have confused the Nirgranthas (Jains) with the
> Ajivikas”, a similar ascetic sect.  *Nirgrantha* = “freed from
> fetters”, a Jaina.
>
> ^([9](#9a))S. Mukhopadhyaya: *The Ashokavadana*, p.xxxviii. In fact,
> the non-persecution of other religions, claimed here for Ashoka
> against the very evidence under discussion, was not unique at all: it
> was the rule among Hindu kings throughout history, and the Buddha
> himself had been one of its beneficiaries.
>
> ^([10](#10a))Both instances cited by S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2
> (2nd ed.), p.413, with reference to *Epigraphica Indica*, vol.3, p.192
> and p.201.
>
> ^([11](#11a))Piers Vitebsky: *De sjamaan*, Kosmos, Utrecht 1996
> (1995), p. 135.
>
> ^([12](#12a))S. Mukhopadhyaya: *The Ashokavadana*, p.134.
>
> ^([13](#13a))S. Mukhopadhyaya: *The Ashokavadana*, p.xxxviii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI Books]()   [Back to
Home]()**
