+++
title = "01 WAITING BEFORE THE CLOSED GATES"

+++

AT the middle of the nineteenth century Japan was a hermit nation. Three hundred years had passed since it had first been visited by Europeans. Almost immediately after merchants found their way thither, Roman Catholic missionaries began those labours that at one time seemed likely to result in the speedy winning of Japan to their Church. Then came an era of bitter opposition that resulted in the apparent extirpation of Christianity. All Europeans were driven from the land except as the Dutch merchants were allowed to have a trading post on the tiny island of Deshima, which thus became the one point of contact between Japan and the West.

Opposition to the missionaries and their teaching was not the only reason that led Japan to adopt the policy of isolation. That opposition itself did not come chiefly from religious considerations but from a belief that the missionaries had been sent out by their sovereign to win the hearts of a portion of the Japanese people in order to facilitate the future conquest of the country. Spanish and Portuguese merchants had done not a little to make Europeans unpopular. They, too, were suspected of having a part in the schemes of their king. Some of them had by their immoral conduct shocked a people whose own standards were none too high. Notwithstanding the protests of the missionaries against the slave trade, the merchants had carried away many Japanese into servitude, and reports were current of terrible cruelties that were suffered by these unfortunate men. Though the guilt of this traffic was shared by daimyos and others who delivered into the hands of the traders criminals and captives taken in war, this did not prevent it from being an additional reason for the dislike that was felt for Europeans. Various incidents had fostered unfriendly feelings between the Japanese and the merchants of Manila and Macao. In one noteworthy case the former, in revenge for what they considered unjust treatment received at Macao, attempted to capture a vessel that had come from that port to Nagasaki, and would probably have succeeded had not the Portuguese captain, after bravely defending himself for three days, set fire to the powder magazine, thus destroying the ship with its crew, passengers, and cargo.

Whatever may have been the parts of merchants and missionaries in causing Japan to drive them forth and close the gates behind them, the commercial and religious interests of the West were earnestly hoping that in some way those gates might be unlocked so that there might again be free access to the land. Though Protestants had not the same reasons as Roman Catholics for regarding Japan with special interest, it was not long after the attention of English and American Christians had been aroused to the claims of foreign missions that some were led to make that country an object of their prayers, contributions, and efforts. The missionaries in China had hopes that they might be able to help Japan either in person or by their books. Doubtless some of their publications were carried to that land, and they could be read there by the best educated people. In 1818, when Captain Gordon of the brig *Brothers* went to the Bay of Yedo hoping to get permission for trade, large numbers of visitors came to his vessel, and he mentions giving them two Testaments besides some religious tracts printed in Chinese.\* Dr. Medhurst, the well-known missionary, found means to make some study of the Japanese language, and in 1828 he asked the Dutch for permission to go on their ship to Nagasaki. This request was refused.†

The *Missionary Herald,* the organ of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, in its issue for March, 1828, acknowledges the receipt of $27,87 as received from Brookline, Mass., "for mission to Japan," Similar entries appear from time to time in later numbers. To-day, as one turns over the leaves of the magazine and happens to light upon these words, they seem like an anachronism, since there could at that time be no mission in Japan; but "faith is assurance of things hoped for, a conviction of things not seen," and those who made these contributions could overlook all obstacles and believe that Japan would not long be closed to the Gospel. William Ropes, a Christian merchant of Boston, whose residence was in Brookline, had invited a few friends to meet once a month at his house that they might unite in prayer for the conversion of the world. At the first meeting, when a contribution had been taken, the question arose to what object it should be devoted. On the table of the room where these friends met was a basket of Japanese workmanship that had probably been obtained through the Dutch traders. Mr. Ropes drew attention to its beauty, and his suggestion that their money be given for the evangelisation of the land from which it came was accepted. The merchant soon after this left Brookline, but a "ladies' sewing society" that grew up in connection with the other meeting often sent to the American Board sums of money "for the mission in Japan." In all, more than six hundred dollars were given, and when in 1869 the Board decided to open work in Japan, the new mission was credited with over four thousand dollars as the sum of these contributions and the accrued interest The first missionary sent to Japan by the American Board was Rev. D. C. Greene, whose father, then a young minister, was present at the first meeting in Brookline.\*

From time to time Japanese sailors driven to sea by tempests have been carried to the shores of America or cast upon some of the islands in the Pacific Ocean. Three such waifs, who had been rescued near the mouth of the Columbia River, were sent to China in the hope that some way might be found for returning them to their own land. They were placed in the care of Dr. Karl Gutzlaff, who gave them shelter in his own house at Macao. He became much interested in them and applied himself with so much zeal to the study of their language that he became able to converse with them upon simple subjects. Soon afterwards, four more Japanese, who had been wrecked on the Philippine Islands, also found a home with Dr. Gutzlaff. Mr. C. W. King, an American merchant residing in China, gave the use of his ship *Morrison* for carrying these people back to Japan. It sailed from Macao, July 4, 1837. Every precaution was taken to avoid whatever might excite the suspicion or the opposition of the Japanese. The ship's guns were left behind so that the expedition might be shown to be entirely peaceful. Much to Dr, Gutzlaff's disappointment, it was further decided that no Christian books in the Chinese language should be taken.\* This was not because Mr. King was not interested in Christian work. On the contrary, he hoped that the expedition might be a help in opening Japan to the Gospel, and three Christian missionaries accompanied him and Mrs. King on the voyage. They were Drs. Karl Gutzlaff, S. Wells Williams, and Peter Parker. Dr. Parker, being a physician, took with him a stock of medicines, some instruments, and a number of anatomical plates. He also had a paper prepared stating his profession and his willingness to give his services gratuitously to any that needed them. So far as recorded, the only opportunity Dr. Parker had for practising his art was while making a short stop in Loochoo. He lent a pamphlet on vaccination to a physician, who copied it and seemed much interested in its contents. Dr. Parker, in giving orally some further explanations about the way in which the operation should be performed, actually vaccinated the old gentleman before the latter was fully aware that the instruction was being carried to such a practical stage.

A set of papers was prepared for presentation to the Japanese Government. One of these gave the names of the shipwrecked sailors, the story of their rescue, and a request that an officer be sent on board to receive them. Another gave an account of the United States and expressed the hope that Japan would be ready to enter into friendly relations with it. In order to show that the religion of its people need not be an obstacle, the explanation was inserted: "God is worshipped by every man according to his own conscience, and there is perfect toleration of all religions. We ourselves worship the God of peace, respect our superiors, and live in harmony with one another."

A list of the presents that had been brought mentioned a portrait of Washington, a telescope, a pair of globes, an encyclopedia, a collection of American treaties, and an American history. In referring to the books, the following remark was appended: "Languages of nations differ, and perhaps ours, though much more extensively spoken than Dutch or Portuguese, may not be understood in your honourable country. If so, and at your request, one of my party shall remain in Japan a year to teach our language." There was also a list of the articles of merchandise on board, with a request that there might be free intercourse with Japanese merchants.

These documents were never delivered. The *Morrison* anchored in the Bay of Yedo, July 30. A number of boats pushed out from the shore and one or two hundred Japanese came on board, but no officer appeared. Letters asking that some one come with authority to confer with the Americans were entrusted to the visitors and it was thought that an official visit would be received the next morning. A little before dawn, however, some cannon that had been brought in the night to a, neighbouring promontory opened fire, one of the balls striking the ship without doing much damage. Bad weather was setting in, and, as there was no good anchorage that could not be commanded by batteries, it was deemed advisable to depart and renew at some other place the attempt to get into communication with officials. Since the wind and currents were unfavourable for a landing on Hondo, the Japanese waifs advised going to Kagoshima.

The reception there was similar to the one before experienced, and the *Morrison* was again fired upon. Mr. King now offered as a last resort to take the Japanese to Nagasaki, where he hoped the intercession of the Dutch would make it possible for them to land. After what had occurred, they were unwilling to be put in the hands of their country's officials and begged to be taken back to China. The *Morrison* therefore left Japanese waters and was soon back in Macao.\* Dr. Williams says of this expedition: "Commercially speaking, the voyage cost about $2,000 without any return; and the effects in a missionary or scientific way were nil. But not finally. The seven men brought back were employed in one way or another, and most of them usefully. Two remained with Mr. Gutzlaff for many years; and two worked in my printing-office at Macao; these four aided us in getting some knowledge of their language, so that between us the books of Genesis and Matthew, and the Gospel and Epistles of John were done into Japanese for their instruction. Rikimatsu, the youngest man, went to Nagasaki with Admiral Stirling in 1855 as his interpreter. He and Otosan, who lived at Shanghai, both showed in their correct lives that the faith which they professed was a living principle. They were the first fruits of the Church of Christ in Japan. . . . For nearly two years, five of them maintained daily prayer in my house at Macao; and their harsh repulse was one of the arguments they used to implore the Governor of Nations to send the Gospel to their countrymen."†

Before condemning the Japanese for refusing to receive back these waifs, we must put ourselves in their place. They might well suspect that the foreigners were using shipwrecked sailors as tools for gaining some advantage for themselves. If moved only by compassion, why did they not bring the men to Nagasaki, or, better still, send them by the Dutch ship? The Daimyo of Echizen, it is said, urged that the castaways be received; but others declared that there was danger of their introducing the Christian religion and in other ways aiding the designs of the crafty foreigners.

In 1848 Ranald McDonald, then twenty-three years old, one of the crew of the whaleship *Plymouth,* had himself left adrift in a small boat off the coast of Japan. Going to the shore, he was put under arrest and so remained until he and some other American sailors were released at the demand of Commander Glynn who visited Japan in the U. S. Ship *Preble.* The statement made by McDonald before Commander Glynn shows him to have been a man with sufficient regard for religion to lead him to take his Bible among the few effects that he brought on shore. It may possibly be that he was a religious enthusiast who had hopes of doing some missionary work. He says that when examined by the Japanese officials in Nagasaki: "They finally asked me if I believed there was a God in Heaven. I answered, Yes; that I believed in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ." At Nagasaki he was confined in a temple. He said: "The day after being put in this prison I asked for my books, particularly my Bible. The interpreter told me with a good deal of fervour or interest, 'not to speak of the Bible in Japan; it was not a good book.' "One interesting paragraph in McDonald's testimony is that in which he tells how he failed to make democracy understood when he was asked about the ship *Preble.* "The interpreter wished me to give him the relative rank of the captain of the ship by counting in the order of succession from the highest chief in the United States. First, T gave the People, which they could not comprehend; then the president of the United States, the Secretary of the Navy, commodore, post captain, and commander."\*

To Protestants as to Roman Catholics it seemed that the Loochoo Islands might be made a stepping stone for reaching Japan, since these islands were under its control, and the language was supposed to be the same. In 1843 a number of officers in the British navy formed a society called the "Loochoo Naval Mission," whose object was the teaching of Christianity to the people of the islands whose name it bore. One of the leaders in this movement was Lieutenant Clifford, who had been with Captain Basil Hall in the latter's visit to Loochoo. In 1845 the society sent out as its missionary, B. J. Bettelheim, M.D. He was a converted Jew, a Hungarian by birth, but a British subject by naturalisation. His wife was of English parentage. Dr. Peter Parker, of Canton, with whom he resided for a short time and to whom were addressed two letters that give an account of his experience in Loochoo,† said of him: "I am able to testify to his superior talents and varied learning, his talents as a linguist, and his acquirements in various languages \(speaking and writing Hebrew with the same facility as English\), and to his devoted missionary spirit."

Accompanied by his wife, his two children, and a lady who was expected to engage in educational work, he reached the harbour of Kapha, May 1, 1846. He also had with him a man hastily procured in China as an interpreter, of whom he says: "His knowledge of English was in perfect keeping with mine of Chinese, and by the time of our arrival here, we could converse with each other but very little." He also thought that the man did not understand very well the kind of Chinese that was spoken in Loochoo. The lady teacher likewise proved disappointing, for at the last moment she declared her unwillingness to land, and went back with the ship that brought her.

M. Forcade, a French missionary who had been in Loochoo for two years, came out in a boat to the ship. Dr. Bettelheim, who apparently had not known of his being there, writes of his own pleasure, not only in meeting a European, but in having a visible proof that it was possible for one to live in Loochoo, for he was sure "that what was granted to the French Tricolor could not be refused to the Union Jack." The Loochooan officials were not inclined to give a hearty welcome to the new arrivals. Dr. Bettelheim now made the most of his doubts about the interpreter's ability to understand them. He says: "Whenever my interpreter reported to me their utter unwillingness to receive or even let us land, I seemed persuaded he had not understood them, and smiled with the full assurance of one whom Captain Hall had taught better things of Loochoo."

For some reason the captain of the ship did not wish to send his boats to the shore, and the Loochooans refused to convey the foreigners. Dr. Bettelheim was equal to the emergency. He writes:

"I now saw that nothing short of a *coup-de-main* would turn the balance in my favour. Unable to get the ship's boats to land my things, which were already prepared on deck, I begged the officer on guard to let as many of them as possible be speedily lowered into the two native boats alongside the vessel, while I endeavoured to keep the owners as merry as I could in the cabin below. This was agreed to and most luckily effected before the company showed any signs of impatience. À drop of liquor is always welcome to a Loochooan, and he will sit with you so long as you fill his glass. But now a good part of my cargo being transshipped, I on my part became impatient; the mystery was revealed, and the company hastened pellmell down to their boats and shoved off at full speed as if to prevent their unexpected good luck further increasing. This was just as I desired. I had not the slightest fear of any damage being done to my goods, and could not repress an encouraging feeling crossing my bosom on beholding the natives doing something towards the reception of the missionary, although I at the same time knew they did it involuntarily.

"At this stage of affairs the captain could not of course refuse a boat to let me look after my baggage, and in this likewise some boxes were taken on shore. That we had the native boats to guide us was the most fortunate feature of the whole affair. For, had I landed without them, \[ should certainly have carried all my cargo to M. Forcade's dwelling, taking advantage of his kind permission given me the preceding day. Such a step, I afterwards plainly saw, would have been the worst we could have taken; for once housed, however huddled together \(M. Forcade had then only a single room and a cabin\), the officials would have gladly seen both parties as uncomfortable as possible; and never have made the slightest effort to accommodate us; or suppose they were indeed capable of a shadow of hospitality, we should have been obliged to accept thankfully the meanest hovel they might have fell disposed to pick out for us.

"As it was, we rowed in quite another direction, following the natives to Napha \(M. Forcade lived in a village called Tumai\), and arrived with them at a spot called Tundo, just at the entrance of the junk-harbour where, as we now know, it was impossible for them to stop. Thus the onus fell on them to try by all means to get us to go to another place; so that we could, as we really did, stand out for a good residence by mere passive continuance where we were. Some slight resistance was made to landing our goods; part of them were actually plunged into the sea during the pushing to and fro; but as it did not amount to more than a vain attempt, I found it best to leave it entirely to the heroism of the second mate while I went twice more to and from the ship, tilt all things were landed. I then brought my family and straightway proceeded with them to the temple. Arrived there, we were immediately waited upon by a great number of officers. The table being served, the parley recommenced; it seemed to me never to end. At last, the Governor of Napha came; but as I could not know at all how to compliment either in the Chinese or another manner, I found it best to continue unmoved in the stern oriental dignity I soon perceived it was best to assume and keep up till at least a concession as to residence was made us."

The Governor at first was not inclined to grant any favours; but Dr. Bettelheim says that on seeing him getting ready to withdraw:

"I expressed astonishment at his omitting to order my things to he removed from the beach, intimating at the same time that I held him responsible for any damage happening to them,. . . and, though we had a great number of boxes and packages, in less than a quarter of an hour all were in the yard."

The next day Dr. Bettelheim was presented with a document to the following effect:

"A duly prepared petition, Hiang Yungpau, the Treasurer of the Department of Chungshan in the Kingdom of Loochoo hereby earnestly begs you not to stop in these quarters in order to tranquilise this little region. The report of Ching Liangpeh, the local magistrate of Napha, states as follows: 'that the English physician Bettelheim told me with his own mouth: "if your honourable country will let me come ashore, the ship will immediately leave, &c." Having reflected that the said Bettelheim had brought with him his wife and children, and that having been a long time at sea they must be suffering both in body and mind, my heart could hardly bear to refuse him to land as he requested. But an examination of our laws and regulations shows that there is none for permitting persons or officers from another country to land with the intention of remaining. I repeatedly and decidedly begged to decline his request, but he would not hear to it, and brought his wife and children ashore with the intention of stopping. As is right, I clearly inform you of these things.'

"On receiving this, I again examined and ascertained that our Government has hitherto strictly forbidden foreigners of all ranks to come ashore to live. How much more, too, since this country has such insignificant limits, the ground everywhere so impoverished and poor, and the productions so inconsiderable; it can scarcely be called a country. If foreigners dwell here, truly it will not be convenient. But year before last, a French ship came in, whose captain stated 'that after a few months a ship of a high commander would arrive, and that in the meantime he wished to leave an agent and an interpreter with him to explain matters better.' As soon as I heard this, I explained the matter and firmly refused his request; but the captain would not listen to me and sailed away leaving behind the two individuals. I, the Treasurer, could do no other way, and here they have been left to stop till this time. Now in the opinion of this Government, since these two men came till now, both officers and people, seeing that they constantly attended to their own matters, have each been confined to their own business and station. But in this miserable region, the present year has been one of extraordinary dearth, so that the whole population has been greatly straitened and obliged to feed upon wild pineapples to keep alive. Truly I fear that before long the scarcity will become alarming and we shall be upon the borders of starvation. I am now anxiously awaiting the arrival of the high French commander, when I shall state the circumstances of the case and again earnestly beg him to take these two men home with him.

"But, sir, if you now persist in stopping here, the distress of rulers and people will become more aggravated, and the country surely will never be able to stand it. I humbly beg you to have some consideration for this distressed, worn-out country; look down on us with magnanimity, be humane and compassionate. Give up the design of stopping in this land; wait till wind and weather be favourable, then embark in the same ship and sail back to your country. This is what I anxiously hope and look for you to do."

Few missionaries at the present day would justify the way in which Dr. Bettelheim pushed himself into a country where evidently it was only fear of the military power of England that prevented the officials from using the most summary methods for keeping him out. The Kingdom of God is not to he built up by disregard of the rights of others, and it may be questioned whether its progress was not retarded rather than hastened by what was done in Loochoo. Dr. Bettelheim, however, was persistent. He says that he contented himself by sending a good present instead of any direct answer. A showy American clock seemed to be especially acceptable to the officer. The ship soon sailed away, and Dr. Bettelheim was asked to look at a house that had been chosen for his residence. It was so dark, damp, and small that he refused to accept it. Accordingly a large but dilapidated temple was assigned to him. Five Loochooans, to whom was given the name of "interpreters," were lodged in the same building, while three huts were built in the courtyard, each to contain five men, stationed there, it was said, to guard the missionary's property.

When Dr. Bettelheim offered to put his knowledge of medicine at the disposal of the Loochooans, an official communication from the Government declared the country to be so well supplied with medicines and physicians that his help would not be required. His offers to teach English, geography, and astronomy, were likewise declined.

Dr. Bettelheim entered earnestly upon the task of learning the language. He soon rendered into the Loochooan dialect some prayers from Dr. Morrison's Chinese translation of the English liturgy. He says that as he daily read these at family worship he was audibly followed by the native servants. He also composed some sermons which he committed to memory. He writes of his early attempts at preaching:

"Crowds gathered and were permitted to gather round me wherever I raised my humble pulpit upon a stone, in the corner of a street, in the market, in the roads or lanes, in Shui or in Napha; no matter where I halted, there all the passers-by stopped, the inhabitants of the neighbourhood opened their houses and slipped out, all of them, men, women, children; the stalls were idle, sellers and buyers forgot their trade while apparently engaged in a higher business."

M. Leturdu, who says that the French missionaries made no attempt at public preaching, writes of Dr. Bettelheim:

"It has often happened that when he was preaching to a circle of hearers and just as he reached the most heated part of his discourse, an official would give a whistle. At that instant half of the circle of those before whom he spoke would turn half way round to the right so as to present their backs to him. At a second signal the other half would execute a similar movement to the left. Thus the poor preacher found himself surrounded by persons of whom he could see only their backs. If he complained, the officers would reply with a sober countenance that the people were showing him the greatest possible politeness, since they thus expressed to him that they considered themselves unworthy to look upon his face. People have gone so far as to put buckets of filth at his feet while he was speaking."\*

In October, 1847, the King of Loochoo died, and from that time the treatment accorded to Dr. Bettelheim was more unfriendly. On the day of the funeral, as he was walking with two French missionaries, they were assaulted with sticks and stones. Afterwards the attendants tried to keep him from having intercourse with the people. He writes:

"It took a year of persevering opposition, now hidden, now open, to enable even a despotic cabal like that we had fallen under since the King's death to bring about a total desertion of the places where I halted and of the streets and lanes I passed through. First, there was a bustle, a running here and there, a rattling and clapping of shutting doors and windows, as if a devil had come in their way; greengrocers deserted their stalls, labourers ceased their work, and crews left their boats; women dragged their children in-doors in such haste and fright as to make them scream out when they saw me again."

As the houses were shut against him, he tried another expedient;

"Rolls of portions of Scriptures and of tracts in the Chinese, and addresses written in the Loochooan—copies of which my good wife busily helped me to multiply during late night hours—were the only missiles I threw into the besieged courts; but, alas\! what I strewed with difficulty and hazard for many months was easily gathered by the vigilant enemy and brought back to me, a large trunkful, by government emissaries. My chief pulpit, the great market of Napha, where I knew they could not long go on driving off buyer and seller, and where my charities to a few cripples waiting there for alms had evidently made a good impression on the multitude, was certainly not forsaken; but no sooner did a man or woman look up to the speaker than a hint, a yell, or a pull from somewhere, was sure to sink the daring eyes to the ground."

Later experiences are recorded in the following extracts:

"To the rolls of tracts which I colported through the streets I added a good bagful of cakes. . . Those who refused a tract were frequently less rigorous toward my cakes. . . . Even after my hawking stratagems had been out-manœuvred by the vigilance of the enemy who countermined all my efforts, and nobody cared either for my tracts, or my bag, or my cakes; a few naked, sun-browned little ones still remained my customers; and observing that the dark of the evening gave the spies less play-ground, I chose this time to go out into the byways and hedges where tawny children presently hopped to and from me in considerable numbers, of course with the natural desire of getting a cake or some cash, but now and then they got something better, a grain of sweet, heavenly manna, or a shekel out of the sanctuary. No wonder a stop should be put to such delightful rambles."

Shut out entirely from street labour nothing remained but boldly to venture into people's houses.....How I felt the first time I found myself within a Loochooan house can be better imagined than described; but as I counted the cost beforehand and was prepared even for a 'Get thee behind me\! Get thee hence\!' or something still more forcible than words, nothing new could well befall me. I was little moved with the cries of the women or frightened at the screams of the children, but seated myself in the first room I could get access to. You will perhaps ask in surprise at the outset how I could gain access into houses whose doors a well-trained body of spies would certainly take the precaution to have shut The answer is simple, I did not enter by the door, at least in most cases, for I could not, but found my way through the deep gaps in dilapidated back walls. I might say I have done some service to the masons in this way and perhaps to the owners too, for by and by the former got more work and the latter got their walls repaired; this whole practice of getting in through such an opening at the back, at first considered here no more irregular than it would be in villages at home to get over a fence or a hedge, came by and by into disuse."

"In the beginning of my visits to these dwellings I rather selected the respectable part of the population, and met with astonishingly good reception. After the first surprise and confusion occasioned by my sudden appearance was over, one or other of the family, and sometimes even the master, kept me company and was sure to hear the message of salvation, as I was watching my time and gave my visit a professional turn as soon as I could. But invariably the second or third visit to the same house found matters altered. In some instances I was plainly forbidden the house. In some, all the inmates ran off. In others, the master told me if I had compassion upon them, I would not expose them to the dangers they ran in letting me enter their doors. Not very long ago, in three instances, I had hairbreadth escapes from a good beating."

He would sometimes hide in a thicket until evening, and then suddenly rush to the crowded market-place.

"Surprise has tamed the enemy—so I thought—and I am granted half an hour to address the wondering multitude. But the enemy is not tame; he is on the alert, and if there is a pause of half an hour, it is used to gather the troop, and on they come, bearing long and heavy bamboos, striking upon the naked bodies of the people as if they were a mass of cattle and crying out, 'Why did you not run?\! Why did vou not run?' thus betraying all the more plainly that it is they who teach the people to flee from us as before wild beasts."

In 1850 the Bishop of Victoria visited Loochoo. He found that the people were prevented from seeking medical aid from Dr. Bettelheim or otherwise having anything to do with him. This, however, did not seem to be because of hatred towards Christianity, but because of fear that Japan would visit its displeasure on Loochoo if it showed itself friendly to foreigners. On the other hand, there was fear that the British Government would resent any ill treatment of its subjects.

At the time of the Bishop's visit, he was ill for a few days. This filled the officials with apprehension lest he should be left with diem. The Vice-Governor, therefore, sent a letter to the captain of the naval vessel that had brought him, saying rumours had come that certain persons requiring medical aid had slept at Dr. Bettelheim's residence. The letter continued:

"Now if this should lead to their permanently remaining here, it would cause much uneasiness. Our humble country is poor and the few sorts of grain which we grow are scanty. During the period of Bettelheim's residence here, all of us, from the highest to the lowest classes, have been constantly occupied in business concerning him, so as to be unable to attend to our vocations, which exposes us to severe want. If still more persons remain here, our troubles will be greatly increased, so that the nation will assuredly be unable to subsist."

The letter also speaks of the undesirability of having any other religion than Confucianism taught:

"Besides, our gentry, as well as the common people, are without natural capacity and, although they have attended exclusively to Confucianism, they have as yet been unable to arrive at perfection. If they should now also have to study in addition the religion of the Lord of Heaven, such an attempt would surpass our ability, and the heart does not incline to it,"

A letter written not long after this by Mrs. Bettelheim tells of her husband's having been thrown out of a house and left lying for some time senseless on the ground. Even after she came, the people were afraid to help him. They were beaten back by the officers, who after considerable delay got two men to carry him home.

In a letter written in 1851, Dr. Bettleheim speaks of having translated Luke, John, Acts, and Romans. He tells the story of a young man whom he speaks of as the nephew and namesake of a professor of Christianity whose fate is recorded in the reports of the Loochoo Mission. The young man had formerly been one of the guards. One day, as Dr. Bettelheim and his wife were passing along the street, they heard their names called and found this man bound to a heavy beam in such a way that he could not change his position. He had been beaten over the head with a stick. Insufficient food, and that of a poor quality, was given to him. This treatment was because he had declared his belief in Christianity. He repeated several passages from one of the books he had studied while acting as guard. When Dr. Bettelheim offered to loosen the stocks that fastened his feet, and thus to give him relief, at least while they were with him, the captive refused, saying that, since his stepfather had confined him in that way, he would not be so unfilial as to rebel.

A month passed before they could again get access to the prisoner, who was then much weaker than before. He said that he had been declared insane and that punishments called "remedies for bringing him to his senses" were regularly inflicted. A month later he had disappeared, the stepfather saying that he had been sent elsewhere to recover from illness. Dr. Bettelheim asked that some books be sent to the young man for his consolation; but to this proposition the stepfather replied: "These books were declared to be the cause and the proof of his madness. How then can I dare accept them?" Not long after this, Dr. Bettelheim was told that the young man was dead.

**Footnotes**

\* *Asiatic Journal,* 1819, p. 338.

† *Ib.,* April, 1829. Dr. Medhurst published a Japanese-English vocabulary. McClintock and Strong's Cyc., vol. vi., p. 14.

\* Rev. A. A. Bennett, D.D., gave in the *Japan Evangelist* of January and February, 1906, a detailed account of the circumstances connected with these contributions. It was reprinted in a pamphlet under the title "The First Protestant Missionary Collection for Japan."

\* Mr. King in his account of the expedition writes: "To prevent the possibility of any harm to these poor exiles by their implication in any suspicion on the score of religion, some Chinese tracts, which got on board the *Morrison* without my knowledge, were now transferred to the *Raleigh."*

\* King, "Notes of the Voyage of the *Morrison,"* New York, 183g. Parker, "Journal of an Expedition from Singapore to Japan," London, 1838. See also "Life and Letters of S. W. Williams," pp. 93-00.

† "Life and Letters," p. 99. In 1841, Dr. Williams wrote of three other Japanese as having lately reached Macao, so that at that time he had seven living with him. Another attempt to return shipwrecked waifs to Japan was made in 1845. Captain Cooper found several such persons on St. Peter's, "an uninhabited island a few leagues southeast of Niphon." Two days later, he rescued a crew of eleven persons from a disabled junk. He landed three of these at a point somewhat north of Yedo and sent them as messengers "to inform the Emperor of his intended visit to the capital to deliver the men whom he had rescued, to obtain food and water, and to make the repairs necessary. On entering the Bay of Yedo, he was well treated by the officials, and the castaways were received; though a letter was presented to Captain Cooper asking that he inform others that hereafter no shipwrecked Japanese would be allowed to return except through the Chinese or Dutch." *The Albany Evening Journal* for June *24,* 1876, gave an account of this voyage.

\* 32d Congress, 1st Session, Senate, Ex. Doc. No. 59, pp. 2528.

† The letters were printed in two pamphlets. The first has an introductory note by Dr. Parker, A manuscript note \(perhaps by Dr. Parker\) on the Boston Library's copy of the second pamphlet says that there are several alterations from the original, "the Bishop of Victoria having taken on himself the liberty of changing and suppressing what was not quite in unison with high Episcopal principles."

\* "La Relig. de Jés. Res.," vol. i., p. 173.




