+++
title = "05 PLOUGHING AND SEED-SOWING 1873-1882"

+++





THE year 1873, was a turning-point in the history of Christianity in Japan. The attitude of the Government suddenly changed. We have already seen that, on February 19th, orders were issued for the removal of the edicts against Christianity. There were other signs of increased freedom. A few newspapers had been established, and in one of these that was published in Kobe there appeared, in April, an article written by a young man who was then a student in America, and who at a later date became one of the most efficient pastors in Japan, Paul Sawayama. The most remarkable thing about this article, which, after criticising Shintoism, Buddhism, and Confucianism, urged the introduction of Christianity, is that such sentiments could be published and freely circulated in Kobe less than two years after Mr. Ishikawa had been arrested for having Christian books in his possession, and but five months after his death in prison.

Moreover, in this year public preaching was begun in Kobe by Rev. D. C. Greene, of the American Board Mission, On the principal street was secured a building, whose front part was used for a Bible and tract depository, while the remainder was fitted up as a chapel. At first, the service was little more than a Bible-class; but very soon the audience increased until the building was filled to its utmost capacity. Sometimes as many as two hundred people were in attendance. About the same time, Messrs. Gulick and Gordon, of the same mission, began to hold a public service in Osaka. It was attended by an average of fifteen persons, most of whom were students in the day-school that was taught by the same missionaries. What was probably the first Sunday-school *conducted, in the Japanese language* was begun at Kobe in December, J. C. Berry, M.D., of the American Board Mission, being its superintendent.

In the spring of 1873, the Governor of Kobe obtained from the Central Government permission for Dr. Berry, who had begun medical work the year before, to teach anatomy by dissection in the provincial hospital. Beginning with ten students, Dr. Berry soon had a large class under his instruction. He also opened dispensaries in some neighbouring towns. The following story shows how entrance was gained to one of these places. Rev. and Mrs. J. D. Davis, with an infant child, spent the summer of 1872 in Arima, a few miles from Kobe, and one day they visited the neighbouring town of Sanda. Large numbers of people were attracted to the hotel to see these strange visitors. Mr. Davis writes:

"Among the rest came the wife of the ex-Daimyo of that little province, whose home was there. She brought with her three little children, dressed in foreign clothes. Soon afterwards the Daimyo and his family came to Arima and visited us every day; and there began an intimacy which has ripened into the warmest friendship. Soon after our return to Kobe last year \[1872\], this family came here \[Kobe\] to live, and we took into our family a girl who had lived with them for five years. Last spring one of the little children died, and the sorrowing friends wanted it buried in foreign style; so we worked out a casket, which was made of the best camphor-wood, and then loving hands trimmed it, laid the beautiful sleeping form within it, and crowned all with a wreath of the brightest flowers, and when, in reply to the eager enquiries of those sorrowing hearts, Mrs. Davis told them of Jesus and of heaven, and that she trusted their darling was forever safe there, a new world was opened to them, tears of joy mingled with those of sorrow, and an interest was awakened which we hope will end in heavenly bliss. . . . A month ago, Dr. and Mrs. Berry spent five days in the Daimyo's old home, Sanda. They found a great eagerness on the part of the people to read and hear the Bible, over fifty coming on one occasion."

Afterwards the physicians of Sanda obtained a building for a hospital, which was visited every month by Dr. Berry, and was also used for preaching. Several of the persons that became prominent members of the Kobe Church were formerly retainers of the above-mentioned Daimyo.

Notes furnished by Dr. Davis tell us more about Sanda, He says:

"About the first of September, 1873, we rented two rooms in Sanda and stayed there two weeks at the request of the young men, some twenty of whom came there three times a day to study the Gospel of John. I could speak the language only in a stammering way, but I did the best I could to make the meaning clear to them. After returning to Kobe, I bought a Japanese pony and rode over to Sanda, twenty miles, each Saturday, spending the Sabbath and coming back on Monday. The company of young men continued interested and for a few weeks I bad no trouble. But arriving there in a pouring rain one Saturday night in the early winter, the hotel where I usually stopped refused to let me stay and I met a refusal from every hotel in the place. It was evident that an opposition to the 'Jesus way' had been developed. It began to look as if I should have to return whence I had come. I was leading my horse in the darkness on a back street, praying for guidance. I knocked at an unknown gate. A boy came and I made known my request to stay all night. Soon the response came that I could stay. It was a small Buddhist temple of the Shin sect. The father was dead, and the widow and her young son were poor and glad of the trifle I could pay for rent; and there we had our meetings for about six months. I had the main room of the temple; eating, sleeping, and preaching before the images and sacred relics of the temple."

The second Japanese church was organised in Tokyo, September 20, 1873, by the American Presbyterian Mission. It had the same doctrinal and ecclesiastical basis as the one organised the year before by the Reformed missionaries, and from the latter church came seven of the eight members, Ogawa Yoshiyasu, who afterwards became a prominent minister, was the first elder.

For more than three years the Reformed missionaries at Nagasaki had taught in the government schools; but in the autumn of 1872, believing that the way was open for more direct work, they opened a private school at their own house. Afterwards a girls' school under the care of Mrs. Stout was added. As the limits of private rooms were soon outgrown, it was arranged that both schools should be removed into the native city. It was a distinct understanding that, while the schools should be under native patronage, the teachers should have entire control of all instruction, leaving the way thus clear to make the schools entirely Christian, when the time should come to do so. It was felt that this could not be done so long as the edicts against Christianity were in force. In the course of a few weeks about fifty girls and thirty boys were in regular attendance. Only the common English studies were taught in the city, but a Bible-class at the mission residence was regularly attended by a large number of the older boys in the evening. Soon the edicts were removed, and it was believed that the time had come for making the school openly Christian. The Bible was introduced into the boys' department. An attempt at intimidation was made by those that had been most active in establishing the school. The pupils, however, seemed to mind this but little, and the Bible-class was continued. Then the patrons summarily closed the school. The pupils were begging for instruction, and so the school was re-opened at the residence of the missionaries.

"Shortly after this, in connection with Mr. Bonnell, the teacher in the government school, a Sunday school was established, consisting of young men both from the government and private schools. For the work thus carried on, private rooms were found too strait; but by the kindness of Captain Janes, a Christian gentleman teaching in Kumamoto, a commodious schoolhouse was built in 1873 and the schools carried on there. This building was well filled with an interested school, especially on Sundays. There also the first baptisms took place in 1873, the first native prayer-meeting was held, and the Gospel first publicly preached, in this part of the Empire."\*

Mr. Burnside of the Church Missionary Society, who also desired to open in Nagasaki a school for boys, met with the same difficulty that had troubled the missionaries of the Reformed Board. About the close of the year, as he writes:

"I called upon the Governor of Nagasaki to ask his permission for my opening such a school in the native town itself, giving him at the same time clearly to understand that besides teaching English I should also teach the Bible, and also that I should, once a week at least, on Sunday afternoon, hold a service in the same house. His reply was that so far as the school was concerned he did not apprehend much difficulty hut that neither the reading of the Bible nor the Sunday service could be at present permitted. I might do what I liked, he said, in the foreign settlement, over which he had no jurisdiction, but that if I applied for permission to open such a school in the native town, I should be required to promise that I would not in the slightest degree influence those who might attend the same on the subject of religion."\*

Mr. Burnside baptised two persons in the year 1873. What he afterwards learned concerning one of them shows another difficulty that beset the work. Of this person Mr, Burnside wrote:

"He sought baptism, I have since discovered, feigning repentance of sin and faith in Jesus, solely and wholly in order that he might obtain money from the Kyobusho, or Department of Religion, by betraying those whom from time to time he might meet at our house. . . . For nine mouths prior to his baptism he had, on several occasions, asked most earnestly to be baptised, and I had on each such occasion told him that I thought he had better wait until such time as he should be further instructed in the faith. At length his profession of faith in the Lord Jesus, his confession of sin, and his contrition of heart appeared so sincere and his grasp of the truth so intelligent that I felt it would not be right of me any longer to delay, and therefore I decided to baptise him....From that day to this he has not been near me."

With the commencement of 1873, the old way of reckoning time by lunar months was changed so as to bring the months and days into correspondence with those of the Gregorian calendar; but instead of numbering the years from the birth of Christ, they were reckoned from the date assigned for the accession to the throne \(660 B. C.\) of the mythical Jimmu Tenno, the alleged founder of the Imperial Dynasty, or by the old system of year-periods.

Foreigners employed by the Government had hitherto been allowed to have Sunday as a day of rest; but in the summer of 1873 notice was given that there would be a return to the Japanese system, by which the first, sixth, eleventh, sixteenth, twenty-first, and twenty-sixth of each month were holidays. This action was taken in the absence from Japan of Mr. Soeshima, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who had been sent to China as an ambassador. According to a letter written by Dr. Maclay of the American Methodist Mission:

"The official who was appointed to act as Minister during his absence belonged to the old obstructive party, and he formed a conspiracy with other leading men of the same party to overthrow the grand programme of reform to which the Government had committed itself. He issued an order prohibiting the students in the government colleges and all the pupils in the schools being present at any time at any Christian preaching or teaching. He also ordered that Christian missionaries who were employed as teachers in the University at Yedo and elsewhere should be no longer engaged; and effectually to prevent them and any truly Christian laymen from becoming educators, he decreed that the seventh-day rest, which Soeshima bad agreed to, should give place to a fifth-day rest. He and the other malcontents thought there would be radical differences of opinion upon this action of his among the members of the foreign diplomatic corps; but, with a degree of unanimity which is extremely gratifying, the ministers of the Western powers entered such a protest and made such representations on the subject to the Japanese Government that the reactionists were compelled to suspend their attack."

After Mr. Soeshima's return, Mr. De Long, the United States Minister, objected to what had been done, saying that it was an act of special and invidious legislation against one class of reputable citizens of the United States. He went on to say:

"The effect of the edict will be disastrous to your own Government. You will lose the services of the most thoroughly qualified and efficient teachers who are now serving in your schools; and by your efforts to ignore the Christian Sabbath you will make it impossible for any educated and honourable gentleman from Europe or the United States to enter the service of your Government,"

When Mr. Soeshima said that the order had been issued in his absence and that he would inquire into the matter, Mr. De Long added:

"The subject is of such importance that after retiring from this interview I purpose at once to wait upon the Minister of Education, and in his presence, enter my formal protest on behalf of the Government of the United States."

"You need not do so," responded Mr. Soeshima with energy, "I will attend to the matter." He did as he had said, and it was not long before Christian teachers were restored to their places.

It was in 1873 that Nakamura Masanao. one of the most distinguished scholars in the land, received Christian baptism. Though in after years he did not prove so zealous as had been hoped, his action at this time in braving the opposition of his associates did much to call attention to Christianity.

Another noted scholar, Yasui Chuhei, published under the title "Bemmo," an attack upon Christians that obtained a wide circulation. Its popularity was increased by its having an introduction written by Shimazu Saburo, one of the most influential men in the country, who had been a leader in the movement for overthrowing the Shogunate.\*

The writer of this work begins by representing himself as an old man who, having considerable leisure, thought that he would spend part of it in examining the Bible. The results of this investigation led him to say:

"The errors of the Foreign Book are monstrous and without reason; the arguments contained in it are shallow, and do not properly need any refutation on my part. But foolish people, being deceived by this Foreign Book, believe in it and retain this belief until they die, which is a source of trouble and disturbance, and this evil would seem to be gradually extending itself until it threatens to reach us, so that to withhold explanation longer would be wrong."

The author then criticises the stories contained in the Pentateuch, asserting that many of them are incredible and represent Jehovah as a malignant and unjust deity. He considers that Noah's flood was coincident with one mentioned in Chinese history. Passing on to the New Testament, he objects to the teaching of Christ as contrary to the principles of loyalty and filial obedience that form the basis of Confucian ethics. Objection is made to Christ's claim that love to Him should exceed love to parents, to His telling a disciple no. to go to bury his father, and to other verses that "have the effect of making sons show a want of affection for their fathers, and daughters for their mothers, and create estrangement between a wife and her husband's mother." The teaching of Jesus is alleged to be arrogant and boastful.

"It does not bow to the authority of the sovereign of any country. It is not for me to explain these things for the benefit of sovereigns in general; but what I fear \(in the event of this religion being adopted\)\) is lest the customs of the country should be abolished and disturbance created. Jehovah called Himself the jealous God, and did not permit His followers to worship any other. Jesus strengthened this law more and more and swore that He would destroy other gods. It was therefore that He said: 'I am not come to bring peace into the world but to create strife.' Should then this religion be adopted the shrines of Jimmu Tenno, and of the various Emperors and nobles, and those dedicated to patriotic and illustrious men will have to be destroyed, and the whole nation, down to the ordinary *samurai* and lower classes, will have to give up offering masses for the souls of their parents and ancestors."

The year 1873 was further noteworthy as one that saw a great increase in the Protestant missionary force, which was more than doubled, the twenty-nine new workers being one more in number than those that were in the field at the close of the preceding year. The number of missions was also increased by the coming of the American Methodist Episcopalians, the Canadian Methodists, and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. The work of the Baptist Free Mission having been transferred to the American Baptist Missionary Union, Mr. and Mrs. Goble, who had been in America on a furlough, returned to Japan in company with Rev. Nathan Brown, D.D., and Mrs. Brown. In March the Baptist Church in Yokohama, composed at first of these missionaries, was organised, and in July the first convert was baptised. In December the Presbyterian missionaries of Yokohama organised a presbytery, and at about this time a Union Chapel was erected for the use of foreign residents in Tokyo.

The following extract from a letter written by Rev. O. H, Gulick after a visit to Yokohama gives some facts concerning the condition of the work at the close of the year:\*

"The native church of Yokohama under the care of Mr. Ballagh has now enrolled about fifty members, while that of Yedo \[Tokyo\] under the care of Mr. Thompson numbers nine with a prospect of an early addition of as many more. The two native elders of these two churches not long since made a preaching tour through the cities and villages on the northeastern shore of the Bay of Yedo. They were listened to with interest and were unmolested; but some of those who afforded them shelter and countenance have been since called to account and annoyed by the officials. . . . There are in all twelve missionary societies, including those of the Roman Catholic and Greek churches, labouring in Japan, The Roman Catholics report fifteen missionaries here, and the Greek Church has one in Yedo and is represented also in Hakodate. The following table presents a list of the evangelical missionaries labouring in Japan.  


Mea Married Ladies Single Ladies Total 
American Board
9 8 3 20 
Presbyterian Board \(Am.\)
6 4 3 13 
Reformed Board \(Am.\)
5 5 1 11 
American Episcopal
8 2 — 10 
Methodist Episcopal \(Am.\)
5 5 — 10 
Baptist Union \(Am.\)
3 3 — 6 
Woman's Union Miss'y Soc. \(Am.\)
— — 5 5 
Wesleyan Methodist \(Canad.\)
2 2 —  
Church Miss'ry Society \(Eng.\)
3 3 — 6 
Soc. for Prop. of Gospel \(Eng.\)
2 — — 2     87 
These missionaries are distributed as follows:  


Men Married Ladies Single Ladies Total 
At Yokohama
14 13 6 33 
At Yedo, now Tokyo
10 3 3 16 
At Osaka
9 6 1 16 
At Kobe
5 5 2 12 
At Nagasaki
4 4 — 8 
At Aomori Ken
1 1 — 2 
Those reported in the table as located in Aomori Ken were Rev. and Mrs. Wolff of the Reformed Mission, who were employed as teachers of English in the city of Hirosaki. On Sundays they had Bible-classes. Another teacher in the school where they taught was a young Japanese who had been a pupil of Mr. Ballagh. Though not yet baptised, he had told the people about Christianity and aroused their interest in it before the coming of Mr. and Mrs. Wolff.

In 1874 the Edinburgh Medical Mission sent out the only representatives it has ever had in Japan, Dr. and Mrs. Theobald A. Palm, who remained in Tokyo until the next year, when they removed to Niigata. The United Presbyterian Church of Scotland also sent out several missionaries. Among them was Henry Faulds, M.D., who at once opened a dispensary at Tokyo, and soon gathered about him a number of medical students.

At the request of Bishop Williams of the American Episcopal Mission, his former diocese was in 1874 divided by the appointment of a bishop for China, thus relieving him from the necessity of long journeys to that country, and permitting him to give his whole attention to Japan. Six persons "the first fruits of the Mission," had been baptised at Osaka, November 16, 1873, and fourteen more the next April. All of these were confirmed before July, 1874.

In Tokyo, one of the American Baptist missionaries, at the request of some Buddhist priests who expressed a desire to hear about Christianity, took up his abode in quarters offered him at one of their temples in Shiba. Failing health, however, soon necessitated the withdrawal of this missionary from the field. Mr. Mori Arinori, whose memorial in favour of religious liberty has been mentioned, rented to the Baptists a house in Surugadai, Tokyo, where they established a girls' school, which has since developed into the Sarah A. Curtis Home.

The church in Yokohama connected with the Reformed Mission continued to prosper. In the course of 1874 fifty-seven adults were added by baptism, the whole number of members rising to one hundred and nineteen. Some twelve of this number joined a theological class that was taught by Dr. S. R. Brown. Its members combined practice with theory by engaging in evangelistic efforts.

The American Board missionaries in Kobe and Osaka were greatly encouraged by the growth of their work, and by the earnestness shown by the converts. In the winter of 1873-74 the first prayer-meeting in the Japanese language that had been held in Kobe met at the house of Mr. Greene. Seven or eight men and one woman were there heard to pray for the first time. In Osaka, a few days later, Mr. Davis, going from Kobe, preached in a building that stood beside the gate of Dr. Gordon's house. At the close of the sermon, a physician arose unasked and broke out in a touching prayer. After this he and five other Japanese went into a darkened room, where Dr. Gordon was obliged to Stay on account of trouble with his eyes, and there each of them offered prayer.

Of five young men in Kobe who expressed a desire to follow Christ, Mr. Greene wrote in January, 1874:

"I have been particularly pleased to see how readily they fall in with the theory of self-support and self-propagation. One of the aims of these young men is to make the church a missionary society, and I believe that it will be such from the start. . . . God has seen fit to make the influence of missionary work in Japan felt first and most strongly by the intelligent classes. The large majority of those who have become Christians hitherto are of this class, both here and in Yokohama and Yedo. . . . Whatever may be right elsewhere, there ought to be no question about having the Japanese support their own pastors and build their own churches from almost the first, if not from the very first."

The medical work of Dr. Berry, in the same field, gave promise of being self-supporting. In February, when writing of visits made to places near Kobe, he said:

"The plan of requiring that the medicines dispensed to the sick poor be paid for by the wealthy is working admirably. Besides paying for all the medicines prescribed during each trip \(amounting the last time to about $50\), they have raised $2,500 for three charitable hospitals, which we hope to have under full headway within six weeks. It is easy to see what the influence of such a course will be upon the question of self-support among the churches, which, from present indications, will soon concern us."

A word may be added about the method by which Dr. Berry and some other medical missionaries won the good will of the Japanese physicians. They made it a rule not to see patients except as consulting physicians in company with Japanese doctors who took charge of the case. Thus the latter were not deprived of their practice by the foreigner, they received their fees as before, and in addition they obtained valuable instruction. A further advantage was that the patient, being under closer supervision than the missionary could give, was more likely to carry out directions concerning medicine and diet. Japanese doctors were very desirous to learn the Western system of medical practice. The physicians of a city would unite in opening a dispensary to which they invited the medical missionary; and these dispensaries often proved gateways by which the Gospel entered the towns where they were established. The medical work did much to break down prejudice against foreigners, which was still very strong. Dr. Wallace Taylor of the American Board Mission has written:

"I well remember our first going into Himeji; how we were scrupulously shut up in our *jinrikishas* from view for miles before we reached the place, hurriedly run into a large *samurai yashiki* \[quarters formerly occupied by the military classes\], and the huge gate immediately shut and barred behind us. We were prisoners and carefully watched, not that we might not get out, but that no one should get in to harm us. Here we were kept and not allowed out, but patients were brought to us. After a few visits, when our patients had made known what we were and the character of our work, we were allowed out on the street, but only within certain limits and always accompanied by a guard whose vigilance we could not evade."

April 19, 1874, a church of eleven members was organised in Kobe. Several Christians from Osaka, twenty miles distant, walked to Kobe in order to be present at services similar to those that a month later \(May 24\) were to take place in their own city, when seven of them were formed into a church.

From the first the Kobe Church showed great activity,\* sustaining a daily service in the hospital and sending its members to other cities for evangelistic efforts. In June the church numbered nine men and five women; and of the men, eight desired to be trained for preaching the Gospel. More than half of the members of the little church in Osaka expressed the same desire. One missionary wrote:

"This whole region around us seems to have received the impression that to become a member of the church means to become a preacher of the Word. A short time since, when the question of forming a church was proposed to a little company of Chrisitians in Sanda, twenty miles north of Kobe, one objection came to all their minds at once, that they did not know enough to *preach* yet."

The churches in Kobe and Osaka, like those previously organised in Yokohama and Tokyo, possessed no denominational name. The missionaries of the American Board, at their annual meeting in May, took the following action:

"Resolved: That we as a Mission declare that we are unequivocally in favour of union; that we have never for a moment wavered from our unanimous desire for union as expressed at the Convention in Yokohama in September, 1872, and that we are organising and shall continue to organise our churches on the basis adopted at that Convention."

It after a time, however, became plain that there were differences of opinion concerning the scope of the resolutions of 1872; the missionaries of the American Board supposing it would be sufficient if all the churches were one in name, belief, designation of officers, and general method of procedure; while some among the missionaries in Tokyo and Yokohama insisted that there should be more complete uniformity and organic union in a Presbyterial system. In the autumn the Presbyterian Mission organised churches in Yokohama and Tokyo "on a strictly Presbyterian basis," thus deviating from the simpler form adopted by earlier organisations. The one in Tokyo was in a large measure the result of work done in the schools that were under the care of Mr. and Mrs. Carrothers. It was described as "a very active body. Connected with it were a Sunday school, a Bible-class, the beginning of a theological class, a debating society, several preaching-places in the city, and outstations at Shinagawa and Hoden. Shortly after its formation the Mission built for this church a cheap but comfortable chapel."

In Nagasaki it was found necessary to discontinue the girls' school that had been carried on for nearly two years by the Reformed Mission, appeals to the Board for teachers having proved fruitless. The time had come, however, for more active evangelistic work in that city, and the Mission erected a chapel which, though blown down when near completion, was speedily rebuilt, so that it was used for services in December.

At the other extremity of the Empire, Rev. M. C. Harris and wife, of the Methodist Episcopal Mission, had reached Hakodate in January, 1874, being the first Protestant missionaries to settle in Yezo. They were followed in the summer by Rev. and Mrs. Walter Den-ing of the Church Missionary Society. As Mr. Dening was accompanied by a Christian from Nagasaki, he was able to begin services at once. Large numbers of people listened to the preaching, and the first baptism took place on Christmas Day. In December Rev. and Mrs. John Ing, missionaries of the Methodist Episcopal Church, were passing through japan on their way home from China, and he accepted an invitation to become a teacher in Hirosaki, a city in the northern part of Hondo. Probably this was to take the position held the year before by Mr. Wolff.

In December, 1874, Messrs. Okuno and Ogawa, elders respectively of churches in Yokohama and Tokyo, conducted the funeral of a Christian. For this they were called to account by the officials. They were closely interrogated on several occasions, and it was not until September of the next year that they were finally dismissed after being reprimanded for what they had done. For several years the burial of Christian believers gave rise to troublesome questions. Most graveyards were connected with Buddhist temples, and the laws would not permit burials elsewhere. Thus it was in the power of the priests to give Christians much annoyance. A few years later, one of the missionaries in writing about the burial of a believer, said:

"A grave had been already purchased in the grounds of a Buddhist temple, but the priest refused permission to bury, closing the gates and offering to return the money. A Shinto priest was then appealed to, but it was not until after a night and a day had been spent in running hither and thither, and a promise not to specially mark the grave, that a grave was obtained. The service was performed in the house, and the priest simply acted as registrar,"

Frequently it was necessary to allow the priests to say masses in connection with the burial of Christians. After the funeral service had been held in the house of the deceased, or in the church, the Christian friends would leave the body at the entrance of the temple until the priest had completed his ceremonies, when the friends would again take up the coffin and bear it to the grave. Often, however, the priests would be satisfied to receive burial fees, after which they kindly forgot the necessity of chanting their prayers. On the other hand, there were priests that made the most of their opportunity to oppress the Christians. In one place they refused to permit a woman to be buried unless her husband would promise to renounce Christianity. After holding out three days, he rendered a nominal submission, though resolving in his heart that he would not give up his faith. We cannot judge him harshly when we remember that, being the only Christian in that part of the country, he had no one to advise him, and that he was liable to arrest if he allowed the body to remain longer unburied. When Dr. Joseph Neesima died in 1890, the Buddhist priests would not allow his body to be buried beside that of his father, because they regarded him as "the very head of Christianity in Japan."

A statement made in May, 1875, said that there were then not less than ten places in Yokohama, twenty-five in Tokyo, ten in the Kobe-Osaka district, and five in other places, making fifty in all, where regular Christian services were held as often as once a week, with audiences varying from twenty to two hundred in number. The people were rapidly losing all fear of governmental interference in religious matters, while their interest in the truths of Christianity seemed to be increasing. The previous year, several chapels had been secured in Tokyo and Yokohama without any opposition from the Government, and a Protestant church building was in process of erection in Tokyo, the property being held by four trustees. The object of the building was distinctly avowed to be that of Christian worship, and a declaration to that effect had been presented to an officer of the City Government.\* In July, 1875, the Church Missionary Society erected a church in Nagasaki. Its turret was surmounted by a cross, which was the more noteworthy because the city had been the place where the ceremony of trampling on the sacred symbol had formerly been most observed. Before this, indeed, the towers of the Roman Catholic Church were adorned with crosses; but at the time of its erection, in 1864, that building had been looked upon by the officials as intended for the use of foreigners.

Another church built at this time was in Yokohama. Known as the Union Church, and also as the Kaigan Church, it served for more than thirty years as a place of worship for the foreign community and also for the oldest Japanese church. Of the $8,000 expended in its construction, $1,000 came from the Christians of the Sandwich Islands, who, on hearing of Commodore Perry's expedition, had contributed money to be used, whenever possible, for a church building in Japan; $1,000 had been contributed by Hon. Townsend Harris, in 1861, under like conditions; $500 by Hon. R. H, Pruyn, Mr. Harris's successor; and $50 by British seamen.

The same year saw the erection of two buildings for the use of girls' schools. Mention has already been made of the day-school taught by Miss Kidder, in Yokohama. Feeling that much more could be accomplished if the pupils were brought more constantly under helpful influences, she leased an acre of land from the local government and applied to her home church for funds to be used in the erection of a boarding department. The Sunday-school children of America responded to this call, so that in June, 1875, a building with accommodations for forty pupils was formally opened. At first the pupils numbered fourteen, all of whom had before attended the day-school. The boarders paid three dollars a month for rooms, fuel, light, food, washing, and tuition; they furnishing their own clothing, bedding, books, and stationery. Common-school branches were taught in English, and there was also instruction in Japanese and Chinese. Daily religious services were held.\*

In Kobe Miss Talcott and Miss Dudley of the American Board Mission had taught classes of girls since 1873; but to them also it seemed that the time had come for a boarding school. They were encouraged to go forward by the interest that was shown by Japanese friends, who contributed eight hundred *yen* for the building, a *yen* at that time being worth nearly as much as an American gold dollar. Other money came from America. In order to make the sum at the disposal of the mission go as far as possible, the building was made very plain, the contract with the carpenter stipulating that there was "not to be a moulding on it or about it," It was planned to accommodate thirty girls with their teachers. "It was much too large for the faith of some good friends of the school, but in less than two years another building was imperatively demanded." Towards the second building Japanese gave six hundred *yen,* while foreigners living in Kobe gave two hundred *yen.* For later buildings the Japanese have also contributed liberally.

These and other schools have often had to contend against opposition, jealousy, and suspicion. A few years after the opening of Ferris Seminary, as the school in Yokohama was called, the father of one of the pupils from the interior came and asked if he might see the buildings.

"His conduct seemed somewhat peculiar, for he wanted to be shown every nook and corner. Finally he addressed the matron in the most confidential manner, saying that he had been told by a Buddhist priest that foreigners at the school where his daughter was had been sent out from their country to obtain a very precious drug, which could only be obtained from the bodies of Japanese girls; that it was very costly; and that was why they could put up such fine schools and take pupils at such low rates. 'Tell me truly,' said he, 'for you too are a Japanese; you must know of this, if it is true. Do these foreigners attach a machine to the bodies of the pupils while they sleep?'"\*

In 1875 there was begun in Kyoto, though only in a hired building, a school for young men. Previously the missionaries of the American Board had sought to gain an entrance into the old capital of the Empire and a Christian whose home was in Kyoto had joined with another from Kobe in asking the Central Government if a missionary could reside in the former city. It was necessary that the document should have the stamp of the ward officer before it could be forwarded, but this official wrote to the chief petitioner that he did not dare to set his seal to such a request. Soon after this, in November, 1874, there returned to Japan a native of the country, who was to be the means of opening Kyoto to the Gospel and of establishing there Christian schools whose graduates would take an important part in the evangelisation of the land.

Joseph Hardy Neesima,† to use that form of writing his name that is best known to readers of English, was born in Yedo, January 14, 1843, his father being a retainer of the Daimyo of Annaka. He was about sixteen years old when, as told in an account of his life that he wrote in imperfect English after he had been about six months in America:

"My comrade lent me an atlas of United States of North America, which was written with China letter by some American minister. I read it many times and I was wondered so much as my brain would melted out from my head, picking out President, Building, Free School, Poor House, House of Correction, and machine-working, etc. And I thought that a governor of our country must be as President of the United States, And I murmured myself that, O Governor of Japan\! why you keep down us as a dog or a pig? We are people of Japan. If you govern us you must love us as your children. From that time I wished to learn American knowledge, but alas, I could not get any teacher to learn it. . . I visited my friend and I found out small Holy Bible in his library that was written by some American minister with China language, and had shown only the most remarkable events of it. I lend it from him and read it at night, because I was afraid the savage country's law, which if I read the Bible, government will cross \[crucify\] whole my family. I understood God at first, and He separated the earth from firmament and light upon the earth, made grass, trees, creatures, fowls, fishes. And he created a man in His own image, and made up a woman, cutting a man's side bone. After He made up all things of universe. He took a rest. That day we must call Sunday or Sabbath day. I understood that Jesus Christ was Son of Holy Ghost, and He was crossed for the sins of all the world; therefore we must call Him our Saviour. Then I put down the book and look around me, saying that; Who made me? My parents? No, God. Who made my table? A carpenter? No, God. God let trees grow upon the earth, and although God let a carpenter made up my table, it indeed came from some tree. Then I must be thankful to God. I must believe Him, and I must be upright against Him. From that time my mind was fulfilled to read English Bible, and purposed to go to Hakodate to get English or American teacher of it. Therefore I asked of my prince and parents to go thither. But they had not allowed to me for it, and were alarmed at it. But my stableness would not destroy by their expostulations, and I kept such thoughts praying only to God; please I let me reach my aim."\*

Finally, in 1864, without having obtained the desired permission, he made his way to Hakodate, where he was for a while Père Nicolai's teacher of Japanese. His desire to go to America was very strong; but, if caught in an attempt to leave the country, the penalty would be death. At last he managed to escape and went to Shanghai, where the captain of a ship bound for Boston consented to let him work his passage thither. Before leaving Shanghai, he sold one of the two swords that as a *samurai* he was accustomed to wear, and with the proceeds he bought an English Bible. Often during the passage, when harshly treated by the sailors, he was tempted to use the other sword upon his persecutors; but thoughts of his great purpose to obtain an education in America restrained his hand and gave him patience.

In Boston, the owner of the ship, Hon. Alpheus Hardy, a Christian merchant, who was deeply interested in missions, took the young man for a servant, and soon seeing his great worth, sent him successively to Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., to Amherst College, and to Andover Theological Seminary. Before he had completed his theological studies, the Japanese embassy, headed by Prince Iwakura, came to America and wished him to become an interpreter to assist them in their investigation of the educational institutions of America and Europe. By the advice of his friends he accepted the position, which not only gave him exceptionally good opportunities for seeing the schools of different countries, but also won for him the friendship and esteem of those whose official positions enabled them in after years to help him carry out his plan for establishing a Christian school in Japan. When his duties with the embassy were at an end, he refused the flattering offer made to him if he would return with it to Japan, and went back to his theological studies at Andover. After graduation he was ordained in Boston to the Christian ministry. He was appointed a corresponding member of the Japan Mission of the American Board, his support continuing to come from Mr. Hardy, who was Chairman of the Board's Prudential Committee. Just before he was to leave America, the annual meeting of the Board was held at Rutland, Vermont, \(October, 1874\), and he had been asked to say a few words. At the last moment he put aside the speech that he had carefully prepared, and with broken voice and overflowing eyes made an earnest plea that a Christian school of high grade should be established in his country. He closed by saying: "I cannot go back to Japan without the money to found a Christian college, and I am going to stand here until I get it." The audience was greatly moved by this appeal, and nearly five thousand dollars were subscribed on the spot.

On reaching Japan, he at once went to see his aged parents in Annaka. As the people of that town were eager to hear about his adventures, he took the opportunity to speak openly concerning Christianity, This was perhaps the beginning of direct Christian preaching in the interior, and the officials were puzzled to know what ought to be done about it. The Governor went in person to consult the authorities in Tokyo, who said to him: "If it is Neesima, it is all right; let him alone." Thus early did the advantages from Mr. Neesima's connection with the embassy begin to appear.

Mr, Neesima soon proceeded to Kobe and Osaka in order to consult with the members of the American Board Mission. They were earnestly in favour of establishing a Christian college. The need for it was emphasised by the fact that among the foreign teachers employed in the Imperial University and other schools were men of immoral lives, while some others took pleasure in ridiculing Christianity and the Bible. The first thought was to establish the school in Osaka. The Governor of that city, however, was a bitter opponent of Christianity, who had been concerned in the recent persecution of the Roman Catholics. He expressed his willingness to have a school, but only on condition that no missionary should teach in it.

Attention was now turned to Kyoto. In 1872 members of the Mission had become acquainted with Mr, Yamamoto, a blind man who was a private counsellor to the Kyoto Government. The acquaintance had been continued, and in the spring of 1875 Dr. Gordon presented him with a copy of Dr. Martin's "Evidences of Christianity," printed in Chinese. A short time after this, when Mr. Neesima met Mr. Yamamoto, the latter said that the book had cleared away his doubts concerning Christianity, "Christianity alone," he said, "can reach and renovate the very spring of the human heart. The day has dawned upon me, so that I can see the path that before was utterly unknown to me, for which I have been unconsciously seeking." Through his influence the provincial governor was led to approve the plans for the school, Mr. Yamamoto also promised to let it have for a very small sum a large lot of land that until lately had been occupied by the mansion of the Daimyo of Satsuma, It is interesting to note that it was here that Shimazu Saburo had written the introduction to "Bemmo," the treatise against Christianity of which mention has already been made.

It was now necessary to get the consent of the Central Government. Mr. Neesima went to Tokyo, where he saw Mr. Tanaka, the Minister of Education. It was with him that Mr. Neesima had been most closely associated while with the embassy. At first the Minister said that it would be impossible to grant permission for the founding of a Christian school in Kyoto, the stronghold of Buddhism. Finally, however, he yielded, after warning Mr. Neesima to be careful not to do anything that would arouse the prejudice of the people. Messrs. Neesima and Yamamoto then formed the company that for many years consisted of only themselves, and chose for it the name "Doshisha" or "Same Purpose Company." Rev. J. D. Davis, who had done much of the planning for the institution, was engaged as its first foreign teacher. He went to Kyoto in October, and in the house that was hired for him began holding Bible-classes every Sunday.

The Buddhist priests soon learned of what was being planned, and held many large and excited meetings to decide what they could do to prevent their holy city from being defiled by the foreign religion. They finally forwarded a protest to the Central Government. The power of Buddhism was so great in Kyoto that the local officials feared to encounter the enmity of the priests and became less friendly to Mr. Neesima. They summoned him to explain the meaning of the word "*Seisho*" \(Holy Scriptures\) which appeared in the list of studies. Soon a request came from the Governor that for a time the Bible should not be taught in the school. To this Mr. Neesima assented. The Governor said that Christianity might be taught under the name of Moral Science, and that direct Biblical instruction could be given to the students in the homes of the teachers. He added that an uprising of the Satsuma men was feared and that the excitement aroused by the establishment of the school would be utilised by them for gaining adherents. The Shinto officials united with the Buddhists in trying to bring pressure upon the Government to keep out the missionaries. A few foreigners living in the city were encouraging the Buddhists. A physician from Holland who was employed in a hospital told the missionaries that they might as well try to throw Mt. Hiei into Lake Biwa as to start a Christian school in Kyoto. Yet it was started, and as Mr. Davis wrote, "The acorn is in the bottle, and it will in time, with God's blessing, split the bottle." In a letter dated November 29, 1875, he also wrote: "We began our school this morning in Mr. Neesima's house at eight. o'clock with a prayer-meeting in which all the scholars took part; then going to the school-house, two others were received, making seven boarding scholars and one day scholar." That winter the number of students increased to about forty.

Most of the first pupils in the Doshisha were Christians that had come from the churches already established in other cities. The membership of the Kobe Church had doubled in the first year and that of the Osaka Church had nearly done the same, while in July a church had been organised in Sanda. Mr. Davis had written in October:

"The Kobe Church now numbers thirty-two members, twenty men and twelve women. Of these twenty men, thirteen have from the time they were received into the church or before been preachers of the Word,—not paid as native helpers by the Mission, but going out on the Sabbath, and during the week, and on tours of ten days, at their own charges, to preach. Regular preaching has been and is now kept up by them weekly in five different places, and monthly in about as many more. They have gone on foot to do this, or have paid for carriage hire and other expenses out of their very limited means, refusing foreign money to do it."

Dr. Taylor, in company with one of the members of the Kobe Church, had visited in July, 1875, the city of Okayama, about eighty miles west of Kobe. In the ten days spent there, he saw large numbers of patients. Preaching services were held every evening; at first in the hotel, and afterwards at the house of the principal of the high school. The hospital desired Dr. Taylor to come for permanent residence in the city. He expressed his willingness to do this if the necessary permission for himself and family could be gained from the Central Government. When the passport came, however, it was for only Dr. Taylor himself, it being said that Mrs. Taylor and the children would be of no assistance to the hospital. Before arrangements for including them in the passport were completed, it was decided that Dr. Taylor should become a teacher in the Doshisha School. The acquaintances made at Okayama helped, however, to open the way by which, three years later, other workers entered that city.

Dr. Palm of the Edinburgh Medical Mission removed in 1875 to Niigata, where he began medical and evangelistic work. For three months a Japanese evangelist who accompanied him preached daily in Dr. Palm's house. Though much interest was manifested, there was also considerable opposition, the influence of Buddhism being very strong in that region. About the close of the year, in response to a request made to the Yokohama Church, Mr. Oshikawa Masayoshi was sent to Niigata to carry on the work already begun. Mr. Fyson, of the Church Missionary Society, also took up his residence in Niigata.

In May, Rev, W. Dening, of the Church Missionary Society, opened a service in what had formerly been a large shop on the main street of Hakodate. On the second Sunday he baptised in the presence of a large crowd Mr. Ogawa, who afterwards became a prominent evangelist. Soon after this, active opposition began, Mr. Ogawa being annoyed and persecuted in many ways. Mr. Dening wrote, June 24:

"The Governor and other local authorities were excessively annoyed that I had obtained the use of a house on the main street. Hitherto all Christian services have been carried on in somewhat obscure quarters of the town—usually in the missionary's house. This is the first time that Christianity has been exposed to public view, as it were, in Hakodate. The young convert Ogawa, who took the house on my behalf, was called up by the authorities, again and again threatened, and charged not to allow any teaching or preaching in the name of Jesus in his house. He informed them he could not obey their commands, that he believed in Christianity himself, and wished to make it known to others, and he could not interfere wish my work. I have reason for believing that the whole matter was referred to Tokyo; but no steps have been taken to carry the opposition further. But the Governor forbade the people to attend the service, frequently sent spies, and once came himself to see who were present."

In March, 1875, a Shinto priest had addressed the following memorial to the Vice-Minister of Religion:

"It has been ordered by the Government that religious tenets are left to the option of the people, and directions have been given to the teachers of both Shintoism and Buddhism whereby they are caused to guide the people in accordance with the 'three articles of religion.' I have, however, heard that of late in the foreign settlements in our country, foreign religious precepts are being incessantly promulgated, and that our people are in a friendly way enticed thereby. Now, such teachings as these, from the very commencement, hold lord and father in light regard, and eventually cause men to fall into the habit of setting at naught their ruler and of disregarding their parents. The fact of this teaching being pernicious to the Empire is a matter needing from the very first no discussion. I have been told of this, and am unfortunately too unworthily holding a minor office of religious instruction, and am thus unable to refrain from slight consideration as to whether it would be a source of trouble were I, at the time of my expounding religious precepts, to publicly throw open to reproach the foreign doctrines. I beg that you will promptly give me clear directions, and so humbly beg to make the above interrogation."

To this the Department of Religion replied:

"Permission is granted according to the enquiry above. However, in matters outside the province of religion, careful attention must, of course, be paid that no hindrance shall arise of such a nature as to affect the public \(i.e., international\) relations of the Government."\*

An elder and about ten members of the Shinsakae-bashi Presbyterian Church in Tokyo withdrew from it in 1875, and formed themselves into an independent body to which they gave the name "Japan Church." According to the historian of the Church of Christ in Japan \(Presbyterian\): "The motive of organising this new church consisted in enforcing an extreme anti-foreign principle of independence, because all the churches at those times were under the assistance of foreign churches and missionaries, who had naturally a great influence in those churches." In 1883 these Christians united with others to form the Reinanzaka Church, the first of the Kumi-ai \(Congregational\) body that was organised in Tokyo.\*

In June Mr. Ing baptised fourteen young men in Hiro-saki, the fruit of his own labours and those of Mr. Honda Yuitsu, a member of the Kaigan Church in Yokohama. These Christians wrote to that church in August asking that they might be organised as a church. The request being granted, the Hirosaki Church was formed and Mr. Honda was made its elder. In 1876 it became associated with the Methodist body.†

Besides these churches and the one in Sanda already mentioned, those organised in 1875 were one in Hoden, a suburb of Tokyo, that was connected with the Presbyterian Mission, and one in Tokyo connected with the Methodists. The Methodist Mission also organised its first quarterly conference.

December 27, 1875, appeared the first Christian newspaper. It bore the name *Shichi Ichi Zappo* \(Weekly News\) and was edited by Rev. O. H. Gulick of the American Board Mission.

Early in March, 1876, the Government issued a decree that from the beginning of the next month Sunday should be the official day of rest. We have already seen how the foreign teachers resisted the attempt to force upon them another system of holidays. Some other Europeans and Americans in the employ of the Government had also insisted upon having their Sundays; and the convenience of the offices demanded that Japanese and foreigners should rest upon the same day. The Government, of course, did not have any religious motives for adopting the new system; but the observance of Sunday as a holiday in offices, schools, and to some extent in business houses, has proved a great help to missionary work.

On the last Sunday of January, 1876, a number of young men from the city of Kumamoto went to a hill on the outskirts of the town, where they entered into a solemn covenant, pledging themselves to follow Christ and "to enlighten the darkness of the Empire by preaching the Gospel, even at the sacrifice of their lives." They were pupils of a school in which Captain Janes, a retired officer of the United States Army, had for several years been a teacher of English. During the first part of his connection with the school he had said nothing about Christianity; but he had won a great influence over his pupils. After he had been a year or two in Kumamoto he offered to teach the Bible in his own house to any that would like to study it. There was much difference of opinion among the students about what they should do. Most of them said that they ought not to have anything to do with a book that taught such evil doctrines as those of the Christians; a few said that out of courtesy to a teacher who had treated them so kindly, they ought to accept his invitation; while some others held that, as knowledge of an enemy is the first step towards victory over him, they, whose duty it would probably be to prevent Christianity from getting a hold upon the hearts of the people, must find out what it taught, so that they might intelligently oppose it. At first ten of the pupils went to study the Bible, and afterwards they were joined by others. Ere long, some of these became convinced of the truth of Christianity, Among these were Messrs. Miyagawa Tsuneteru, Ebina Danjo, Yokoi Tokio, Kanamori Tsurin, Shimomura Kotaro, Morita Kumando,\* and others who afterwards were prominent in Christian work. Finally there were over forty who, as above narrated, met to pledge themselves to God's service.

As soon as this became known, there was great excitement, not only in the school, but throughout the city. The young men were persecuted by their fellow-students and by members of their own families. Most of them were called home by their parents. Their Bibles were burned, and they were told not to touch such books again. The widowed mother of one student told him that, as he had shown lack of reverence for his ancestors by action that brought disgrace upon the family, he ought, if unwilling to give up the evil religion, to slay himself with a sword. As he showed no signs of yielding, she took the sword and made preparations for killing herself; but the servants ran out and summoned help to prevent her from carrying out her purpose. A few years later she herself became an earnest Christian, When one father drew his sword and threatened to kill his son, the latter bent forward his head, thus expressing his willingness to receive the blow. Another student, after being imprisoned for a hundred days, was cast out from his home. Some of the young men yielded to the opposition, but about thirty stood firm. Most of them soon went to the Doshisha School in Kyoto to prepare for Christian work. They were known as the "Kumamoto Band," and several of them became prominent leaders in the church.\*

This movement among students in the southern island had in the far north what was in some respects its counterpart, though without the bitter persecution. Among the teachers employed by the Government was Colonel W. S. Clark, President of the Massachusetts Agricultural College, who temporarily left his own school in order that he might help to organise a similar institution in Sapporo. From the first, he tried by word and deed to exert a Christian influence. Among other duties he was expected to teach ethics, and when some of the Japanese officials objected to his saying anything about religion, he held up a Bible, saying: "If I am to teach morality, I must insist on having this as a text-book." Being one of those men who quickly win confidence and are able to carry their own way, he soon overcame opposition. Not only was his teaching in the school permeated with Christian thought, but on Sundays he preached the Gospel directly to those who would come to his house and listen. He gained a great influence over the students, and though he remained in Sapporo only about a year, his whole class, fifteen in number, signed a covenant whose opening paragraph was as follows:

"The undersigned, members of Sapporo Agricultural College, desiring to confess Christ according to His command, and to perform with true fidelity every Christian duty in order to show our love and gratitude to that blessed Saviour who has made atonement for our sins by His death on the cross; and earnestly wishing to advance His Kingdom among men for the promotion of His glory and the salvation of those for whom He died, do solemnly covenant with God and with each other from this time forth to be his faithful disciples and to live in strict compliance with the letter and the spirit of His teachings; and whenever a suitable opportunity offers, we promise to present ourselves for examination, baptism, and admission to some evangelical church."

The young men were so earnest that, when another class entered the school, they tried "to convert the Freshies by storm," as is declared by one of the latter, who also describes his own efforts to resist their unwelcome persuasions to accept the new faith. The writer finally yielded; for, he says, "The public opinion of the college was too strong against me. . . . They forced me to sign the covenant."\* He with his classmates swelled the number of covenanters to thirty. They formed the basis of what became the Independent Church of Sapporo.

The church in Kobe received a request from two men living in Matsuyama, a city about two hundred miles distant on the island of Shikoku, asking that some one be sent to preach the Christian religion to themselves and their friends. There being no one who could go for permanent residence, Rev. J. L. Atkinson, a missionary of the American Board, decided that he would visit the city, and the church voted to pay the expenses of two of its members who should accompany him. Just as they were about to start, a letter came asking them to delay a few days. After waiting a month, it was decided about the end of March, 1876, to start at once, since the time covered by Mr. Atkinson's passport for travel in the interior, was fast slipping away. At the port where they landed from the steamer they received a letter from the brother of the man with whom they had been in correspondence, saying that he was away from home. Mr. Atkinson with one of his companions remained in the place where they were, while the other evangelist went on to Matsuyama, about three miles distant. He found that there had been a quarrel in the family of the man that had invited them, and also that there was considerable excitement in the city over the report that Christian teachers were coming. The Shinto and Buddhist priests had been in consultation to devise means for averting the threatening evil. On the other hand, the Governor of the district had received notice that a foreigner who was coming to the city would probably teach Christianity, and care must be taken that there was no disturbance. Some of the officials arranged for a meeting at which they desired Mr. Atkinson to speak to them. After several meetings had been held in small rooms, a house that would hold three hundred and fifty people was hired and notices of the services were posted upon the streets. The rooms were usually crowded with attentive hearers. About a fortnight was spent in Matsuyama and several days in Imabari, a city about thirty miles distant. Thus were the beginnings made of a work that in after years made these two cities centres of Christian influence.

The proof afforded by this trip that some parts, at least, of the interior were open to the Gospel, was the more welcome because in January, Mr. Imamura Kenkichi, a member of the Kobe Church, and afterwards well known as a Christian publisher, was summoned before the courts for giving away Christian tracts while visiting Kanazawa Prefecture the previous autumn. It was at the instance of the Governor of that prefecture that he was called to account and was closely questioned as to who wrote the tracts, who printed them, whether the foreigners gave them to him, etc. It was not until June that he was declared free from blame.

A Christian of Yokohama while on his way to Niigata was surprised to find in Ueda \(Shinshu\), more than a hundred miles west of Yokohama, a little company of believers. Only two of them had ever met a missionary or listened to Christian preaching. Both of these had heard a little in Tokyo, and one of them also in Nagasaki. They had carried back to their homes information of what they had learned, and though one of them had met much opposition from the members of his family, there were several persons who had been impressed with the truths thus brought to their notice, and they desired to receive fuller instruction. In August, Rev. and Mrs. E. R. Miller went to Ueda, and after spending some time there Mr. Miller baptised fifteen persons. Later in the year Mr. Ballagh baptised several others and organised a church, the first one established at any great distance from an open port.

A few other churches were organised in 1876, Among them were three in the city of Kyoto, most of the members being students of the Doshisha.

About the beginning of the year 1877 a Japanese Christian received from the Government permission to translate and publish Williamson's "Natural Theology," This is worthy of notice because, so far as known, it was the first permission given for the publication of a distinctively Christian book.\*

The work was spreading into the interior in various directions. In January, Rev. G. M. Meacham, of the Canadian Methodist Mission, who had been teaching in Numazu, baptised the principal of the school, two other teachers, and three pupils. A colporteur connected with the American Methodists had visited Shinshu Province, and it was in part a result of his labours that earnest invitations came from several cities asking that they be visited by a missionary. In October and November, Rev. I. H. Correll made a tour through the province and established in Matsumoto and other cities classes for religious instruction. Rev. J. Soper, of the same mission, visited the province of Shimosa where, in the city of Ajiki, he organised a class of twelve candidates for baptism. Earlier in the year, Rev. J. L. Atkinson, of the American Board Mission had made an extensive tour along the northern shore of the Inland Sea and in Shikoku, finding promising openings at almost every place he visited. He made arrangements by which several students of the Doshisha Theological School spent their summer vacation in the most important towns. Another of these students spent the vacation in Annaka, Mr. Neesima's former home, where at the close of the summer, fifteen persons banded themselves together in a Christian company.

At one place visited by Mr. Atkinson, the Buddhist priests decided that the best way to oppose the Christian religion would be to get the people to sign a pledge that they would have nothing to do with its teachers. This method was frequently adopted by the priests in later years; and they usually found it easy to get large numbers to promise that they would not attend Christian meetings, and that they would cease to have social or business relations with any person that accepted the hated religion. The following is a specimen of these pledges:

"Christianity is calculated to disturb the minds of the people and diminish the power of the Empire. When that religion prevailed in Japan many years ago, several feudal lords and numbers of their followers were induced to join. It was soon ascertained that the Christians plotted the overthrow of the Government and deposition of the Emperor; therefore, Christianity was prohibited. The Shogun Tokugawa Iemitsu suppressed the foreign creed and slaughtered several hundreds of thousands of those who professed Christianity. Now, however, it appears that this false religion may be introduced to our village, and those who adopt it will be inspired with rebellious notions, from which great calamities must ensue. Therefore we agree that if any native of this village becomes a Christian, we will cease to have any intercourse with him, and if any person dwelling here, not being a native, embraces the foreign creed, we will send him back to his birthplace."\*

Sometimes the people of their own accord made similar engagements. In one place several persons signed a paper in which they agreed that if any of the number became a Christian, the others might say anything, however bad, against him, and his signature would be their guaranty against his taking legal or other redress.

The missionaries who visited the interior were obliged to obtain passports from the Imperial Government. These were granted only for "health" or for "scientific investigation," the object of the restriction probably being to prevent foreigners from going into the country to trade. It became a practical question with missionaries whether they were justified in using passports thus worded. While the Foreign Department was unwilling to change the form of the documents or to make a public definition of how the words were to be interpreted, the heads of the Department at different times gave unofficial assurances that missionaries might use the passports for religious work. By most of the latter this was taken as being the equivalent of an official definition of the words; but some others felt that they could not conscientiously use such passports for evangelistic tours.

Foreigners were not allowed to reside in the interior except as they were employed by Japanese. In such cases it was necessary to have written contracts that were approved by both the local and the Imperial governments. Some missionaries accepted positions as teachers, and they usually found that no serious obstacles were put in the way of their improving the opportunities for doing religious work that came from their residence in the interior.

In the spring of 1876 the missionaries of the Presbyterian Church in the United States \(North\), the Reformed Church in America, and the United Presbyterian Church of Scotland formed the "Council of the Three Missions" made up of two delegates from each mission. One of its chief objects was to effect a union of the Japanese churches that had been formed in connection with their labours. The rules drawn up by this council, and adopted by the churches, recommended the Westminster Shorter Catechism, the Heidelberg Catechism, the Westminster Confession of Faith, and the Canons of the Synod of Dort, as the standards of doctrine; and the rules of church government were modelled upon those of Presbyterian churches in the West, though somewhat changed so as to suit Japanese conditions. The name adopted for the new body signified "The United Church of Christ in Japan." A few years later the word "United" was dropped from the title. The first meeting of the new organisation was held in Yokohama, October 3, 1877, Besides the missionaries, there were eight elders representing the same number of churches. These churches had a membership of six hundred and twenty-three. Requests were received for the organisation of three new churches.

At this meeting, three persons were ordained to the Christian ministry. Their names were Okuno Masatsuna, Ogawa Yoshiyasu, and Toda Tadaatsu.

Mr. Okuno was born in Yedo in 1823. He belonged to the military class, both his own father and the man that afterwards adopted him being vassals of the Tokugawa Shoguns. At the time of the overthrowal of the Shogunate he was serving as an official in the household of Ninnoji no Miya, the uncle of the Emperor Mutsuhito. An attempt was made to set up this prince as a rival emperor, and Mr. Okuno was among those that joined the army raised for this purpose by the northern daimyos. This movement soon ended in failure. Mr. Okuno, who was reduced to poverty, was still loyal to the house of his former master and longed to see it restored to its former prosperity. As a help in bringing this about, he had recourse to fasting and penance. He resolved to offer up petitions for help at all the Shinto shrines in Yedo. Setting out in the winter, he repeated his prayers at each shrine and poured cold water over his body. In fifty days the number of these ablutions had amounted to ten thousand. Sometimes he fasted for periods of seven days, eating absolutely nothing. He became so weak that he depended on his friends to help him as he crawled from one place to another; yet on arriving in front of a shrine, he would pour bucketful after bucketful of ice-cold water over his head until his skin turned black and his emaciated body could hardly be kept from falling. When the bamboo tallies with which he kept account of the number of douches had been used up, his friends would help him to some house where they would seek to restore vitality to his almost frozen body. After he had visited five hundred shrines in this way, he returned to his family. His prayers and intercessions had been in vain, and his friends undertook to find out why the gods had not granted his desires. Thus it was ascertained that in his weakness he had sometimes failed to reach a shrine at the proper time. He therefore went over the whole weary round once more; but still the gods were unmoved. He told his friends that his efforts were vain and he could do no more. He had spent their money and his for naught; he had starved himself to a skeleton and almost destroyed his life; but not one comforting response had come from any of the gods.\* Soon after this he found employment with Dr. Hepburn, helping him in the preparation of his dictionary. Being thus brought under Christian influences, he at last became a believer in the truths of the Gospel, and he ever after showed a spirit as earnest as marked the days when he sought help by pilgrimages and penances.

Mr. Ogawa, like Mr. Okuno, became one of the leaders in the church. He was born in 1831 and belonged to the military class. Becoming Dr. Thompson's teacher and so a helper in the translation of the Bible, he was greatly moved by its truths and was thus led to a belief in Christ.

Earlier in the year \(February\) another earnest young man had been ordained as pastor of the Naniwa Church, which at the same time was organised in the city of Osaka. Rev. Paul Sawayama was born in 1851 in the province of Suwo. During the Revolution he fought against the Shogun's army, and soon after the restoration of peace came to Kobe, where he studied English with Rev. D. C. Greene. In 1872 he went to America, finding a home in the family of Mr. Greene's brother, who lived in Evanston, 111. While there, he united with the First Congregational Church of that city, and decided that he would devote his life to preaching the Gospel. On returning to Japan in 1876, he was offered a government position at a salary of one hundred and fifty *yen* a month, which was a very large sum at that time; but he chose instead to become pastor of the little flock in Osaka, which could pay him only the paltry sum of seven *yen.* He was a man of deep faith, an earnest preacher, and one that exerted a great influence over all that met him. He and Mr. Neesima were the Japanese who did most to lay the foundations of what afterwards became the Kum-ai body of churches \(Congregational\). Though feeble health often kept him from the pulpit, yet in the sickroom or the ward of the hospital he was a great spiritual power. Other Christian workers went to him for advice and help to such an extent that he was often called "a pastor of pastors." He was an earnest advocate of self-support for the native churches. His own church was noted for its readiness to contribute not only for its own expenses, but for carrying the Gospel to others. He died in 1887 but his memory is still a power for good among all who knew him. His biography under the title, "A Modern Paul in Japan" was written by Mr. Naruse Jinzo.

In connection with the union of the Presbyterian churches, a committee was chosen to arrange a plan for theological education. As a result a school was established in Tokyo and put under the care of the Council of the Three Missions, This did away with the former practice by which each mission had sought to educate young men for its own ministry. In November, 1877, Rev. H. Maundrell of the Church Missionary Society began in Nagasaki a school to train candidates for the ministry, there being at first four students.

A difficulty that was often experienced is illustrated by the trouble that the Christians of Kyoto had in renting a building for their meetings, which had hitherto been held in private houses. Rev. J. D. Davis, writing in November, 1877, said:

"For three months they tried and failed. As soon as it was known that they were Christians, the way was blocked. Some three months ago they found a very desirable building for rent near the centre of the city, and the owner, and the mayor of the ward also, consented to rent it for Gospel preaching. In Japan, however, the neighbours must be consulted before a man can rent a house, and the neighbours in this case, hearing that it was to be rented for Christian preaching, refused their consent and sent word to the owner of the house in question, who lived in another ward, that he must not rent his house to a Christian. He replied that if the house belonged to them they could control it, but while it belonged to him he should rent it to whomsoever he pleased, and that if they did not like this they could buy the house. So they had a consultation and sent him word that they would buy it. Twenty days elapsed and they did not pay for it; and then they sent word to the owner that, since they heard that this Christian expected to rent a house in another place, they had decided not to purchase. The owner at once rented the house to one of the native Christians and he took possession, and preaching services were commenced. The neighbours were now greatly troubled and held meeting after meeting before they could decide what to do. Most of them wanted to eject the Christian, though some said they wanted to learn the New Way. The majority would not, however, vote to buy the house. Finally they fell back upon an old custom or law, which originated in the time of the persecution of the Jesuits here, that every man who rented a house must write in the lease to what sect of Buddhists he belonged. The Christian who rented this house had written in the lease that he was formerly a Buddhist but now a Christian. The neighbours said that unless this Christian could bring a paper from a priest of the sect of Buddhists to which he formerly belonged, saying that such was the case, he could not hold the lease. The Christian refused to pay any attention to this demand, and after their threatening the owner and the man who had rented it and also troubling the mayor of the ward for some time, the latter had a private interview with the Governor of the city to enquire what he had better do. The Governor advised him to order that the Christian simply write himself as a Christian and that one or two other men become responsible that if he should die they would see that the neighbours were not troubled about his burial, since, as a Christian, he could not receive regular Buddhist burial."

In 1875 Dr. J. C. Berry had obtained through the American Minister permission to visit prisons in different parts of Japan. The results of his inspection were embodied in a report that he made in 1876 to the Japanese Government, adding many suggestions about needed improvements. The Government had the report printed and distributed among the prison officials, a fact the more noticeable since it included the testimony of many European and American penologists upon the value of Christian teaching as a reformatory agent. The Governor of Kobe appointed a member of the church in that city as a teacher in the prison to give instruction in reading, arithmetic, and morals. Though not appointed as a chaplain, he found many opportunities to exert a Christian influence. Early in 1877 this man received a document from eight of the prisoners. The cover was of ordinary paper; but in the centre was a wreath of flowers painted in colours, in the centre of this wreath was a cross, and on the cross were four Chinese ideographs that signified "The Company of the New Covenant." Within the covers was written an agreement saying that the persons whose names were signed at its close entered into a solemn covenant with each other and with God to cease from all violations of the law of God and of the land, and to follow Jesus as their Saviour. At the end each man wrote his name, and then as they had no seals, they did what is recognised as lawful under such circumstances, dipped the ends of their thumbs in ink and impressed them on the paper. The man that taught these prisoners was afterwards made the superintendent of the prison.

Early in 1877 Mr. Neesima sent some Christian books to the prison at Otsu, about eight miles from Kyoto. Among them was Dr. Martin's "Evidences of Christianity" in Chinese, the book to whose influence reference has several times before been made. This so interested one of the prisoners that he began to translate it into Japanese for the benefit of his illiterate associates, whom he began to instruct. Mr. Neesima wrote an account of what followed:

"Most of the prisoners are uneducated, and petty thieves. A lamp was allowed for evening study. This was a great concession from the authorities, for the use of lamps had hitherto been forbidden. But one lamp proved insufficient for the large number of prison students. I believe they were eighty in number. Subsequently one more was granted, then another, then another, till finally the room was fully lighted. He who taught his associates also began to preach to them every day. One day fire broke out in the prison, but there was no least confusion. He kept them in complete order. Under his direction each one work nobly and soon the fire was extinguished. Afterwards the prisoners were inspected, and none of them had escaped. It was a wonderful thing. The authorities of the city were informed of the behaviour of the prisoners and the reason for it, and their leader was released on account of his good conduct, although he had one year yet to serve. After his release he called on us and told us his story. He had killed a man ten years ago in a quarrel. He has since started a private school in Otsu, and Mr. Davis, myself, and some of the students have preached there ever since."\*

Departing from the chronological order of events, we may here insert one or two other incidents connected with work for prisoners. The first relates to a young man who failed in an attempt to inaugurate such work. He was a student in the Doshisha School. While there, his conscience troubled him because a few years before, when a boy in Tokyo, he had stolen some shoes from a hotel. He finally decided to confess his crime and take the consequences. Supposing that he would have to spend considerable time in prison, he began to think where he could do the most good. As no Christian work had yet been done in the province of Satsuma, he decided to seek imprisonment there in order that he might preach Christ to those that were confined with him. He left school without telling any one of his plans, and went to Satsuma. From there he wrote letters to two leading newspapers in Tokyo telling of the theft committed years before, of his remorse of conscience since he had been taught by Christians, and his desire to make all the restitution in his power. He then gave himself up to the officers of justice for punishment. He was detained a few days and then, much to his surprise, was released, the authorities scarcely knowing what to make of such a conscience. Thus his plan for Christian work in a prison ended in failure.\*

The prisoners at this time furnished a more hopeful field of labour because they contained, especially after the Satsuma Rebellion of 1877, a number of political prisoners, who were intellectually and morally of a higher grade than most criminals. The labour of the convicts was often let out to farmers and manufacturers. In Kobe a Christian had established a small factory and he employed some of these political prisoners to run the machines. He began to speak to them about Christianity, had some one read the Bible or other books while they were working, and once a week invited some preacher to address them. The official that accompanied these prisoners made no objection, and some of the men became very much interested in what they heard. After a time, business grew so dull that the employer could no longer afford to keep his machines going; but the prisoners were so desirous of continuing the arrangement that one or two of them, who were men of property, furnished funds to enable him to continue hiring them and their companions through the dull season. Several of them were baptised after their sentences had expired, and on returning to their own province opened the way there for Christian preaching.

The Cumberland Presbyterian Church of America, which formerly had done most of its foreign work through the American Board, to which it contributed both money and men,† now began a mission of its own in Japan. Rev. and Mrs. J. B. Hail, its first representatives, reached the country in February, 1877, and Osaka was selected as their residence. To the same city in April came Miss M. J. Oxlad, the first representative of the English Society for Promoting Female Education in the East. The Evangelical Association of North America had sent its first missionaries \(Rev. F. Krecker, M.D., Mrs. Krecker, Rev. A. Halmhuber, and Miss R. J, Hudson\) to Japan the preceding year. They at first resided in Yokohama.

The year 1878 was marked by a number of conventions that in various ways showed the progress that was being made. The earliest of these was a meeting of delegates sent by the nine churches that had grown up in connection with the work of the American Board. It was held in Osaka January 2 and 3. Its purpose was to promote fellowship among the churches and to devise plans for uniting their forces for spreading the Gospel. Besides the delegates, many Christians living in the vicinity were in attendance. Mr. Neesima was the chairman. The most important business accomplished was the establishment of the Japanese Missionary Society, the churches promising to make monthly contributions for its support. The management of this society was wholly in the hands of the Japanese, and at first it did not receive any financial aid from the mission. The next summer it sent several theological students from the Doshisha to places where there were promising openings, and in these they laid the foundations of what have since become large churches.

In May the missionaries of the Church Missionary Society, the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and the American Episcopal Mission met in Tokyo for a conference. Two bishops and fifteen other clergymen were in attendance. They decided that the Japanese churches formed in connection with their work should use the same Book of Common Prayer, For this the translations already made of the Litany and of the services of Morning and Evening Prayer were adopted, and a committee was chosen for the translation of other portions.

May 10-13 a convention of missionaries was held in Tokyo. As this was a delegate convention, it is not reckoned as one of the "General Conferences." Besides forty-one missionaries representing ten missions, each of the three Bible societies \(British and Foreign, Scotch, and American\) working in Japan sent a delegate, and there were three honorary members. The chief business related to the translation of the Old Testament. It was decided that each mission should be requested to appoint one of its members to serve upon a permanent committee that should have authority to select committees for translation and general revision.

The first *Dai Shimboku-kwai,* or General Fellowship Meeting, for all the Protestant Christians of Japan was held in Tokyo, July 15-18. Twelve cities were represented by twenty-seven delegates; and it is said that from five hundred to six hundred people were present at some of the meetings. Mr. Tsuda Sen was chosen Chairman. There were reports from the churches and addresses upon such subjects as "The Spirit of Christian Fellowship," "Christians should be Independent," "The Church and the Nation," "Christianity and Literature," "Christianity and Social Reform," "Christianity and Liberty," etc. Much enthusiasm was manifested and it was a great advantage to have the Christians of different churches thus brought together. It was decided to have such meetings annually. The next year, however, the prevalence of cholera in the city of Osaka, which had been chosen for the place of meeting led to a postponement until 1880. These Fellowship Meetings, either under the original name or as meetings of the Japanese Evangelical Alliance, have been held at irregular intervals until the present time.

The Presbytery of the United Churches, held in October, elected, besides the Home Evangelisation Committee, a Foreign Evangelisation Committee of six members. The plan was to begin evangelistic work in Korea. The Committee, having obtained a man that desired to labour in that country, had him enter upon a course of theological study; but the candidate was obliged on account of illness to leave the seminary and the whole enterprise was dropped for the time being.

In January, 1878, the two Congregational \(or *Kumi-ai,* as they were afterwards called\), churches in Osaka, each having about twenty-five members, opened the school for girls to which was given the name Baikwa Jogakko \(Plum-blossom Girls' School\). Rev. H. Leavitt, a missionary of the American Board, was an earnest advocate of self-support, believing that the Christians should not depend on foreign funds for the expenses of churches, schools, publishing houses, or other Christian institutions. It was chiefly owing to his zeal, seconded by that of Rev. Paul Sawayama, that the enthusiasm, faith, and courage of the Christians were aroused for this undertaking which at first seemed far beyond their strength. Though individual missionaries showed their sympathy by personal contributions, no money was asked from the missionary board. Mr. Leavitt wrote: "The running expenses of the school—including rent of building, fuel, teacher, etc., etc.,—are paid entirely by the tuition of the scholars and the contributions of the church members." The American Board Mission allowed one of its lady missionaries to teach in the school, but gave it no pecuniary aid. At first there were fifteen pupils, a number that increased rapidly from month to month. It may be added that for about fifteen years the school continued upon this self-supporting basis; and then, in view of the financial straits into which the school was brought by the dishonesty of the man in whose name the real estate was held, the American Board made it one or two grants.

A number of new churches were organised in 1878, several of them being outside of the open ports. One of these was in Annaka, Mr. Neesima's old home, where it will be remembered that he spoke to the people about Christianity at the time of his return from America. Mr. Ebina, a student of the Doshisha Theological School, had spent his vacations there as an evangelist. In March, 1878, a church was organised. Mr. Neesima thus wrote of the exercises:

"When I arrived there, I found them well prepared to be baptised. I held a meeting on the evening of my arrival, preached to a large audience the next day, and held an enquiry meeting in the evening. This was repeated the following day, and on the fourth day I baptised thirty persons and organised a church. It was the most solemn and yet most joyful event I ever witnessed. The people have thus far paid all expenses and have never received any aid from without. They take pride in doing so, and have already raised a fund for the support of their church. There is a rich merchant among them, the most influential man in the place, although quite young. He keeps the pastor in his home and does everything for his comfort. He also supports a free reading-room where daily, weekly, and monthly papers, secular and religious, are kept."

In the province of Shimosa, Mr. Soper of the American Methodist Mission, baptised thirty adults, who were organised into a church. In connection with the work of the same mission, six converts were baptised in the important city of Nagoya and placed under the care of a native catechist.

Rev. D. Macdonald, M.D., of the Canadian Methodist Mission, had been employed for four years as a teacher in Shizuoka. He also practised medicine, and in his own house taught Christianity, Up to the time of his departure, one hundred and eighteen persons had been baptised. Rev. G, M. Meacham of the same mission, had lived for two years in Numazu. Forty-one persons, most of them students in the school where he taught, were baptised.

In Kyoto there was a wave of reaction. Some one wrote:

"Whereas there were upwards of forty places occupied each week by students as centres for presenting truth, with audiences always inspiring in number, now scarcely eight can be occupied with any encouraging number of hearers. In many places the houses are closed to the preachers."\*

There was also difficulty in getting permission for employing foreign teachers in the Doshisha Schools. Two ladies had come to teach in the Girls' Department, which had been recently established; but when the local Governor, who had become hostile, forwarded the request to the Central Government, he added a suggestion that it should not be granted, since the schools were used to promote Christianity. There was further trouble at a later date when it was necessary to have Dr. Learned's passport renewed. One objection suggested by the Governor was that, though Mr, Neesima nominally employed the foreign teachers, the school was really a foreign institution sustained by an annual grant from a missionary society. In February of the next year Mr. Neesima went to Tokyo where, since the passports must be obtained through the Foreign Department, he explained to Mr. Mori, the Vice-Minister, how the school was started and how it was sustained. After hearing his statement, Mr. Mori said: "You have a right to exist and also to employ foreign teachers, if you use your own funds instead of those coming from a foreign society. The Foreign Office objects to your depending upon the American Board." Mr. Neesima says:

"I told him that this annual aid was a free gift and that we made a good use of it. Is it forbidden us to receive any aid from a foreign nation? If so, the law ought to prohibit us from aiding other nations. Did not our people send an immense quantity of rice last year to a famishing district in China, and can we not also receive some aid for our moral and intellectual famine? This argument was just enough to bring him around to our side, and through his kindness I obtained the extension of Dr. Learned's passport for five years."

In the spring of 1878 Rev. F. B. Plummer of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, made a visit to the Bonin Islands, which are five hundred and fifty miles southeast of Yokohama. At this time the islands had a population of about a thousand persons, among them being English, French, Americans, Spanish, South Sea Islanders, Negroes, and cross-breeds. Webb, who was a leader among the foreign settlers, had been in the habit of baptising the children of all but one of the families. These islands, which belong to Japan, have since that time been frequently visited by missionaries.

A school for teaching the blind was opened that year at Tokyo in the hospital conducted by Dr. Faulds, who also about the same time caused some portions of the Scriptures and other Christian literature to be printed in raised type.\* Three years before this he had been in conference with several Japanese Christians who united with him in forming a philanthropic society, one of whose objects was the education of the blind. An official who was induced to join the society "strongly objected to its dependence on a foreign church for its support," and as his views were accepted, the society lost its distinctively Christian character, but gained contributions from the Emperor and others. The school for the blind and for deaf mutes established by this society was not opened until February, 1880, more than a year after that of Dr. Faulds, who continued to help the Japanese society in developing and carrying out its plans.

On certain Shinto festivals, sacred cars are carried through the streets upon the shoulders of men, who may number several scores. Often the car will suddenly stop, and though the men pretend to be trying to make it go forward, they will all be carried backward or swayed from side to side, the idea being that for some reason or other the god, whose spirit is supposed to be in the car, does not wish to go in the direction that is being taken. Sometimes the car strikes against a house whose inmates have in some way displeased the deity. In August, 1878, as the car belonging to the tutelary shrine of Yotsuya, Tokyo, was being carried in front of the Christian church that had been built in that district, the spirit of the deity became so turbulent that finally the car was hurled against the building with such violence as to do considerable damage. Soon after this, the persons in charge of the proceedings were called before the police, and as a result were led to write a document acknowledging that they had not exerted sufficient care, asking forgiveness for the offence, and promising that there should be no trouble next year. They also sent eighteen persons to offer apologies to the Christians. When a somewhat similar affair occurred in Kobe, the Shinto priests were warned that a recurrence would lead the authorities to prohibit the taking out of the car in future years.\*

Intercourse with Western lands brought to the Japanese not only a knowledge of Christianity, but also of modern materialism and scepticism. The letters of missionaries show that they quickly recognised the danger. Thus Rev. J. T. Gulick wrote:

"It becomes more and more evident that the strongest opponent to Christianity in Japan will not be Buddhism but materialism; not the religions and superstitions of old Japan but the scepticism of modern Europe. The faith of the people in their old religions is giving way gradually, and though the strong fraternities of priests and a large conservative element among the common people will be for a time resolutely arrayed against any change of religious opinions, their utmost endeavours cannot stay the tide. Though we should fail to do our part in urging the claims of Christianity, the old systems would not fail to crumble before the advance of modern ideas. But we must not deceive ourselves with the thought that in the absorption of new ideas Christianity will be as readily received as other things; for it becomes every day more apparent that the natural heart of progressive Japan is the eager disciple of rationalistic and materialistic Europe."

The scorn with which many looked on religion finds expression in the following extract from one of the leading newspapers, the *Hochi Shimbun,* of October 19, 1878;

"The Christian religion seems to be extending by degrees throughout our country. . . . We have no wish to obey it, nor have we any fear of being troubled by it. As we can enjoy sufficient happiness without any religion whatever, the question as to the merits or demerits of the different forms never enters our head. Indeed, we are of those who, not knowing the existence of religions in the universe, are enjoying perfect happiness. We have no intention of either supporting or attacking the Christian religion. In fact, religion is nothing to us."†

While many of the wise and noble thus despised Christianity, it was having its influence on publicans and sinners. Rev. O. H. Gulick, writing of a visit to Hikone, said:

"Two men widely known in that section of country as keepers of gambling saloons and houses of ill-fame, have within a few months become ashamed of their vile trade. Gathering the inmates of their establishments together, they announced their purpose to abandon the wicked business and follow the teachings of Christ. The women and girls, whom they had purchased from their parents and subjected to a life of degradation, they promised to set free without the return of money if they could find homes as wives or if they would return to their parents, giving pledges that they would abandon their lives of shame. We were told that all but one of the victims of their trade had in these ways been provided with homes, the business had been entirely closed, and those who were the organisers of this iniquity had become regular and attentive hearers of the word of life."\*

This was but one of many cases in which men were led to give up trades not consistent with Christian teaching, though to do so involved considerable loss.

In a small town in the province of Tango on the shores of the Japan Sea lived a woman whose story is here condensed from an account written by Rev. J. H. DeForest. She belonged to a family of some local importance, one of whose members had died in the year 1854. By the old calendar, which divided the years among cycles named after various animals, that was the year of the tiger, and when the next year of the same designation came around, the head of the family died. Superstitious as the Japanese are, the family and friends could not fail to be deeply impressed with the coincidence; and the two tombstones, both inscribed with the tiger year, made them regard it as one fatal to the household. In 1878 the dreaded season came again. At New Year's the family talked together of the terror that they could not but feel. "Whose turn will it be to die this year?" was the question they asked one another. Finally the widow of the man who had last died offered to take upon herself the wrath of the deities in order that the younger members of the household might be spared. To prepare herself for death she decided to make a pilgrimage to the great shrine at Ise, visiting other noted temples on the way. She set out attended by a single servant. On reaching Osaka she went to the house of her brother-in-law. This man and his wife had recently become Christians, and that night this widow for the first time heard about their religion. She tarried over another night that she might hear more of what they had to say. That they had torn down their idol-shelves, that they dared openly to profess a faith that she had been taught to dread, and that they seemed to be so full of joy in their new religion, led the old lady to say on the third day: "The weather is raw, the roads are bad. If the servant wants to continue on his pilgrimage to Ise, all right; I will stay here till his return and learn more about this religion."

She heard for a week, and gave a dollar to the church; two weeks, and she bought several dozen copies of the Scriptures and other books to take back home as presents; another week, and besides another dollar to the church, she gave one to the girls' school; still another week, and it was arranged that, since she felt hardly able to face the questions that would meet her at home, the relatives with whom she was staying should return with her. They did so, and though they were called before the police, they were allowed to continue telling the people of the town about Christianity. It was also arranged that one of the students of the Dushisha should spend his summer vacation there at the old lady's expense. Until the end of her life, about twenty years later, she was well known in the churches as the Tango Obaa San, or Old Lady of Tango. She built a church in her village and paid a large proportion of the expenses of the evangelists that laboured there.\*

Rev. C. T. Blanchet of the American Episcopal Missions, wrote in 1879: "The people are actually getting ready for Christianity faster than we can carry it to them." From towns far in the interior the missionaries of different societies were receiving invitations to come and preach the Gospel. Those that had the language found it easy to get large audiences. There were several places where the permanent residence of the missionary was desired; though this was possible only when he was employed by Japanese as a teacher of English, or in some other capacity. It was in this way that Rev. T. C. Winn went to Kanazawa as teacher in a government school. The principal offered him the position of English teacher with the understanding that he should be allowed to preach and to teach Christianity in the city. Mrs. Winn and Mrs. True, who accompanied him, were able to carry on work among the women; and as a result of these efforts a church was organised a year and a half later. Similarly, with a full understanding by the prefectural Governor and all other persons concerned that they came as Christian missionaries, J. C. Berry, M.D., and Revs. J, H. Pettee and O. Cary, were employed in Okayama, the first in a government hospital and the two others in a private school. They were accompanied by their families and Miss Wilson, all being of the American Board Mission. The Governor even went so far as to let them have free from rent, for temporary residence, a house that belonged to himself. This was also used for preaching services and a Sunday school. As it was well known to belong to him and as some of his family attended the services, much of the prejudice that would naturally be felt against the teachers of a foreign religion was allayed. The favours thus shown did indeed subject him to some criticism. The next year a comic paper published in Tokyo contained a picture that represented the Governor of Okayama as an acrobat balancing on his forehead a cross upon which was a pole labelled "Popular Favour." Underneath was the inscription: "The Governor of Okayama hopes to gain favour by becoming a Christian." Other papers asserted that he worshipped every day before a cross.

In other cities the labours of Japanese evangelists or the tours of missionaries were accompanied by encouraging results. The first class of young men, fifteen in number, was graduated from the Doshisha Theological School, and they at once became teachers or evangelists. From the cities where they laboured in the latter capacity, there soon came news of many persons who had become followers of Christ. In March, Rev. H. Maundrell of the Church Missionary Society, in response to an earnest invitation from Kagoshima, sent to that city one of the theological students under his training, who at once hired a room where he held services every evening and instructed those who, having before learned about Christianity, had asked for baptism. A visit was made a little later by Mr. Maundrell himself, and when he returned to Nagasaki in May, he left at Kagoshima a church with fourteen adults and seven children. There were also several others that had given in their names as desirous of becoming Christians.

Other missions reported many baptisms, and the statistics for the year 1879 showed an increase of about sixty per cent, in the number of Protestant church-members. With so much to encourage them and with so many promising openings, the missions called loudly for re-enforcements, and also felt deeply the need for raising up, as soon as possible, a thoroughly equipped native ministry.

Opposition, however, was not at an end. In Kyoto the local government instructed the ward officers to advise the people not to go to the houses of missionaries or to places where Christianity was preached, giving as a reason that the people already had a sufficient number of religions and those that were good enough.\* Two of the Japanese teachers in the Imperial High School in Osaka had been prominent workers in the churches. They were now forbidden to preach or teach Christianity, danger of overwork outside of school being the excuse for the order.†

This was one of several indications that the Department of Education was then, as for many years afterwards, opposed to Christianity.

Another form of opposition was in some respects harder to bear, since it came from those who had been born in Christian lands. Some of the foreign professors in the Imperial University at Tokyo, not only ridiculed Christianity in their classrooms, but also held meetings in a public hall, where they attacked Christianity and even theism.\*

In the summer of 1879 the peasants in a place near Niigata attacked Dr. Palm and demolished his preaching-place. This occurred in a riot, the people having gained the idea that the cholera, which was then raging, was in some way due to the Christians.

Missions were commenced in 1879 by the English Baptists and by the Reformed Church \(German\) in the United States. The next year the Methodist Protestant Church of America entered the field.

April 19, 1880, a meeting was held in one of the churches of Tokyo to celebrate the completion of the translation of the New Testament as made by the Committee chosen in 1872. A large audience of Japanese Christians, together with representatives of fourteen American and English missionary societies, filled the church. Dr. N. Brown of the American Baptist Mission, who a few months before had completed an independent translation of the New Testament, read the nineteenth Psalm in English, and Rev. J. Piper of the English Church Missionary Society offered prayer. The leading address was in English by Dr. Hepburn, who gave a historical sketch of former attempts to translate the Scriptures into Japanese, and of the way the present version was prepared. The chief work had been done by Drs. S. R. Brown, Greene, Hepburn, and Maclay; the Japanese brethren who assisted them and to whom much of the excellence of the version is due, being Messrs. Matsuyama Takayoshi, Okuno Masatsuna, Taka-hashi Goro, Ibuka Kajinosuke, and Miwa—Of the first of these it was said:

"He was with the Committee from the first, and throughout its whole work. He was our chief dependence, assistant, and arbiter in all cases of difficulty. Whatever virtue there is in our Japanese text is mainly, if not altogether, owing to his scholarly ability, the perfect knowledge he has of his own language, his conscientious care, and his identifying himself with the work."

Mr. Okuno, who was with the Committee a little more than two years, "had more to do in assisting in the first work of translation than perhaps any other."

The year that saw the completion of the translation saw also a great increase in the sale of the Scriptures. Rev. J. Goble, who was employed by the American Bible Society as a colporteur, had a small handcart made, which he stocked with books and so sold them through the streets of Tokyo and in different parts of the country. In the first month he sold about 5,500 portions of the Bible. Not only did he himself effect these large sales, but he proved to the Japanese that the people were ready to buy if approached in the right way, and many of the colporteurs, who hitherto had been too dignified to push their business, learned from him how to do successful work.

It will be remembered that in 1878 a convention of the Japanese Christians had been held in Tokyo. Plans were then made for having a similar meeting the next year in Osaka, but at the appointed time that city was suffering from an epidemic of cholera and so the convention was postponed until July, 1880. Though the expense of travel prevented the attendance of large numbers, the meeting was thought to be very profitable. Besides devotional meetings and addresses upon various themes, a half day was spent in making arrangements for presenting to the Government a petition asking that the Christian dead might be buried with Christian rites without let or hindrance from the Buddhist priests. Nothing, however, was gained at this time in furtherance of such liberty.

October 13 and 14 a remarkable meeting was held in the Public Park at Ueno, Tokyo. A restaurant with its grounds was rented and services held from nine o'clock in the morning until five in the afternoon. There were prayers, the singing of Christian hymns, and addresses by both Japanese and foreigners. Dr. Verbeck thus described the exercises:

"In the forenoon, moderately sized audiences were addressed in the rooms of the restaurant; but towards noon the rooms, though pretty large, were found insufficient to hold the crowd of visitors then on the ground. The wide front veranda of the ground floor was now converted into a platform, the pretty gardens furnishing abundant room for the growing audience. The whole of this made up an impressive scene. In full view in front were the miniature lake of Shinobazu and the northern suburbs of the city; on a little island in the lake stood the temple dedicated to the goddess Benten; within hailing distance towards the left might be seen the temple of the thousand-handed goddess of mercy; within a stone's throw to the rear sat a bronze image of Buddha, twenty feet high; and in the midst of all these a large and orderly crowd stood attentively listening to the proclamation of the Gospel by a number of zealous preachers. White the principal work was done on the novel platform just described, a few preachers held overflow meetings under the summer-houses standing in different parts of the gardens. It is calculated that several thousand people, as they came and went, heard the preaching of the Gospel, many of them for the first time, on that day. It was gratifying to notice among the crowded audience the attendance of several representatives of the higher and official classes resident in the capital and the presence of Buddhist priests; the respectful bearing of all present, too, was a pleasant feature of the day's performance. The next day's local papers \(Japanese\) also, in their reports of the meeting, generally spoke of it with respect and approval. The promoters of this new enterprise had every reason to be satisfied with the result. For months afterwards one could hear, in Japanese churches, allusions made to the happy event, and thanks given to God for the blessings vouchsafed on this memorable day."\*

When we remember that only eight or nine years before it was dangerous to attend a Christian meeting in a private house, we see how great was the change that had taken place.

The liberal views of the Central Government were shown about this time by the orders it sent to one of the local governors. Some Japanese evangelists of the Greek Church had visited the province of Tamba, when the police, under orders from the Governor of Kyoto, to whose jurisdiction the district belonged, forbade their preaching. As they would not desist, the Governor reported the matter to Tokyo, only to receive commands to let the preachers alone. The same Governor had in many other ways shown his hatred of Christianity. It was on account of his opposition that there had been trouble in getting passports for the American teachers in the Doshisha, and he had issued orders that made booksellers afraid to deal in Christian books. It was a great relief to those interested in missionary work when he was soon after removed.

Two Japanese pastors obtained permission in September to speak every Sunday in the Hyogo prison. The document granting this gave "Moral Science" as the subject of their addresses; but it was well understood that they were at liberty to speak on religious themes.

The first Young Men's Christian Association among the Japanese was probably that organised this year in Tokyo. Rev, Messrs. Kozaki, Ibuka, Hiraiwa, and Uemura were prominent in the early days of the society. Meetings of its members were held for religious and philosophical discussions, a small library was formed, and there were occasional evangelistic services. It formed the foundation of the present Association in Tokyo. In October there was published under its auspices the *Rikugo Zasshi* \(The Cosmos\), a magazine that soon gained considerable circulation and influence. In this connection it may be noted that about the same time there was started in Kyoto a periodical entitled *Ryokyo Zasshi* \(The Magazine of the Two Religions\), which announced as its object the protection of Buddhism and Shintoism from the alarming advances being made by Christianity.

A letter written in July, 1881, by Rev. C. T. Blanchet of the American Episcopal Mission, mentions four indications of the rapid extension of Christianity;—1. The establishment, with the Government's approval, of a number of Christian papers. 2. The greater demand for Christian literature, and the rapidly increasing supply. 3. The renewed energy put forth by the Buddhists in trying to bolster up their system, which was daily losing its hold upon the people. 4, The tacit allowance by the Government of preaching the Gospel and of selling the Scriptures in the interior as well as in the open ports, irrespective of the protests of the Buddhists against the same.\*

The circulation of the Scriptures had largely increased. The sales of Bibles and "portions" by the three societies—the American Bible Society, the British and Foreign Bible Society, and the National Society of Scotland—amounted to 115,000 copies, for which 16,000 *yen* were received. It was the general rule of these societies to sell and not give away the Scriptures, the retail price being but little, if any, below the actual cost of production. Most of the missions and other societies that published Christian books put the price at such a sum as covered all the expenses of publication and distribution.

About this time Rev. Mr. Okuno, at the request of the superintendent of a large prison near Tokyo, commenced to preach every week to the criminals. His audiences usually numbered from eight hundred to a thousand. These services were kept up for about two years, when the opposition of Buddhist priests caused their discontinuance.

The missionary correspondence of 1881 and succeeding years contained accounts of the mass meetings that were frequently held in theatres. The ordinary theatre of Japan is a large, barn-like structure, open to the roof, the wood-work unpainted, and without ornamentation except that of the furnishings of the stage. The floor is divided by low railings into what resemble small cattle-pens. A family or a company of friends can engage one of these for its exclusive use. The spectators often bring their lunches with them or they can procure tea and refreshments from the neighbouring restaurants; and thus they combine the pleasures of a picnic with that of witnessing the play. There are usually one or two galleries. It was discovered that these buildings made good places for preaching. One of the first of these meetings of which a description is given was held in Kyoto. Rev. W. W. Curtis thus wrote of it:

"The hour for commencing was one p.m. We found the theatre, said to seat four thousand, comfortably filled with an expectant audience. There were probably in the neighbourhood of three thousand present. In the audience nearly every variety of fashion was illustrated, from that of the bare-legged coolie with nothing on but a loin-cloth and a loose open robe girded at the waist, to the becoming full dress of the *samurai,* and the less comely attire of foreign coat and pants. I could see but two or three men in all that assembly who wore the cue. One of the galleries was set apart for the ladies, scarcely any of whom were seen among the men below. In a box opposite the stage several officials were seated, who proved attentive listeners. It is estimated that as many as two hundred priests were in the audience. On the carpeted platform stood a little stand with a Bible and a glass of water on it. The name and subject of each speaker in large characters were posted up before he came upon the stage. Several minutes were given between the speeches to allow the audience to exchange a few words and take a smoke. To the right of the platform was the chairman with a call-bell on the table before him. with which he notified the speakers when their time was up. Near by was a cabinet organ, and seated around this some twenty or more students from our Training School. The audience applauded the speeches in the way which is now quite fashionable in Japan, by clapping their hands."

A Buddhist magazine published in Kyoto thus referred to this meeting:

"The place was crowded with hearers day and night, more than three thousand being present. The preachers were both converted Japanese and foreigners. The sermons were well prepared and able. Those on 'Faith' and 'Cause and Effect' were emotional and calculated to excite the uneducated. The preachers were eloquent. 'Love God and Your Neighbour' was very peculiar. As regards love, our Buddhists have something to be ashamed of. Among different kinds of love, that for your own party and friends is one of the greatest, and this leads to mutual help and so progress is rapid. It seems to me, however, that we are destitute of this love, and instead of it have internal dissensions. Is not this blameworthy?"\*

Though the meeting passed off without a display of opposition, Mr. Miyagawa, who was the chairman and one of the speakers, received an anonymous letter that denounced him as a very wicked man, a stirrer-up of strife, and threatened that he would not reach his home that night alive. In Japan at that time threats of assassination were not to be lightly regarded; but Mr. Miyagawa simply said: "I am ready, if need be, to be a martyr." No violence, however, was offered.

Similar meetings were held in other cities. In Osaka the Shinto and Buddhist priests were so annoyed that they brought legal action against the Governor for allowing such a meeting. The judges rendered the following decision:

"The plaintiffs in this action complain that the Governor has improperly administered the laws by permitting the Christians to hold a great meeting in Osaka. They allege that the Governor should have issued a notification forbidding foreigners to erect a church or preach a religion not sanctioned by Government, outside the limits of the Foreign Settlement, and also prohibiting all persons unauthorised by Government from preaching on religious subjects. The court is of opinion that the plaintiffs have no ground for their contention although there is nothing to prevent their presenting a petition to the Governor on this subject. . . . The case is therefore dismissed."†

The activity of the Christians led, in a few cases, to threats against the propagators of the new faith. Two theological students, who spent the summer vacation in Fukui, received from a Shintoist the following letter:

"You, in seeking the trifling gain that is offered you, preach the baneful doctrines of Christianity. What sin is greater? If you will repent, do it speedily, and we will be quiet; but if you continue preaching, we have weapons to destroy what is harmful to the country. The sacred sword to use for the holy Empire is at our side. Your impure blood, young children, is unworthy to be shed; but we will try the sword for the first time on your young necks.

"Village of Kawakita, God of Mountains: From Nobuakira, the Keeper of the Holy Empire.

"To the preachers of Barbarian Doctrines."

More legitimate methods of opposition were not neglected. The Buddhist priests published a series of tracts on "The Unreasonableness of Christianity." One of these urged that the existence of noxious beasts disproved the doctrine of a wise and loving Creator. Another adduced the Crusades to show that Christianity gives rise to wars. Mass meetings like those inaugurated by the Christians were held. Some of the speakers endeavoured to frighten the ignorant people by asserting that at the beginning of the next year the Government would put all Christians to death. Herod and Pilate became friends; the Buddhists seeking the help of those that were opposed to all religions. Three pupils of Mr. Fukuzawa, who like their master, the famous teacher and reformer, avowed that they did not believe in any religion, were employed to address meetings in Osaka and Kyoto. One of them began his speech by saying:

"I am neither a Buddhist nor Shinto priest; neither have I any special leaning to either of these religions, the excellence of which I am not well acquainted with; but I am aware of the iniquities of the Christian sect, and my purpose is, from love of country and sincere heart, to discuss these. Of late the progress made by this sect has been marvellous, and may be compared to a fire sweeping over a plain, which constantly increases in power. Wherever one may go, their preaching places are to be found. The three Christian sects, Catholic, Greek, and Protestant, which entered Japan simultaneously, have already produced much confusion, and bid fair to put an end to the old condition of things in my country. Therefore I propose, by the aid of ancient and modern history, to show whether Christianity is profitable or injurious, to startle these immoral believers of the foreign religion in their infatuated dreams, and call the attention of the Government and people to the subject. Now this Christian sect is very different from other religions and contains two greatly to be dreaded qualities. These are, first, cruelty and rebellion; second, the seizure and robbery of other countries. Therefore they are prone to present their complaints with sword and spear, murder innocent people, and seize their country and property; such instances are by no means rare."

The lecturer then went on to speak of the Crusades, of contests in Europe between Protestants and Roman Catholics, and of the troubles brought upon Japan by the preaching of Christianity three centuries before. He asserted that modern missionaries were sent by foreign governments for the sake of gaining a foothold in the country, and that their followers, in case of war between Japan and a Western nation, would secretly aid the latter. Lovers of their country should resist the progress of a religion that threatened such great evils.\*

The lecturers were so much nettled at the remarks of the newspapers accusing them of speaking only for the sake of the money paid them by the Buddhists, that in one of the subsequent meetings they made some violent attacks upon the priests, who were not a little vexed to have their allies thus turn against them.†

Mr. Fukuzawa himself delivered a lecture in Tokyo about the same time, in which he spoke of religion as being necessary for controlling the hearts of the people. For himself, he had no special leaning toward either Buddhism or Shintoism, but he feared the influence of Christianity would be to make people regard foreign nations with too much favour. He went on to say:

"At present there is great emulation and strife among nations to be first, and those that are careless will soon fall behind in the race. The right and the wrong are not much thought of any more. If a nation sees an opportunity to enrich herself by seizing another country, she does so without any misgiving. Christianity is making progress, but when Japanese become Christians, they will. . . consider everything Christian and that comes from Christian nations as very good, and will be disposed to take the side of foreign nations. Though Buddhism came from another land, yet it has for more than a thousand years held sway over the Japanese mind and is in fact a Japanese religion. If there were no religions in Japan at this time, then I might choose Christianity rather than Buddhism. But as Buddhism has for so long a time penetrated the life of the Japanese people, I am disposed to give all my assistance towards preventing Christianity from trespassing on the dominions of the former."\*

In a volume of essays Mr. Fukuzawa went even farther in his opposition to Christianity. He declared that there was danger that men of ability, who embraced the faith, might ultimately form a party that would come into opposition with a party or parties holding Japanese doctrines. Eventually an appeal might be made to arms, and this would lead the Christians to invoke foreign assistance, through which Japan would be in danger of losing its independence. The "liberty of conscience" that had come into fashion was working evil. Buddhism ought to be recognised as the one and only religion of Japan. The followers of Shinto, which is not properly a religion, should unite with the Buddhists to endeavour to oppose the spread of Christianity. The authorities ought also to take steps towards the same end. They might feel some delicacy about interfering in such matters, but they should not be misled by the vague notions of the students of Western doctrines to value liberty of conscience above their public duties and so to refrain from measures which concern them no less than taxation or the conduct of justice.†

Such sentiments seem very strange as coming from one who had done more than almost any other man to introduce Western ideas among the people. Caring little for religion itself, Mr. Fukuzawa in questions connected with it seems to have been almost as much a follower as a leader of public opinion; and it was not long, as we shall see, before he spoke in quite a different tone.

In Tokyo the Buddhists began holding a series of "lecture-meetings" in the Meiji Kwaido, a hall that was erected partly for political assemblies, but also with the avowed intention of furnishing a place where efforts might be made to oppose the spread of Christianity.

Some leaders of public thought, while professing indifference to religion itself, contended that all should be treated alike by the Government. The editor of a prominent paper in Tokyo, while declaring that he was opposed to Christianity, called on the Government to abandon its non-committal attitude and openly tolerate that religion. His reasons were: 1. Because it is a shame for the Government to retain laws against Christianity that are notoriously violated in all parts of the country. 2. Because religion ought to be free to each man to believe or reject as he pleases. 3. Because, while Christianity is bad, Buddhism is no better, and both ought either to be prohibited or to be tolerated.\*

The next year \(1882\) religious discussion waxed hotter and hotter. The Christians pushed into various parts of the country, and nearly everywhere they were able to gather large audiences. To counteract the influence of these meetings, the Buddhists started others in opposition, often hiring a house close to the one engaged by the Christians and thus trying to draw people away from the latter.

The *Jiji Shimpo,* a daily newspaper, was started in 1882 by Mr. Fukuzawa. At first, nearly every number contained an attack on Christianity. Though professing no attachment to Buddhism as a religion, it declared its preservation necessary for the national welfare,† The following extracts from an editorial will show its position:

"The national religion of Japan is Buddhist. We must protect it from decay. The higher classes in Japan care nothing about any religion. . . . This total indifference to religious things in the Japanese mind is greatly to be praised. Foreigners cannot equal us in this respect. Nevertheless, at the present juncture this peculiar merit of the Japanese is a grave detriment to the country. That Christianity is baneful to our national power is evident. . . . But educated people care nothing about it and relegate the whole thing to the priests. This is a dangerous tendency of the time. Unless assisted by the influence of the upper classes, nothing can obstruct the intrusion of Christianity. Moreover, Buddhist priests are immoral and shameless, and without energy of spirit. It is very unsafe to trust this weighty cause to them alone. We do not believe in Buddhism, nor do we respect the priest. Our concern is for the national power, in the conservation of which that religion must be utilised,"

This was doubtless written by Mr. Fukuzawa, who in another article said:

"We do not care to discuss the truth or falsity of religious systems; but looking at the matter from a statesman's point of view, we hold that in self-defence the foreign religion should be banished these shores. For this we should not rely so much on government aid or on the influence of scholars. The best method for counteracting the foreign religion is to encourage the native, that is, Buddhism; but the corrupt state of the priesthood is deplorable. . . . The priest preaches one day in the temple, and the next he is found in the meeting of the commercial company. He becomes a bankrupt. He squeezes a profit as broker in making loans. He leans here and flatters there. He is not ashamed to offer bribes. His only aim is to make money. He drowns himself in strong drink. He indulges his lust shamefully in the house of the harlot. We see him nowadays in layman's dress,—perhaps to cover his abominable conduct under the sleeves of his garment."\*

Mr. Fukuzawa's attitude was that of many men of his class, and he had considerable to do with shaping public Opinion. His paper soon attained great influence, while his school sent forth many talented young men who had imbibed the spirit of their master and who delighted to spread abroad what they had heard from him. It was his pupils who, at this time, translated and published the lectures of Colonel Robert Ingersoll, the American lecturer against Christianity.

Occasionally Christian meetings encountered such opposition as is described by Rev. P. K. Fyson of the Church Missionary Society, who, in writing of a chapel in Niigata, says:

"Almost every evening, except when the weather was very had, I used to go with the catechist to preach there. The number of hearers varied very much; there were frequently fifty or sixty, sometimes eighty and up to one hundred. Sometimes a very noisy set of young men came in and did their best to interrupt the meeting, to the evident annoyance of more sober-minded people who wished to hear what we had to say. The front of the house being open to the street, it was practically equivalent to preaching in the open air, and the people stood in their clogs on the earth floor, so that we could not turn the rowdy ones out, and their yells often completely drowned our voices. *'Makoto no Kami*' \('True God'\) would be shouted in derision, or *'Namu Amida Butsu*'—the usual Buddhist invocation—jocularly, in opposition. Abusive threats were hurled at us in abundance; 'Sorcerer,' 'Thief,' 'Incendiary,' 'Murderer,' and others too foul to repeat; the catechist coming in for his special share, 'Traitor to your country,' &c. Sometimes dirt and a few stones were thrown, or we found our table or the rain-doors smashed."\*

The funerals of believers often proved favourable opportunities, not only for addressing persons that otherwise might never attend Christian services, but also as a means of disproving the assertion often made that Christians treated the bodies of the dead with disrespect, a son not caring though the dogs might devour the corpse of his father. In some way the idea became widespread that at Christian funerals the chief ceremony was the driving of an iron spike into the skull of the dead body, and a morbid curiosity often drew large numbers to see this gruesome rite performed. In Okayama, the first death among the believers was that of a poor paralytic, who lived in a small and wretched house. Most of the Christians in that city belonged to well-to-do families; and it was a great surprise to the people that watched the procession as it passed through the streets, when they saw that the coffin, instead of being carried by coolies, was borne on the shoulders of the young men of the church, and that the poor paralytic was followed to the grave by so many well-known people. The Japanese think much of having "a splendid funeral," and a religion that would do so much for the poorest of its followers evidently did not deserve the charge of treating the bodies of the dead with disrespect.

Joseph Cook, the well-known Boston lecturer, visited Japan in 1882, and through interpreters addressed many large audiences. He was the first of the noted Christian speakers from abroad that have gone to Japan for such purposes, and his vigorous words attracted much attention. He was invited to speak in Kyoto by some prominent members of the Prefectural Assembly. Hiring a building that held over a thousand people, they assumed all the expenses connected with the lecture. Letters of invitation to be present were sent to leading citizens. The Vice-Governor, many members of the Prefectural Assembly, officials of the city, Buddhist priests, physicians, lawyers and others listened attentively to an address that, with its interpretation, occupied three hours and three-quarters.

While in Japan, Mr. Cook addressed to missionaries and to Japanese workers a number of questions. The replies given by the latter to some of the enquiries will serve to show their view of the situation. The first question was: "What are the chief objections made by educated natives of Japan to the acceptance of Christianity?" To this, four persons in Tokyo united in replying:

"\(a\) The supernatural element in Christianity; e.g., miracles and divinity of Christ.

"\(b\) The opposition of Christianity against ancestral worship, especially among those who have received Chinese education.

"\(c\) The doctrine of future existence, which they consider as a pious fraud.

"\(d\) Its supposed disadvantage to the growth of national spirit and to the independence of the country.

"\(e\) Alleged conflicts between Christianity and modern science.

"\(f\) Supposed hindrances of Christianity to the progress of civilisation."

Ten pastors and teachers in Kyoto replied to the same question::

"They think that Christianity will destroy patriotism, filial duty, loyalty to the Mikado; give rise to religious wars, become the secret means of foreign interference. They regard the supernatural elements in Christianity as an outgrowth of superstitions and to he antagonistic to modern sciences. They confound Protestantism with Roman and Greek Catholicism."

The question. "What are the chief hindrances to its acceptance by the uneducated among the Japanese?" received from Tokyo the reply:

"\(a\) The fear of offending the Government and their friends.

"\(b\) The observance of Sabbath.

"\(c\) Ancestral worship.

"\(d\) Simplicity of Christian worship.

"\(e\) Dislike of change.

"\(f\) Strictness of Christian morals. "\(g\) Sacrifices and obstacles inherent to Christian profession."

The Kyoto workers answered:

"They regard Christianity as a foreign religion. They fear the Government persecutions on account of the attitude of the Government toward the Roman Catholics in the past. They regard Christianity as a demon's religion. They regard the Sabbath and other Christian discipline as too severe and impracticable."

The most specific answer to the enquiry, "What books opposed to evangelical Christianity and a theistic philosophy are the most read by the educated Japanese?" was the following from Tokyo:

"Buckle's 'History of Civilisation' \(translated\), John S. Mill's works \(his 'Essays on Religion and Utilitarianism,' translated\), Huxley on 'Protoplasm' \(translated\), Draper's 'Conflict between Science and Religion' and 'The Intellectual Development in Europe,' Thomas Paine's 'Age of Reason' \(translated\), Ingersoll's 'Lectures on Gods' \(translated\), Herbert Spencer's works, Bain's works."

The question, "By what aspects of Christian truth are the most conversions made?" was answered from Tokyo:

"\(a\) The great comfort which Christianity gives to the afflicted.

"\(b\) Excellency of Christian morals."

The answer to the same question from Kyoto was;

"\(a\) The excellence of the Christian ethics.

"\(b\) The reasonableness of Christian system.

"\(c\) The doctrine of the New Birth.

"\(d\) The doctrine of the Atonement.

"\(e\) The doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul."\*

The statistics of Protestant Missions for 1882 include the following items:  



Married male missionaries
81 
Single male missionaries
8 
Single female missionaries
56 
Organised churches
93 
Of these wholly self-supporting
13 
Adults baptised in the year
796 
Children baptised in the year
99 
Membership, adults
4,367 
Membership, children \(where reported\)
620 
Mixed schools
39 
Pupils
1520 
Boys' schools
9 
Pupils
454 
Girls' schools
15 
Pupils
566 
Theological schools
7 
Pupils
71 
Sunday schools
109 
Pupils
4,132 
Ordained preachers
49 
Assistant preachers, catechists, etc
100 
Bible women
37 
Hospitals
5 
In-patients treated in year
795 
Dispensaries
8 
Patients treated in year
24,898 
Contributions of native churches for year
*Yen* 12,064.48 
**Footnotes**

\* Rev. H. Stout as quoted by Dr. Verbeck in Report of Osaka Conference, p. 61.

\* *Church Mis. Intelligencer,* February, 1875.

\* This work was translated into English by J. H. Gubbins, Esq., of the British Legation.

\* *Mis. Herald,* 1874, p. 121.

\* The statement has been made and might appear to rest on contemporaneous evidence *\(Mis. Herald,* 1874, p. 273,\) that this church prepared its own creed and rules. In fact, they were written out in English by Rev. J. D. Davis, translated into Japanese, and then adopted by those that were to form the church. I have seen the original English.

\* *Mis. Herald,* 1875, p. 266.

\* Report of Osaka Conference, p. 72; *Japan Evangelist,* VII., 386.

\* *Japan Evangelist*, VII., p. 390.

† *Niishima* would be the form of the family name if the system Of transliteration now in general use were followed.

\* The full account is given in Hardy's "Life and Letters of Joseph Hardy Neesima."

\* *Japan Weekly Mail*, May, 29, 1875.

\* *Japan Evangelist,* 1896. p. 77.

† *lb.,* 1898, pp. 77 and 225.

\* Mr. Kozaki Hiromichi, who held off for some time from joining the class, did not become a Christian until after the persecution became violent.

\* It Is still too early for the sadder side of this story to be written in full. Suffice it now to say that in later years Captain Janes was not in sympathy with revealed religion. In 1893 he again came to Japan and became a teacher in a government school in Kyoto. The love that his former pupils had for their teacher combined with other influences to lead a few of them to join him in opposition to the teaching of the missionaries. Though his course was such as soon loosened his hold upon them, all did not recover the faith that was so shaken by the very one who had been the instrument for arousing it.

\* Uchimura, "How I Became a Christian," p. 12.

\* *Missionary Herald, 1877,* p. 158.

\* *Hiogo News,* December 1, 1881.

\* *Church Missionary Intelligencer,* December, 1873.

\* Hardy's "Life of Neesima," p. 214.

\* *Shichi Ichi Zappo,* May 31, 1878; *Mis. Herald,* 1879, p. 471.

† It may be noticed as an interesting fact that at about this time the Japan Mission of the American Board included persons belonging to six different denominations. Though most of them were Congregationalists, the following denominations had one or more representatives; Presbyterians, Cumberland Presbyterians, Reformed, Baptist, and Methodist. It is sometimes asserted that the missionaries have tried to force upon the Japanese their own sectarian views and methods. Evidently this could not well be the case in a mission made up like that of the American Board, neither is it true of most other missions.

\* *Mis. Herald,* 1878, p. 223.

\* *Shichi Ichi Zappo,* November 29, 1876; Ritter, p. 79.

\* *Shichi Ichi Zappo,* August 30, 1878.

† Quoted in Miss Bird's "Unbeaten Tracks in Japan," vol. ii., p. 312.

\* *Mis. Herald,* 1879, p. 64.

\* *Mis. Herald,* 1878, p. 292; *Shichi Ichi Zappo,* April 12 and May 31, 1878.

\* *Mis. Herald,* 1880, p. 64.

† *Ib.,* 1879, p. 347.

\* There are many Europeans and Americans who do their best to make the Japanese think that Christianity has been outgrown by Western nations. An enthusiastic eulogy of the well-known writer, Lafcadio Hearn, that appeared in *The Sun Trade Journal* \(Tokyo\) of June 1, 1905, says that when he was teaching English in Kumamoto \(about 1890\), one of his pupils referred in an essay to the civilisation of Christendom, Mr. Hearn, in a written criticism of the paragraph, said: "It is very doubtful whether the civilisation of a people has any connection whatever with their religion. In Christian countries, moreover, the most learned men do not believe in Christianity, and the Christian religion is divided into countless sects which detest each other. No European scientist of note—no philosopher of high rank—no really great man is a Christian in belief." If in after years this pupil read Mr. Hearn's "Japan, an Interpretation," he must have been surprised to find that its opening chapter was chiefly devoted to the thought that the social conditions, industrial history, art, literature, etc. of a country cannot be understood without a knowledge of its religion. The article goes on to say that Mr, Hearn's hatred of Christianity was so great that when in his walks he came upon a church, he would not pass before it, but would turn about and go another way. Such conduct and words on the part of a popular teacher could not fail to prejudice his pupils strongly against Christianity.

\* Report of Osaka Conference, p. 118.

\* Report of Osaka Conference, p. 126.

\* Quoted in *Mis. Herald,* p. 360.

† *Mis, Herald,* 1882, p. 152.

*\*** The Chrysanthemum,* 1881, p. 395.

† *Mis. Herald,* 1881, p. 445.

\* *The Chrysanthemum,* 1881, p. 392.

† *Japan Weekly Mail,* January 21, 1882.

\* *Mis. Herald,* 1882, p. 69.

† It was about this time that Mr. Fukuzawa bought a large image of Buddha and set it up in his garden. A friend, whose attention he was drawing to the image, drily remarked: "Yes, I hear that such images can be bought very cheaply now,"

\* *The Chrysanthemum,* 1882, p. 182.

\* "Japan and the Japan Mission," 2d Ed., p. 117.

\* New York *Independent,* October 25, 1883.




