+++
title = "07 THE PERIOD OF RETARDED GROWTH 1889-1900"

+++





JAPAN is a country of sudden changes. The bright prospects that gave rise to the hope that the country would be speedily evangelised were soon clouded over. Missionaries are usually optimists, and it seemed to most of them that the storm would quickly pass and the sun would then shine out as brightly as before. In the correspondence of the period now to be reviewed the hopes of the writers frequently find expression in such words as, "The worst is over," "The reaction has spent its force," "Things are looking brighter than they have for a long time," etc. Yet a full decade must pass ere there would be any very marked improvement, and even then the rate of apparent progress would be much slower than it had been before the reaction set in.

The reasons for the retardation in the advance of Christianity were numerous. Among them much prominence must be given to a great reaction against the acceptance of Western civilisation. The *Japan Mail* of April 27, 1889, writing of the way this had arisen said:

"The fall of 1887 found the nation beginning to be pervaded by the apprehension that it had travelled too rapidly; that it was in danger of losing individuality altogether; and that the way to compete with foreign countries was not to follow in their wake by copying their example, but rather to strengthen and develop the faculties that belong especially to the genius of the country. This conviction has now passed into the cry of the day. Under the name of *Kokusui Hozon* \(Preservation of the National Excellencies\) it is recognised as the guiding principle, the first duty of the present generation. It is talked of, written about, and even embodied in song. It inspires the lectures that are delivered before scientific and political associations, and it manifests its influence in a thousand directions of everyday life. Even Buddhism has taken advantage of it, and endeavoured to rekindle the embers of a faint faith by connecting the dignity of the throne with the permanence of Shaka's doctrine."

The movement of the Buddhists took shape in the establishment of the *Sonno Hobutsu Dai Do dan* \(Great Association for Honouring the Emperor and Preserving Buddhism\). The prospectus of this society as translated by the *Japan Mail* said:

"This Association is formed for the purpose of maintaining the majesty *of* our Emperor and the truth of the doctrine of Buddha—a union of all those who wish to protect our land and religion from the contempt of the foreigner. Those who unite with us are expected to avoid everything that would lessen the honour and reverence due to His Imperial Majesty or the influence of the Buddhist doctrine. For instance, in selecting our representatives to the national parliament, to provincial assemblies, to town councils, or local offices, in the distribution of all honours, in appointing school-teachers, officials of societies and business companies, etc., we pledge ourselves carefully to exclude all who are disloyal to our Emperor or untrue to Buddhism by believing in the foreign religion called Christianity. If these points are kept well in mind and carried into practice, we, thirty-nine million of brethren united into one, will so protect our country that, although many a difficulty and many an internal social and political problem may arise, still our Emperor's position shall stand secure and the doctrine of Buddha shall remain unshaken. Yes, if we but stand together on this solid foundation of truth, the result will be that no foreign land will point at us with the finger of scorn. Now, brothers, if you can see the truth as here stated, do not hesitate to come up and join our band. Give us your hand; we shall then all stand together and add to the strength and life of our *Yamato-damashii* \(Spirit of Old Japan\)."

Important political events excited the minds of the people and made it harder to gain their attention for the consideration of Christianity. February 11, 1889, the new Constitution was promulgated. The conflict of new and old ideas was exemplified the same day by the assassination of Viscount Mori, the Minister of Education, because of an act of irreverence that he was alleged to have committed some time before by lifting with his walking-stick the curtain that hung before the holy place in the great Shinto shrine at Ise. In the autumn of the same year great excitement arose over the question of treaty revision. The treaty with America negotiated in 1858 by Townsend Harris, and those with other nations modelled upon it, provided for a system of extra-territoriality by which, if a citizen of one of the treaty powers committed a crime or was defendant in a civil suit, he was tried in the consular court of his own nation. Also the amount of duty that could be levied on imports was limited. Mr. Harris, who desired to treat the Japanese in the most friendly way possible, and who hoped that after a few years such restrictions could safely be modified if not wholly removed inserted in his treaty an article providing that a revision "may be made" after July, 1872, if desired by either party. The wording was unfortunate, and at last it became practically necessary to get all the treaty powers to unite in assenting to a change before it could be made. The United States did indeed, at one time prepare a new treaty, but the Japanese Government, fearing the threat of other nations that under the "most favoured nation" clauses they would claim for themselves all the benefits granted even conditionally to another, insisted, contrary to the wish of the American Minister, on having an article inserted by which the agreement should come into force only when all the other powers had made similar treaties, and this proviso made the whole document worthless. For a long time there had been increasing irritation against Western nations for their unwillingness to yield to Japan's desires for control over her customs and the removal of extra-territoriality. In 1889, however, it was announced that treaties with all the nations were on the point of being ratified. They provided that for a few years to come foreign judges should sit with the Japanese upon the bench when cases concerning foreigners were to be tried. At once the ultra-patriots excited so strong opposition to a concession which they declared dishonourable that they caused the failure of the proposed plans. Dissensions in the Cabinet led to the resignation of the Minister President of State. A few days later Count Okuma, Minister for Foreign Affairs, was severely wounded by a person who attempted to assassinate him for assenting to the proposed arrangements. In addition to the excitement caused by these events, the minds of the people were much occupied by the election to local offices, and by preparations for the election of members to the first National Diet, which was to meet the next year. Political meetings were frequent and to some extent usurped the place that had been held by large public meetings for the preaching of the Gospel. These political gatherings were often very noisy and sometimes became the scenes of violence. It was perhaps partly a result of the turbulent habits thus formed that in places where Christian services held in theatres were formerly attended by quiet audiences, disturbances became common. Because of the difficulty of securing respectful attention, these mass meetings were less frequently held by the Christians.

Some of the causes of the lull in Christian work were in the Church itself. The early fervour had to some extent passed away. Whereas all of the Christians had once felt the responsibility for telling others about their new faith, and had been earnest in leading their friends to accept it, they were now inclined to leave the work of propagation almost entirely to the pastors and evangelists. In the days of rapid growth many persons had come into the churches who were far from being permeated with the spirit of Christ. Christianity was the religion of the West, and in their enthusiasm for Western civilisation they had taken the religion as one part of it; now, when seized by the wave of reaction, they wished to put away Christianity with other things that seemed opposed to the spirit of old Japan. It is easy now to say that more care should have been taken before admitting such persons to the churches; yet it is doubtful whether these are the persons whom more stringent rules would have excluded. The words with which they described their experiences and the earnestness that they displayed, seemed equal to what was found in others. In most cases there was no intentional deception on their part. To themselves as to others they seemed to be followers of Christ. Some that dropped out of the churches had been disappointed at the results of Christianity. It had seemed to them that its pure doctrines and exalted morality must speedily command the assent of all to whom it was made known, and that therefore, by its beneficent influence, the country would soon be purified from evil, and attain the exalted condition that they imagined had already been reached by Christian lands in the West. They found that the victory was not so easily gained. They saw some of the Christians fall into sin; they experienced the power of temptation in their own lives; they learned more and more of the terrible evils that still exist in so-called Christian lands; and they were led to doubt whether Christianity was indeed a great power for national and individual salvation.

The ultra-nationalistic spirit affected many of the prominent Christians. They wished to disprove the reiterated charge that they were the slaves of the foreigners. The desire to show their independence often led them to oppose the beliefs and the advice of the missionaries, which otherwise they might have accepted. It became the fashion among those who went to America or England to pay special attention to the defects of those countries. Their letters from these lands and their addresses after returning, told of evils that had convinced them that these countries were not superior to their own.

Theological speculations absorbed much energy, and in many cases were chilling to the faith. These were to some extent introduced by the "liberal" missions, but more through books and magazines coming from the West. These were eagerly read by many of the leading preachers, whose minds were naturally inclined to favour whatever was new. Here, too, the desire to show their independence inclined some of them to discard what they had received from their former teachers. While they imagined that their conclusions were reached by their own thinking, it was easy to trace the source of their views to opinions that were then being advocated in the West. Many of those that went abroad, even when supported by help gained through the mediation of missionaries, took more interest in seeking interviews with noted advocates of new opinions than in pursuing their studies in the schools to which they had been sent. It was felt that young men hardly showed that they had received any advantage from going so far for study if they returned with the same views that they had when setting out. When they came back to Japan, their friends asked them what new things they had learned. They must at least tell the theories they had heard, and in explaining these they frequently became, almost before they knew it, advocates of the views that at first they intended only to describe. As the narrative proceeds we shall see how, in these and other ways, divisive doctrines gained currency, the faith of many church-members was chilled, and there were defections among those who had been prominent preachers. Many of the less educated members of the Church, while understanding little of the questions under discussion, were stunned by the defection of their pastors, or by being told that much of what they had formerly been taught was false. The effects that intellectual wanderings have upon the spiritual and moral life are more marked in a country like Japan than in those where early education and a helpful environment may "hold men's hearts right after their heads go wrong."

While the exaggerated nationalism of that time led to a higher appreciation of what was distinctively Japanese, the people had gone so far in accepting Western ideas that they could not wholly give them up. Hence, much was said about an alleged characteristic of the Japanese, namely, that while they gladly borrow what is good in foreign lands, taking now from the West as formerly they had taken from China, they always modify and improve whatever they receive. Those who loved their country, it was said, ought to insist that everything coming from abroad should be remodelled so as to become really Japanese instead of foreign. Occasionally this contention took grotesque forms, as when in reply to criticisms on blunders in the use of English on the part of some who published articles in that language, it was soberly asserted that Japanese ought not to be bound by the grammatical rules observed in England and America, since they had the ability to produce a Japanese form of the English language that would be superior to the original. These phenomena that accompanied the awakening of national consciousness remind us of what Tourgenieff said of a similar period in Russian history: "Some young people among us have discovered even a Russian arithmetic. Two and two do indeed make four with us as well as elsewhere, but more pompously it would seem. All this is nothing but the stammering of men who are just awaking."

It was in accord with such sentiments that much began to be said about the necessity of having a "Japanese Christianity." In 1890, Mr. Yokoi, a prominent Kumi-ai minister, published an article in which he lamented that Christianity as then existing in Japan was in most cases a copy of that found in England and America. In the early experiences of the converts this could not be helped, but now they had obtained sufficient knowledge to be able to select what was suitable for themselves. The day had come for the development of a Japanese Christianity. Though in some points time and place could make no difference in the religion of Christ, in others there must be variety, and Christianity in Japan ought to exhibit some fine qualities not discernible in the older stock. Christianity in the Occident had developed on the basis laid by Greek literature and Roman jurisprudence. The Christianity about to spring up in the East must stand on the pedestal formed out of the religion of Buddhism and the Confucian philosophy. It was desirable to develop a system of theology that, in its essential characteristics should be purely Japanese, and to originate religious rites and ceremonies that should be peculiar to themselves. At first the converts had believed just what the foreigners had told them, and the early preachers, being supported by the missionaries, had refrained from expressing dissatisfaction with the teaching they received. Unless Christianity divested itself of foreign clothes and wore the Japanese dress, it would never accomplish its object. "The time has now come," he said, "for Japanese propagandists to form their own estimate of Christ and to make it known to their fellow-countrymen. We must henceforth think independently and construct without assistance so as to build a Church of Japan."\*

Probably most missionaries had recognised that Christianity in Japan must in many outward features differ from that of other countries. Dr. Eby's paper in 1884, on "The Immediate Christianisation of Japan," had said:

"What we have to do for Japan is to evangelise it, win it for Christ, and I for one care not a rush what church polity is chosen, if only the church be true to her living Head and preserve the soul of charity, the inspiration of living faith. Ecclesiastical form, philosophical statement of doctrine, etc. differ with every race. Whatever the future church of Japan may be, its Christianity will be a Christianity in Japanese mould, and any effort of ours to put the stamp of a hundred 'isms' upon it would be childish and futile."

Similar words might be quoted from other missionaries; but to say that differences must be expected to arise from national peculiarities is far different from urging that such variations be artificially stimulated for the sake of avoiding resemblance to what has been developed elsewhere.

Much began to be said about the desirability that Japanese churches should be independent of foreign dictation. Even missions that had disclaimed authority over churches were criticised as exerting control through their ability to refuse financial aid to men and work that did not meet their approval, and it was desired that funds from abroad should be put unconditionally into the hands of the Japanese. Much was said and written derogatory to the missionaries; and some preachers, especially the younger men, seemed to think that in addresses before unbelievers it would help them to win favour if they showed their independence of the foreign teachers by speaking in disparagement of them. Some of the criticisms pointed out real faults in the missionaries, others were childish; but what caused most sadness to those against whom they were directed was the spirit in which they were uttered, together with the injury that was done to the work by the manner in which they were made.

Some churches were much weakened by the work of the Plymouth Brethren, who came to Japan not far from the beginning of this period. It is not within the province of this history to discuss the principles or beliefs of any body of Christians, or to criticise its work; yet it is necessary to state facts, and whatever good may have been accomplished by the Plymouth Brethren, some of the results of their labours were disastrous. It is well known that there are several divisions among those calling themselves Plymouth Brethren, and some that bear the name are not to be included in the statement, which is true of most of them, that they did little to proclaim the Gospel to unbelievers, thinking it their duty to bear witness against what they regarded as the corruption of the churches, and to lead as many as possible away from them. Their efforts were sometimes only too successful. Persons who had been prominent church-members were led to withdraw. In some places churches were almost broken up; in others, where churches were on the point of being organised, this became impossible because some of the believers went over to the Plymouth Brethren. If such persons had retained their faith, the result would have been less deplorable; but many who thus gave up associating with Christians and getting the help derived from the pastors, fell into sin and unbelief.

The effect of the reactionary movements was speedily felt by the Christian schools and especially by those for the education of girls. Critics declared that the young women in these schools lost their gentle manners, becoming forward, mannish, and proud. There was considerable financial stress in the country, and many persons who had formerly sent their daughters to such schools found this to be one of the easiest points at which to economise. For these reasons the number of pupils was gradually reduced, and it was several years before interest in the education of women revived. The schools for boys had to contend against difficulties arising from the desire of the Educational Department to confine education to the schools established by the Government. At one time the best opportunities for acquiring a modern education had been furnished by Christian institutions; but the excellent system of schools established by the Government had raised the latter to a high standard. The large sums of money furnished for the institutions of high grade gave them better material equipments than those of the Christian schools. Not only did graduates of private schools find that it was difficult for them to enter the Imperial University and other higher institutions of learning, but in other ways private schools were discouraged by the Educational Department. As has already been stated, a Christian school in Sendai was discontinued because of this opposition, and the same was true of others. Some schools that were under the control of Japanese endeavoured to retain popularity by giving up religious exercises, refusing to be known as Christian institutions, or minimising the Christian features that had before characterised them. As we proceed we shall see how even the school founded by Joseph Neesima, which had been considered by opposers the chief citadel of Christianity in Central Japan, yielded to the pressure. Many things seemed to indicate that the Educational Department had determined to oppose Christianity itself. Certain it is that Christian teachers felt their positions to be very insecure, and that the Department winked at injustice done to Christian pupils. The simultaneousness of the warnings that teachers in all parts of the country gave to children in the lower schools, telling them they ought not to attend Christian Sunday schools, is not easily explained except on the supposition that in some way it was made known that such directions were in accordance with the wishes of the educational authorities.

The Army seemed to be another centre of opposition to Christianity, though the trouble experienced may have come from the commanders of the different garrisons. Soldiers were told not to attend Christian meetings nor to have Christian books in their possession. In some places Christian officers were pressed to withdraw from the membership of churches. The new Imperial Constitution, indeed, guaranteed religious liberty, and officers might have hesitated to inflict punishment for violation of the *quasi* orders that they gave; but privates and under-officers very well know that there were many ways in which their commanders, without any apparent violation of law, could make them suffer for having anything to do with Christianity. A great change, however, took place at the time of the war with China, as will be related in due time.

Such were some of the discouragements and difficulties of the period on which we are now entering; but as we turn to describe more in detail the course of events, we shall see that the churches still continued to grow, though at a retarded rate.

February 11, 1889, is an important date in the religious as in the political history of Japan; for in the Constitution that the Emperor then granted to his people, Article XXVIII. declares:

"Japanese subjects shall, within limits not prejudical to peace and order, and not antagonistic to their duties as subjects, enjoy freedom of religious belief."

It was but a little over seventeen years since men and women had been sent into exile for their religion, and now Count Ito Hirobumi in his commentary on the Constitutionthat he himself had been chief in preparing, said:

"The cruel treatment of those of a heterodox faith or the exclusion of them from the enjoyment of certain portions of public and civil rights are already historical facts of the past, and now-a-days it is very seldom, if ever, that such absurdities are brought to our notice. \(In the German states political rights were denied to the Jews up to the year 1846\)."

It is amusing to see this turning to European history as though for the last instance of religious persecution; but the forgetfulness of what his own land had witnessed can be forgiven in view of his declaration that "Freedom of conscience concerns the inner part of man and lies beyond the sphere of interference by the laws of the State."

The year 1889 saw many missions extending their work. The reaction had not yet begun to be seriously felt. The American Baptist Mission, which hitherto had been but feebly supported by the home board, received eleven new workers and was thus enabled to open a station in Shimonoseki besides strengthening those already established. The Baptist Southern Convention also sent out two families, whose plans concerning fields of labour were made in connection with the older mission of like faith.

The work of the Canadian Methodist Mission had reached such a stage that an annual Conference was organised. To ordained Japanese ministers and to the same number of laymen were given equal voice and vote with the missionaries in the organisation and developing of churches. Coincident with the establishment of the Conference was the inauguration of a policy that led to the opening of new stations and an enlargement of the work.

The Southern Methodist Mission in the same year founded at Kobe the Kwansei Gakuin, a school for young men, which soon came to hold a prominent place among educational institutions.

An attempt to combine the different Methodist Churches did not at this time get beyond the preparation of a "Basis of Union." The failure of the proposed plan for uniting the Presbyterian and Kumi-ai Churches has been already recorded.

An important movement among young men was begun in the spring of 1889 by Mr, L. D. Wishard, the International College Secretary of the Young Men's Christian Association, who visited several cities in Japan, speaking to students. He made a great impression, not only upon the pupils of Christian schools, but also on those connected with government institutions. The Christian Associations organised the previous year in three of the schools in Tokyo were greatly strengthened, and similar societies were formed elsewhere. Mr, Wishard planned and conducted a "Summer School for Bible Study," the first of a series that has continued to be held annually. The work for young men was further helped by the locating in Tokyo of Mr. J. T. Swift as the representative of the Young Men's Christian Associations of the United States.

Almost synchronous with Mr. Wishard's visit was that of another American—Colonel Olcott, the theosophist. He had been invited by the Buddhists, who, in alarm at the progress being made by Christianity, were ready to accept help from any source. A speech made by Mr. Nagouchi, the man through whom the invitation had been conveyed to Colonel Olcott, shows the view that many Buddhists took of the situation. After speaking of the changes that had brought to Japan railroads, electric lights, newspapers, steam presses, sewing machines, whiskey, and cigarettes, he bemoaned the fact that many who were once interested in Buddhism gave themselves now to the study of physics, photography, biology, astronomy, geology, metaphysics, materialism, and Christianity, —subjects that now formed the dominant topics of thought and conversation. Much of this sad upheaval was to be laid at the door of the missionaries, who had met the desire of people for Western knowledge by establishing schools in all parts of the land. Moreover, whereas the Emperors were formerly warm supporters of Buddhism, so that many princes and princesses entered the monasteries, the present attitude of the Government was one of indifference, and Imperial contributions to the temples were now given only for the purpose of preserving the Imperial tombs. Most of the priests were lazy, wasting their time in amusements, repeating prayers whose meaning they did not know, and by worthless lives alienating the believers. "The different Buddhist sects," he said, "must be united, and every priest must be educated. To rescue our Buddhists from the thraldom of Western vices we have thought of only one way. It is to obtain the unselfish help of Colonel Olcott, the reformer of religion. All Japanese Buddhists are now awaiting his visit, and they have named him the Bodhisattva of the Nineteenth Century."

When Colonel Olcott arrived he was received with the greatest enthusiasm. Temples and houses were decorated in his honour; in the cities he visited he was met by committees of priests and leading citizens; and at first large crowds went to hear his addresses. The enthusiasm for the American Bodhisattva was short-lived. For some reason or other the series of lectures was interrupted, and Colonel Olcott soon left the country. It was reported that he was disappointed in the Buddhists of Japan; it is certain that they were disappointed in him.

The Christian Church in Japan, and especially the Kumi-ai body, met with a great loss in the death, January 23, 1890, of Dr.\* Joseph Neesima. He had been in Tokyo and vicinity trying to interest influential men in his plans for a Christian university, when severe illness led him to seek rest at the seaside resort of Oiso. There he died at the age of forty-seven. His death made a profound impression, not only on those that had been closely associated with him, but also upon many who, though having no sympathy with his religion, recognised that he had been a man of the noblest principles, who had in many ways brought great good to his country.

When his body reached Kyoto, the students of the Doshisha insisted that they alone should bear it to his former home and afterwards to the grave which they had dug with their own hands. This meant much in Japan, where such offices for the dead are left to the very lowest classes. Among the banners that according to Japanese custom were carried in the funeral procession, was one inscribed "From the Buddhists of Osaka," thus testifying to the respect in which Dr. Neesima was held by those that disagreed with him. This courteous act offset to a great extent the refusal of the priests of a temple in Kyoto to allow him to be buried beside his father in their cemetery, because he was "the very head of Christianity in Japan."

Another funeral that occurred in September of the same year attracted considerable notice. Mrs. Katsura, the wife of the Vice-Minister of War, was a member of a Kumi-ai church. At her death, the church was asked to assume charge of the funeral services. More than two thousand persons were in attendance, including one prince, three minsters of state, military officers, and foreign diplomatic officials. Owing to the smallness of the chapel at the Aoyama Cemetery, only three or four hundred could listen to the religious exercises; but these heard an impressive sermon on the Christian's hope of immortality through Christ. The presence of such persons at a Christian service was another proof of the change that had come since the days of official persecution.

October 30, 1890, the Emperor sent forth what has ever since been known as "The Imperial Rescript on Education," a document that had a great influence on the religious history of Japan. The following is a translation issued in 1907 by the Department of Education:

"Know ye, Our subjects: Our Imperial Ancestors have founded Our Empire on a basis broad and everlasting, and have deeply and firmly implanted virtue: Our subjects ever united in loyalty and filial piety have from generation to generation illustrated the beauty thereof. This is the glory of the fundamental character of Our Empire, and herein also lies the source of Our education. Ye, Our subjects, be filial to your parents, affectionate to your brothers and sisters; as husbands and wives be harmonious, as friends true; bear yourselves in modesty and moderation; extend your benevolence to all; pursue learning and cultivate arts; and thoroughly develop intellectual faculties and perfect moral powers; furthermore, advance public good and promote common interests; always respect the Constitution and observe the laws; should emergency arise, offer yourselves courageously to the State; and thus guard and maintain the prosperity of Our Imperial Throne coeval with heaven and earth. So shall ye not only be Our good and faithful subjects, but render illustrious the best traditions of your forefathers.

"The Way here set forth is indeed the teaching bequeathed by Our Imperial Ancestors to be observed alike by Their Descendants and the subjects, infallible for all ages and true in all places. It is Our wish to lay it to heart in all reverence in common with you, Our subjects, that we may all thus attain to the same virtue."

Copies of this Rescript were sent to the schools; and it became the custom for teachers and pupils to come together on certain national holidays to listen to its reading. It is taken in the most reverential way from the box in which it is kept, slowly unrolled, and read to the members of the school, who stand with bowed heads as they listen to the august words of their Emperor. The slightest lack of decorum is looked upon as almost treasonable.

To most foreigners the esteem in which the Rescript is held will seem strange, and they may not see how it could affect the progress of Christianity. It was, however, seized upon by the reactionists, who declared that it was intended by the Emperor as a direct blow against the ethics and the religion of the West. Many commentaries upon the Rescript were written in which it was repeatedly asserted that Western nations knew little of the true principles of loyalty and filial piety, while many of the teachings of Christianity were opposed to what the Emperor had urged upon his people. To such attacks the Christians were quick to reply; insisting that they gladly assented to all that the Rescript contained, and that its teachings were in accord with their own religion. Indeed, some Christians in excess of zeal spoke of the Rescript as though it were to be put on a par with the Bible.

About this time the custom was introduced of having the pupils in the public schools bow on certain national holidays before the picture of the Emperor, So much honour was paid to the picture that instances are recorded where janitors or teachers lost their lives in trying to save it from burning buildings. It seemed as though an attempt was being made to foster the idea that the Emperor was to be considered divine. Zealous patriots were on the watch to detect any act that might savour of disrespect. On one occasion after the ceremony of bowing to the portrait had been performed, the teacher of a school said: "You may now put away His Majesty's picture." The expression was thought lacking in reverence and the teacher was dismissed. In another town an official who visited a school did not remove his shoes before entering the building. A student afterwards spoke of this as a violation of the rules of the school. The teacher, in trying to show that all rules have exceptions, said: "Surely, if the Emperor should come, you would not expect him to leave his shoes outside." At once this was declared insulting, since the Emperor had been spoken of as though he were a mere man; and the teacher lost his position. A Christian teacher in one of the higher schools in Tokyo declared that he could not bow before the Emperor's picture, since to do so was an act of worship. At once there was a great stir throughout the whole land. The affair was discussed by all the newspapers, and by many was declared to be a proof of the disloyalty of the Christians. The latter with few exceptions met the charge by saying that they did not regard the act of bowing as worship, but as reverent salutation of a sovereign whom they all honoured. One good result of the agitation was that the Department of Education changed the word used of the ceremony so as to make it evident that no worship was involved. Public opinion, however, made it necessary for the professor that had caused the excitement to hand in his resignation. About the same time, there were a few cases where Christian teachers were dismissed, nominally for other reasons, but really, as was generally supposed, because of their religion.

The first election of members of parliament occurred in 1890. Among the candidates were several Christians, and it is not strange that their religion cost them many votes. In some places the Buddhists put forth the most strenuous efforts to prevent their election, Mr. Kataoka Kenkichi, an elder of the Kochi Presbyterian Church, was a prominent candidate. Some of his political friends came to him, saying:

"You would certainly be elected were it not for your religion, but that makes the result doubtful. We will not urge you to give up Christianity, but it will help matters if we can announce that you have resigned your office in the Church. Withdraw from the eldership, at least for the time being. After election, if you wish to resume the office, you can do so."

To this appeal Mr. Kataoka simply replied: "I will do no such thing. I would rather be an elder in the Church than a member of parliament."

His steadfastness did not turn to his disadvantage. At this and many subsequent elections he was chosen a member of the House of Representatives, and for several sessions was its Speaker.

Similar consistency was shown by Rev. Honda Yoitsu, who, before removing to Sendai in order to become the pastor of the Methodist Church in that city, had for several years been a member of the legislature of his native prefecture. In 1890 he was urged to become a candidate for parliament and could doubtless have gained the election were it not that religious teachers were by law debarred from serving as representatives. Many of his friends urged him to withdraw from the ministry. He himself says that it was a great temptation over which he long thought and prayed, the result being that he continued in the ministry.

As a result of the elections, thirteen out of the three hundred members of the House of Representatives were Christians—nearly nine times the proportion that Christians had in the total population—a result the more noteworthy since their religion could have gained them but few votes, while it had caused them to lose many. This one fact is a sufficient refutal of the assertion that Christianity had made no progress except among the lowest and most ignorant classes. To the Buddhists of Kyoto it was a cause of great chagrin that a Christian was elected from that part of the city most under their control, where the powerful Shin sect had put forth great exertions to prevent such a humiliation. It may be further mentioned that when the first House of Representatives chose its officers, the Speaker \(Nakashima Nobuyuki\) and the. Chairman of the Committee of the Whole \(Shimada Sahuro\) were professing Christians.

One reason for the political preferment of the Christians was doubtless that their fellow-citizens had learned that they were upright and trustworthy men, to whom the public interests could be safely committed. Some of them had also been prominent in advocating reforms that met the approval of the people. It has been suggested that another reason may have been that in considering various subjects that came before the churches for discussion these men had gained an experience that afterwards helped them to perform successfully their duties in the local assemblies, where most of them served an apprenticeship before being chosen for the higher position.

A movement, partly political, in which Christians had been the acknowledged leaders, was that for the abolition of licensed prostitution. In the large cities of Japan were certain quarters occupied by houses of ill-fame. These were licensed by the Government. The inmates were practically slaves; most of them having been delivered over to the masters for a term of years by their own fathers, or, in case the father was not living, by whatever person might be at the head of the family. The law required that the girl's consent should be gained; but such are the ideas of filial obedience prevailing in Japan that few girls would venture to oppose the father's will, and common opinion would condemn any who should be so daring. Those who once entered the life of shame found it almost impossible to escape, their wily masters managing to involve them in debts that bound them to continual service. It is not necessary here to enter into the arguments of those who favoured the method by which the Government attempted to regulate prostitution. Suffice it to say that the Christians started an agitation against the licensing system, endeavouring at first to get prefectural assemblies to abolish it. This agitation first attracted attention in Gumma Prefecture, where the President and several members of the assembly were Christians, and where Christianity had gained such a foothold that it exercised considerable influence over public opinion. A vote for the abolition of legalised prostitution was soon gained. The movement spread to other parts of the country. Everywhere the Christians were regarded as its natural leaders, though they were earnestly supported by others who desired the moral elevation of their country. Lectures were delivered, pamphlets were issued, and newspapers were utilised so far as these dared to disregard the threats of the powerful class whose business was in danger. In Kyoto a Christian who led in the agitation was assaulted at the instigation of the brothel-keepers. Though rescued before receiving serious injury, the danger of other attacks was considered so serious that the police insisted on having one of their number accompany him wherever he went. In a few provinces the desired vote for abolition was obtained. The Christians felt so much encouraged over these successes that they decided to go one step further. They began to circulate petitions asking that the new parliament prohibit prefectures from giving licenses. Success did not follow this appeal. Moreover, the weakening of zeal, caused in part by the chill that came over the churches because of the reactionary movements and theological discussions of ensuing years, led to a discontinuance of the agitation. The brothel-keepers of some prefectures rallied their forces so as to secure a repeal of the vote for prohibition. In Gumma Prefecture, however, their efforts and wily schemes failed to secure the restoration of the old system.

The desire of the Buddhists to oppose Christianity led them to become in some places the allies of those engaged in pandering to lust. This was especially the case in Nagoya, a stronghold of Buddhism and also of immorality. The chapels and the houses of the missionaries were stoned. The missionaries were obliged to live with blankets and rugs hung over the windows to keep out the stones, such as had already broken the glass and shutters. When Dr. Perin, of the Universalis\! Mission, attempted to hold a meeting in a theatre, he narrowly escaped serious injury from the turbulent mob.

In the province of Ise, mobs broke up meetings and injured chapels, though here the disturbance was not directly connected with the movement for the abolition of licensed vice. The most serious trouble was in the town of Yamada, the seat of the great Shinto shrines. The chief business of the town is connected with the entertainment of pilgrims. Incongruous as it may appear, this place, like the vicinity of most other noted temples, whether Buddhist or Shinto, was a hot-bed of immorality; those that came nominally for worship indulging at the same time in debauchery. Societies were organised for driving Christianity out of the place, meetings were broken up, and soon none dared to confess any interest in the hated religion.

The work of the Church Missionary Society in Tokushima \(Shikoku\) was hindered for a while by a "Buddhist Young Men's Club" that was the centre of an organised effort to oppose Christianity, The missionary's house was injured and believers were molested. The trials strengthened the faith of the Christians, and among the persons baptised the next year was a Buddhist priest.

Increased denominational variety was given by the coming of the mission sent by the Universalist General Convention of America, The first missionaries reached Japan in April, 1890, and under the leadership of Rev. George L. Perin soon erected a building to serve as a permanent centre for their work. A theological seminary and an English school were opened, and soon afterward a magazine was published.

Another addition to the missionary force was made in the autumn of the same year by a band of men and women under the leadership of Rev. Barclay F. Buxton, who undertook the responsibility for their maintenance. They worked under the auspices of the Church Missionary Society, making Matsue, in the province of Izumo, their headquarters. Mr. Buxton was also frequently called to other parts of the country for evangelistic services among churches of different denominations. An earnest believer in certain doctrines concerning "holiness," he did much to propagate them among both Japanese and foreigners.

The missionaries connected with the Church Missionary Society enlarged their educational work in Osaka by the erection of a building for what was thenceforth known as the Bishop Poole Memorial Girls' School, and also by opening a school for boys, which in January of the next year removed to a new building on the outskirts of the city, the location giving it the name "Momoyama Gakuin."

Previous to the year 1890, the National Bible Society of Scotland, the British and Foreign Bible Society, and the American Bible Society had maintained separate agencies that for the most part worked independently. An arrangement was now made by which these agencies were combined, thus avoiding the rivalry and waste resulting from the former system. About the same time a similar arrangement united the agencies of the American Tract Society and the London Religious Tract Society, their work being put under the care of "The Tract Societies' Committee" composed of American and British missionaries.

In December, 1890, the Church of Christ in Japan \(Presbyterian\) held a synod in which it was decided to adopt as its Declaration of Faith the Apostles' Creed, with the following Preamble:

"The Lord Jesus Christ, whom we worship as God, the only begotten Son of God, for us men and for our salvation, was made man and suffered. He offered up a perfect sacrifice for sin; and all who are one with Him by faith are pardoned and accounted righteous; and faith in Him working by love purifies the heart.

"The Holy Ghost, who with the Father and Son is worshipped and glorified, reveals Jesus Christ to the soul; and without His grace man being dead in sin cannot enter the kingdom of God. By Him the prophets and holy men of old were inspired; and He speaking in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments is the supreme and infallible Judge in all things pertaining unto faith and living.

"From these Holy Scriptures the ancient Church of Christ drew its Confession; and we holding the faith once delivered to the saints join in that confession with praise and thanksgiving:

"I believe in the Father Almighty, etc."

The Council of Missions working in connection with the above church issued the following statement of the views that had led the Synod to adopt this Confession;

"Characteristics necessary to a Confession for the Church of Christ in Japan in this era of its history;—

"1. It should be simple and brief. Men are constantly asking: 'What are the doctrines of your Church?' They will not read a long document in reply.

"2. It should be a Confession about which the whole Church will rally, a Confession for pastor and people alike.

"3. It should be irenic. The church in Japan is face to face with Buddhism, Confucianism, Agnosticism, Rationalism, and radical Unitarianism. Its Confessions of Faith should proclaim the whole difference between these things and Christ. It should set forth the great truths of historical Christianity. But it should not be a symbol of division among those who love and worship one Lord Jesus Christ."

It is fitting that some notice should be taken of the work that was being done for the Japanese residing in California, and an article published in *The Church,* July, 1890, gives an account of its condition at that time. The number of Japanese then living in San Francisco was about two thousand, while from a thousand to fifteen hundred more were in the vicinity. A few years earlier, many young men had gone to California for study, supposing that they could easily gain admittance to the best schools and get an education at a very small expense. Some of these soon found it necessary to exchange study for work. Later comers were merchants, clerks, and labourers. Not only did individual churches endeavour to reach these people, but there were special movements in their behalf. That of the Methodists began about 1880, in connection with the Mission for the Chinese, and in 1886 was organised as a separate mission under the superintendence of Rev. M. C. Harris, D.D., who had been obliged, on account of Mrs. Harris's poor health, to give up missionary labour in Japan itself.\* Dr, Harris's earnest efforts in behalf of the Japanese in California were in 1898 recognised by the Japanese Government, which conferred on him the decoration of the Fourth Degree of the Imperial Order of the Sacred Treasure.

In 1890 the Christian societies of Japanese in San Francisco were the following:

I. The Gospel Society, connected with the Methodist Church, and numbering one hundred and fifteen young men.

2.The Japanese Ladies' Benevolent Society, also connected with the Methodist Church, whose object was to relieve the sick and destitute, to distribute clothing, to find employment for Japanese women, and otherwise to assist them when in need.

3.The Japanese Young Men's Christian Association, connected with the Presbyterian Church and having ninety-five members.

4.The Only Friend Society, made up of about a dozen young men who were members of Kumi-ai Churches in Japan.

5.The Japanese Christian Union, composed of twenty-one persons of different denominations, who desired to become preachers of the Gospel.

There were two organised churches; one Methodist and the other Presbyterian. Several other churches in the city had Japanese among their members.

As time went on, the number of Japanese on the Pacific Coast and in other parts of America increased. Efforts for their evangelisation were made in many places, and some churches were organised.

Bishop Williams of the American Episcopal Mission had withdrawn in 1889 from Episcopal cares, and the office remained unfilled for four years. During a part of this time Bishop Hare of South Dakota superintended the affairs of the Mission, arriving in Japan in the spring of 1891. He soon afterwards joined with Bishop Bickersteth in proposing a plan for defining the respective jurisdictions of the English and American bishops. It was to be considered only a temporary arrangement, since "the English and American bishops are not regarded by the Japanese and should not be regarded by us as having jurisdiction over dioceses finally delimited, but rather as forerunners in the Episcopate of Japanese bishops who will exercise jurisdiction over such permanently defined dioceses as the expansion of the Japanese Church may in the future demand." The negotiations over this matter occupied considerable time, but in 1894 Japan was divided into six dioceses:—Hokkaido, North Tokyo, South Tokyo, Osaka, Kyoto, and Kyushu.

At their annual meeting in 1891, the Kumi-ai Churches adopted a basis of organisation. While each church retained its independence, delegates were to meet in a general and in local associations for consultation on matters of common interest. A statement of the faith of the churches was prepared, not as a creed to which conformity was demanded, but as a declaration of beliefs held in common. As slightly modified by the committee to which it was entrusted, it took the following form in which it was adopted the next year:

"We believe in one God, infinite, perfect, who is made known in the Bible as Holy Father, Holy Son, and Holy Spirit. We believe in Jesus Christ, who, being God, became man; who suffered and died and rose again that He might save sinners. We believe in the Holy Spirit, who bestows the new life. We believe in the Bible, which was given by the inspiration of God and makes us wise unto salvation. We believe in the Holy Church, baptism by water, the Lord's Supper, the Holy Lord's Day, eternal life, the resurrection of the dead, and in just rewards and punishments."

In October, 1891, a terrible earthquake that had its centre near the cities of Gifu and Ogaki, resulted in the loss of eight thousand lives, the wounding of fifteen thousand persons, and the complete or partial destruction of more than one hundred thousand houses. The missionaries living in Gifu and Nagoya at once exerted themselves to help the suffering. As soon as the news reached other parts of the country, the Christians organised plans for relief. Such organised effort was new in Japan, and the example was quickly followed by the Buddhists. Almost the first, if not the very first, medical relief to reach the scene of disaster from outside was a corps of physicians and nurses led by Dr. Berry from the Doshisha Hospital in Kyoto, The foreigners in the open ports contributed about thirty-five thousand *yen* and sent committees to superintend the use of this fund. The help thus rendered by foreigners and by Christians did much to change the general sentiment of a district that had been strongly prejudiced against both. One person engaged in the work said: "In their gratitude the people worshipped us daily," and this was doubtless literally true. The Christian orphanages received many of the children that were left without parents, and new asylums were Opened for such persons and for others who had been made destitute. It was the first time that Christian charity had been displayed upon a large scale; and though the Buddhists are also to be commended for their activity, it was generally recognised that the Christians had acted more promptly and that their charity was more wisely administered.

It will be remembered that a company of young men commonly known as the "Kumamoto Band" had in spite of severe persecution entered into solemn covenant with each other that they would follow Jesus Christ and devote their lives to teaching His Gospel to their countrymen. They had been among the most prominent ministers of the Kumi-ai body and by their earnest labours had built up several churches. One of the most successful was Mr. Kanamori who, after a few years in Okayama and a short period of service as a teacher in the Doshisha, had become pastor of a church in Tokyo. His views upon some of the fundamental doctrines of Christianity underwent such a change that he resigned from the pastorate. Soon after this he published a book entitled" The Present and Future of Christianity in Japan." As described by another pastor: "This book stripped Christianity of its supernatural ism. It denied miracles, the divinity of Christ, and the atonement." This defection was perhaps the severest blow that the Protestant churches had yet received. At the time, none of the other leading preachers were ready to assent to his views, but his prominence brought before the Christians at large doctrines of which they before possessed but little knowledge. The book was, however, more a symptom of theological uneasiness than it was a promoting cause. Many of the preachers and educated laymen were readers of Western periodicals, and the unrest existing in Europe could not but find an echo in Japan. In that country the results were the more deplorable because the Church had not reached a stage where it was prepared to discuss such questions as now perplexed it. Men who from childhood have been steeped in Christian thought can indulge in intellectual speculations with much less danger than those who have just come out from non-Christian systems of belief, and who are likely to lose all their faith if any part of it is seriously shaken.

After the opening of Japan proper to the Gospel, the Loochoo Islands were for a long time neglected by Protestants. Rev. J. C. Davison of the American Methodist Mission, spent five days there in 1887, and preached in Napha to a small company of Japanese and Loochoo-ans, A lady from Scotland had long desired to see the Gospel given to the islanders, and after a visit to Japan she offered to the American Baptist Union a sum of money sufficient to provide what would be needed for the first years of evangelistic effort. The offer having been accepted, two Japanese evangelists were sent in the autumn of 1891. Not long afterward, Mr, Correll of the American Methodist Mission, visited the islands, where in December he baptised the first convert. Both the Baptists and Methodists have continued their work; and in 1893 the Church Missionary Society also stationed an evangelist there.

Official interference with Christian work increased. In one city where several military men had been brought into the church or into Christian clubs, officers of the grade of captain and lieutenants were told by superiors that they must stop trying to introduce Christianity into the ranks. In the Judicial Department men were told that the profession of Christianity was the only thing standing in the way of their promotion. It was also believed that the real cause for the discharge of certain teachers was their religion. The Christians desired to find some test case where the facts were sufficiently plain to justify an appeal. At last they considered that such a case had been found in Kumamoto, where in 1891 several events occurred that gave rise to much controversy in the newspapers. Some of the most prominent Christian ministers were chosen to bring the matter before the Government and the public. In an open letter that was published in several papers they stated that the prefectural Governor had said in an address to the leading officials of towns and villages:

"There are two things that are forbidden to teachers of primary schools. One is the belonging to any political party or to any society formed for political purposes. The other is the acceptance of Christianity. That is a foreign religion and is not to be believed. Teachers must strictly follow the Emperor's Rescript. In case a teacher accepts Christianity, he will be summarily dealt with."

It was alleged that a month later, when the principal of a primary school was informed by the police that four pupils were studying the Bible, he reprimanded them and threatened to expel them unless they desisted. One of them, who refused to obey, was expelled as a disorderly student. The committee of the Christians said:

"These evils are not limited to one prefecture. All through the country similar things are done. Even the editors of educational papers and of journals at the very foot of the Imperial Throne are, with strange ingenuity and recklessness, upholding such actions as being in harmony with the Constitution. In case it is decided that a believer in Christianity cannot attend the common schools, then it follows that the position of teacher is taken from Christians as well as the privileges of the schools from their children."

The Governor's secretary in a reply to this open letter declared that the speech in question had been incorrectly reported and that there was no official knowledge of the expulsion of a student for the alleged reason.

The committee had an interview with the Ministers of Education and of Home Affairs. The former said:

"Since it is the aim of the Department to teach morality on the basis of the Emperor's Rescript, any attempt on the part of teachers, while engaged in their official duties, to obstruct this aim will be met with a dismissal from service. . . . But so far as religion is concerned, it is outside the control of the Educational Office, and beyond all question is left entirely to the free will of any and every individual. This Department has nothing to do with a teacher's belief in Buddhism, Christianity, or in no religion at all."

When reminded that the *Educational Journal,* which was supposed to represent the views of the Department, had supported the alleged action of the Governor and the principal of the school, the Minister declared that the Department had no connection with the magazine. The reply of the other minister was similar, and as both gave permission to have their words published, the position of the Christians regarding religious liberty was greatly strengthened.

There began to be, especially among the Kumi-ai Churches, considerable discussion upon the subject of complete independence from the missions. With what was said concerning the desirability of the churches becoming self-supporting most of the missionaries could sympathise, since it was what they themselves had urged. Unfortunately, however, the agitation was connected at this time with ill-feeling towards the missionaries, who were charged with endeavouring to exert too much control over the churches. Somewhat strangely, the severest criticisms came from those whose relations were with a mission that disclaimed all authority over the churches, leaving them to make their own creeds, to choose their own forms of government, and to manage their own finances; the missionaries retaining only the right to decide on their own methods of work and on the use that should be made of funds entrusted to their care. Some of the more radical agitators desired that missionary funds used in aiding schools and evangelistic work should be given as lump sums wholly into the care of the Japanese. Others wished that the missionaries should have such a connection with the churches that their location and forms of work should be decided by the latter. In some quarters it was urged that missionaries ought to leave to the Japanese ministry the work in the older fields, while they themselves should go, as one of the pastors said, "into the interior and even to the Loochoo Islands." Criticisms of the missionaries were rife. Many of these were doubtless well-founded; but the manner in which they were made, sometimes even before audiences of unbelievers, did much to grieve the hearts and lessen the influence of even the most devoted foreign workers. To some extent, the agitation was an outgrowth of the ultra-nationalism that, in order to exalt everything Japanese, thought it necessary to depreciate whatever was done by foreigners. Not all, however, joined in the adverse criticism; and though at times any marked expression of esteem for missionaries subjected a person to the accusation of being their slave, many still prized their work and sought the co-operation of those who had been their first teachers.

Mention should be made of three persons that visited Japan in 1892. Dr. G. T. Ladd, Professor of Philosophy in Yale University, came to deliver a course of lectures in the Doshisha. He also addressed the students of the Imperial University in Tokyo, and spoke before the Young Men's Christian Associations at their summer school. His lectures on the relation of philosophy to religion were well received and exerted considerable influence. So good was the impression made upon Japanese scholars that Professor Ladd has since then made two visits to Japan in order to deliver lectures in the Imperial University.

Miss Mary A. West came to labour in behalf of temperance. She visited many cities, doing much to establish new total abstinence societies and to inspire the old ones with fresh enthusiasm. While in Kanazawa she fell ill and died. At her funeral in Tokyo many prominent officials and citizens united in showing honour to one who had lost her life in seeking the good of Japan.

Rev. F. E. Clark, D.D., the founder and President of the Christian Endeavour Society, was the third of these visitors. A few Endeavour Societies had previously been established in Japan, and now as a result of his addresses several new ones were formed.

A missionary who had the reputation of usually looking on the bright side wrote concerning the year 1893:

"As for organised Christianity, it has been a hard, discouraging year. There are those who would not say so; but they cannot alter the fact that the churches are poorly attended, many a pastor or evangelist having hardly fifty for an audience, while the self-supporting churches find it harder and harder to be self-supporting with audiences that fail to increase. There are baptisms every month, perhaps a hundred and fifty on the average among all the Protestant churches, yet so many are students, teachers, or officials, who move from one place to another, that the churches are not generally growing stronger. With all this, there is something of friction between the missionaries and the native Christians, though that is by no means universal."\*

Early in the year a very severe attack was made upon Christianity by Professor Inoue Tetsujiro of the Imperial University, He wrote an article that appeared simultaneously in six Buddhist and one Unitarian magazine. For a while it became the subject of controversy in all religious periodicals and to some extent in the secular papers. It was hailed with the greatest joy by Buddhists, and the ablest Christian writers busied themselves in replying to its charges. The following extracts from a synopsis given in the *Japan Mail* will show the spirit of the article:

"At the issuance of the Imperial Rescript, only Christians were opposed to it. Buddhists, Confucianists, and Shintoists accepted it. The Christians made defence that they did not oppose the Rescript, but only its worship. This, however, was a mere pretence. Christians do not like the meaning of the Imperial words; they oppose loyalty and filial obedience, the ancient principles of ethics in Japan. Why? Some Christians are of course loyal and teach the Rescript in their churches, but they are not supported by the conservative faithful. Christians are divided into two classes; one class seeking to preserve their doctrine, which is hostile to Japan, the other trying to Japanise their Christianity in spite of the impossibility of doing so. In a word, Christianity is not adaptable to Japan. If it were, why should it be necessary to try to adapt it to the country?. . . Christians do not worship any other than their one only God, Monotheism is like an absolute monarchy. It denies all other gods but its one. Polytheism is like a confederation of states; toleration of one with another prevails. Buddhism, which is polytheistic, has therefore had a warm and gentle history, but the history of Christianity has been intolerant and warlike. . . In Shinto also there are many gods; all Emperors are regarded as divine. Japanese ethics are the teachings left by the Emperors. Our nationality rests on this foundation. . . . Worship of the Emperor's words is nothing difficult to a patriot. Christians have lost their patriotism unconsciously. They wonder at the patriotic devotion of others. They antagonise the present moral passion, and will violate the order and destroy the unity of the country. . . . The essence of the Imperial Rescript and Christianity are different. If the former is to guide national education, Christians must oppose it. If there are Christians who accept it, they either simply acquiesce and wait, or, if sincere, they have changed their relation to Christianity. The two powers, the Rescript and Christianity are not in harmony."

Professor Inoue adduced several instances where Japanese Christians were alleged to have shown disrespect to the Rescript or to the Emperor's picture. By quotations from Christ's words and by references to European history he endeavoured to show that Christianity is destructive of patriotism. He closed by asserting that as Christ Himself had said, "Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation," therefore the reception of Christianity would involve national destruction.

It will be seen that this attack, like those of twenty-five years before, was based upon the idea that Christianity is opposed to the principles of loyalty and filial piety. The replies of the Christians contained indignant denials that they were lacking in love for country and Emperor, or in readiness to follow the moral teaching laid down in the Rescript. Doubtless the charge laid against them led them to be more earnest in displaying their patriotism, and the morbid nationalism thus fostered increased the friction between them and the foreign missionaries.

Some of the missions had considerable trouble connected with holding property in the interior, Japanese law did not permit foreigners to be the legal owners of real estate. In some places it was difficult to rent suitable houses, and so land had been bought by the missionaries and buildings erected for residences, chapels, or schools. The real estate was necessarily registered in the name of some Japanese. Other foreigners besides the missionaries followed the same plan, and in the case of foreigners employed by the Government this was done by the assistance of the officials, so that the whole arrangement was open and perfectly understood. In connection with the morbid nationalism of the time, there suddenly arose the cry that foreigners were trying to buy up the best land in the country, and those who had consented to take the nominal ownership of the property for which the foreigners paid the money were condemned as traitors. Even some of the Christians began to say that those who held land for the missionaries were breakers of the law and that the missionaries themselves were parties to the crime. In a few cases the persons in whose name the property was registered mortgaged or sold it, retaining the money for themselves, and there was no legal redress. Some Christian schools built by the Japanese suffered in the same way, since the lack of trust laws made it necessary to have the property held in the names of individuals.

Mention has been made of Nagoya as a city where Buddhism possessed much strength, and where its followers exerted themselves to oppose Christianity. Several incidents occurring in 1893 showed the bitterness of their hatred. In May the meeting of the Japanese Evangelical Alliance was held in that city. It was at that time the custom among politicians to hire a class of men called *soshi,* who not only protected their employers from assault, but also did their best to break up the meetings of the other party. The Buddhists of Nagoya now resorted to similar methods. To a large public meeting of the Alliance held in the evening they sent a company of about forty *soshi,* who divided into two bands, one remaining outside of the Methodist Church where the meeting was held, and the other entering the building. Soon they began an antiphonal chorus of yells, one group answering to the other. Ere long, stones and other missiles were thrown. In anticipation of trouble several policemen, some of them in citizen's clothing, were in attendance, but found it difficult to restore order. Some of those that were without uniforms had their clothes torn and they themselves were wounded. The Alliance had planned to invite the officials, teachers, and prominent citizens of the city to a social gathering; but the Buddhists went to the proprietor of the building that had been engaged for the purpose and threatened to tear it down if he permitted it to be used. The same course was pursued with the proprietor of another building where the Christian ladies of Nagoya had arranged a reception for the delegates. In both cases the owners withdrew their consent for the meetings.

In October a new chapel was dedicated by the Methodists of Nagoya. At an evangelical service that followed, the Buddhists, who had come in large numbers, rose at a given signal, smashed all the lamps, scattering the oil over the worshippers, tore the clock from the wall, and broke the windows. The Methodists had also rented a house for a chapel in another part of the city. The Buddhists went to the owner and protested against his letting the building for such a purpose. As he insisted that the clause of the Constitution insuring religious liberty gave him the right to let his house to Christians, a meeting was held in a temple to which he was called in order that he might be assailed with arguments and threats. Next, a building opposite the one in question was secured for an indignation meeting. *Soshi* were sent with clubs to invade the man's house, and he was forced to flee for refuge to some friends in the country. The Buddhists then induced the wife's family to say that they would compel her to leave him unless he repented. They at last accomplished what they desired; for when the man came with tears to the missionaries, threw down the money already paid, and begged to be released from the contract, it did not seem best to insist on holding him to his former promise.

A great advance was made in the Church Missionary Society's work among the Ainu. In 1893 there was an increase from eleven church-members "and two catechumens to two hundred and nineteen members and one hundred and fifty-one catechumens. The number of villages containing Christians increased from two to ten. Of one village Mr, Batchelor wrote:

"Every woman in Piratori has accepted Christ as her Saviour, That is a glorious triumph of the Cross, for the women hitherto have never been allowed to have any religion; the men only have worshipped God. Just think of old women over seventy years of age, now for the first time in their lives, praying—and praying to Jesus only\!"

A Methodist missionary who visited Hakodate in January, 1903, wrote of the harmony that existed among different denominations in that city. He said:

"It is customary here in Hakodate for the Christians, not only to unite during the week in prayer, but also on the second Sunday of the Week of Prayer, and partake of the Lord's Supper together. One year the Lord's Supper is observed according to the Episcopal form, the next according to the Presbyterian, and the next according to the Methodist. . . . These Sunday 'Union' services are always held in the Methodist Church, because that church building is the largest. . . . I was invited to preach the sermon. . . After the sermon Mr. A., a missionary of the Church of England \(a Low Churchman\), conducted and administered the Holy Communion, wearing his surplice. He read the service in Japanese according to the order of his Church, inviting the pastors of the Presbyterian and Methodist Churches \(both Japanese\) and myself within the railing around the pulpit. After partaking of the emblems himself, he administered them first to us three, and then invited us to assist him in administering to the people as they gathered about the railing."\*

Among other signs of progress in 1893 may be mentioned the completion of the revised Episcopal Prayer Book, the holding of a summer school for girls, and the establishment of the Railway Mission. This last placed a copy of the New Testament in each railway station, and published a monthly paper for the benefit of railway men.

About this time the question began to be discussed among some of the missions whether it was advisable to ask for more workers from abroad. Some pointed to the many towns and villages whose inhabitants had as yet heard nothing of Christ, and asserted that until these had been reached there was need of more missionaries. Those that doubted the advisability of asking for re-enforcements were chiefly influenced by two considerations. It seemed to them that the responsibility for evangelising the country should be thrown largely upon the Japanese Christians themselves, the churches having already gained such a degree of strength as should enable them to carry on the work with the help of the foreign missionaries already on the field; and that, while many other countries were inadequately supplied with missionaries, men and women should not be urged to come to Japan except to meet special needs or to supply vacancies caused by death or removal. Some too, felt that in the present state of public opinion a marked increase in the number of foreign workers would prove irritating even to the Christians, many of whom complained that the missionaries were trying to keep things too much under their own control, and said that the money required for supporting one foreigner could be more advantageously used in employing several Japanese workers. To some missions it seemed preferable to leave the question of re-enforcements in abeyance, waiting for further developments before deciding whether to ask for new missionaries.

In view of the persecution to which the Christians of Nagoya had been subjected, it is gratifying to know of the blessings that came to them in the beginning of the year 1894. The different churches united in observing the annual Week of Prayer. The meetings were well attended, and as they drew near the close the interest was so great that it was decided to continue them. The faith of believers was quickened, and those that had grown cold confessed their sins. The awakening was such as had never before been known in that part of Japan, and the Christians were spurred to more earnest labour for unbelievers. Daily evangelistic services were begun in different parts of the city. Persons were chosen to convey to churches in other cities an account of this revival in the hope that the intelligence might lead them to seek and obtain similar blessings. One of the Christian newspapers reported that, as a reaction from the low state that had prevailed for several years, there were revivals in all parts of the country; those in Yokohama, Kobe, and Nagoya being the most noteworthy.

There continued to be in several places violent opposition to Christianity. In Saga, Buddhist students endeavoured to break up meetings that were inaugurated by the Evangelical Lutheran Mission. They used all sorts of insulting epithets, and tried to drown the voice of the speakers. Finally a mob gathered in front of the chapel, tore down the fence, threw stones, rushed into the building, and behaved so violently that several policemen were required to quell the disturbance. In Yonezawa, while an open-air meeting was being held, a stone thrown at Miss Imhof, who had gone to play the organ, broke her spectacles, and pieces of the glass entered one eye so that she lost its use. It should be said that the prefectural Governor and other officials called in person upon Miss Imhof or sent messages to express their regret for what had happened.

In March, 1894, the Unitarians dedicated in Tokyo a two-story building to which the name Unity Hall was given. It contained an audience room, a library, and rooms for the use of a school. An extract from the dedicatory address of Rev. Clay MacCauley, D.D., will show the importance that he attached to the building:

"If, in beginning what I have to say, I should assert that in the modern history of Japan no event of more importance than this has taken place, most of those who hear me would think my words the extreme of absurdity and pretension. But, in a deep sense, this assertion is neither absurd nor pretentious. Let me say why. The purpose with which Unity Hall is to be made a gift to the Japanese people is this. Here we intend to give a home to a school of learning in which the highest human relations, those which are manifested in religion, morals, and social order, may not only be studied, but be also understood clearly and unquestionably; and further that from here the result of such study may be made practical in life. Here religion, morals, and social order are to be subjected to the same methods of investigation as those which characterise all objects of the science and philosophy of the present age. Here no tradition as such will control our work. Here, so far as possible, our high studies have been freed from prejudice."\*

The outbreak of the war with China made the year 1894 an important one in Japan's history. This war affected in many ways the progress of Christianity. In the first place, the Christians had an opportunity to disprove the charge that had so persistently been brought against them of being deficient in loyalty. Those in the army were eager to prove their devotion to their country, and some of the most noteworthy deeds of personal valour were performed by them. An "interdenominational society was formed through which money was raised and supplies contributed to furnish comforts for the soldiers.

The war opened a way for carrying the Gospel into the army. It will be remembered that soldiers had often been warned not to attend Christian services nor to read Christian books. Even so late as the spring of 1894, a prince of the blood, who was in command of a garrison, gave what was practically an order that Christian soldiers must give up their religion. In a branch of this garrison, about a dozen of the common soldiers and a few officers formed an important part of the church in the city where they were stationed. The privates decided that it would be necessary for them to conform outwardly to the command, and asked to have their names erased from the register of the church. Some of the officers felt obliged to take the same course. Now, however, a great change came. Rev, H. Loomis, the agent of the Bible Societies, obtained from the Vice-Minister of War permission to visit all the garrisons in Japan in order to supply the men with copies of the Gospels. Letters were sent to the commanding officers instructing them to give Mr, Loomis the necessary assistance for distributing the books. In some places regiments were drawn up in line that they might be addressed by a missionary before the books were given out. In other places the officers received the books and themselves distributed them to the men. A similar work was done in the navy. The Scriptures and other Christian literature were distributed to soldiers in the hospitals and even to the Chinese prisoners that were sent to Japan. In nearly every case the books were thankfully received, and many of the officers wrote letters expressing their appreciation of what had been done. Prince Komatsu, who was next in command to the Emperor, expressed in person his gratitude to Mr. Loomis.

Five prominent Japanese ministers went to the seat of war as chaplains. They were sent by the Christians, but were recognised by the military authorities, so that they had their quarters with the army. When they were to deliver addresses, the officers usually gave out notices of the meetings and came themselves with the men. In addition to direct religious work, the chaplains, whose official designation signified "comforters," tried in various ways to cheer the men by sympathetic ministrations to their welfare. Occasionally they came in contact with Chinese Christians. Notwithstanding the difference in language, they could communicate with these in writing. One of the chaplains says of a prayer-meeting held with the Chinese: "Though we could not talk together, the tunes of the hymns we sang, the name of Christ, and the word 'Amen' were equally familiar to all."

Plans were made for sending two American missionaries to engage in similar work, and there is good reason to believe that the consent of the military authorities would have been gained had it not been that the American Minister refused to forward the request that must of necessity pass through his hands.

During the war the city of Hiroshima was the military headquarters, and it also became the centre for much Christian work among the soldiers that spent a longer or shorter time in the city on their way to or from the seat of war. The most favourable opportunity for work was among the sick and wounded soldiers in the hospitals. Missionaries joined with Japanese Christians in carrying books, papers, pictures, flowers, and other things to the patients, who were glad for anything that would relieve the monotony of the hours. Those in charge of the hospitals welcomed such ministrations and gave the missionary ladies freedom to visit all parts of the hospitals and to converse with the patients. Some of the hospitals were under the care of the Red Cross Society, This had become very popular in Japan. Most of the prominent citizens of the country were members, and a large force of nurses had received training under its auspices. Though not a Christian society, its symbol was significant of the fact that its principles of charity to be shown to friend and foe alike had come from the teaching of Him who had died upon the Cross. When it was remembered that not many years before the Japanese had trampled upon the cross as the sign of a hated religion, it was very suggestive to see it now becoming an honoured symbol. In the long wards of the hospitals, the cross was everywhere to be seen,— on the sleeves of the surgeons, on the white caps of the nurses, on the clothes worn by the patients themselves. One of the missionary ladies said: "How could we keep from speaking of our Saviour when the Cross was ever before our eyes? What better introduction to religious conversation could there be than to ask the sick soldier if he knew the original meaning of the symbol he was wearing on his arm?" Yet it was necessary to take care not to weary the patients nor to press the subject of Christianity unduly. The missionary ladies by their helpfulness and wisdom so commended themselves to the persons in charge that they were allowed to visit the wards at hours in which even relatives were denied admittance.

By the treaty of peace that concluded the war Formosa and the Pescadores were ceded to Japan. This brought into its territory a number of churches and Christians, the fruits of work done by the Canadian and the English Presbyterian Missions. The scope of this history does not require an account of these missions among the Formosans, though mention may be made of the fellowship that Christians in the Japanese army, and afterward, those in official positions had with their fellow-believers who had now become their fellow-countrymen. Efforts were also put forth, especially by the Church of Christ in Japan \(Presbyterian\), for the religious welfare of the Japanese settled in Formosa.

In 1894 the Church of Christ in Japan took a step in the line of financial independence by a reorganisation of its Board of Missions. For some years before this the Co-operating Missions had given three *yen* for every one contributed by the churches, and the Board had been composed in equal numbers of missionaries and Japanese. According to the new plan, the subsidies of the Missions were relinquished and a Board consisting of twenty members was elected by the Synod. This Board was to have the general charge of the work, entrusting its direct management to an Executive Committee.

Near the close of 1894, Rev. Yokoi Tokio who, like Mr. Kanamori, was a member of the "Kumamoto Band," and one of the most prominent ministers in the Kumi-ai body, published a book entitled "The Problem of Christianity in Our Country." Dealing with questions upon the essence of Christianity and the future of evangelistic work in Japan, its position was that of extreme "liberalism" and naturalism. To many it seemed to go farther than Mr. Kanamori's book and to be more destructive of Christian faith. It did not, however, give rise to so much discussion; though this was in part because the views advocated were no longer novel.

Christian work was in various ways affected by the ratification, in 1894 and 1895, of new treaties between japan and Western nations. As has been previously noted, the Japanese had long desired to be relieved from extraterritoriality and from other restrictions imposed by the older treaties, and the reluctance of some nations to grant any concessions had caused much ill-will towards foreigners, Japan was now received as an equal, and this did much to foster good feeling. Missionaries were directly affected by the provision that, when the treaties should come into full effect in 1899, aliens would be allowed to travel or to reside in the interior. It will be remembered that hitherto only those foreigners that were in the employ of Japanese could live outside of the Open ports; and this led many missionaries to become teachers and to submit to various annoying regulations. For travel it had been necessary to obtain passports from the central Government. Hence, missionaries could not quickly respond to calls to visit places in the interior. It had been necessary in application for these passports to specify the exact route to be taken, and at times the Government refused to give those that were valid for more than a fortnight. Immediately after the new treaties were ratified, the Government began to grant permissions, good for one year, to travel in any part of the country. The missionaries rejoiced in this new freedom and there was much more touring in country districts than had before been possible.

It was in part an indirect result of the war that there came a great and rapid increase of industrial and commercial activity. Many factories were built, railroads were projected, and stock companies were formed for all sorts of enterprises. Japan seldom does things by halves, and the whole nation seemed to be affected by the spirit of commercialism. In some respects this had an unfavourable influence upon Christian activity. People were so occupied in devising ways to make money that it was hard to call their attention to spiritual things. Some Christians were so busy that they neglected religious duties; those engaged in manufactures found it easy to invent excuses for not observing the Sabbath; and others yielded to the temptations that beset those that are in haste to become rich. Even those that had entered the ministry were affected. Their education had a commercial value that enabled them to obtain remunerative employment. Some of them had been discouraged by lack of success in evangelistic labours, and thought they had mistaken their calling. Others had the idea that they would help the churches to financial independence by providing for their own support while continuing to preach the Gospel; but they soon found that the claims of business left them little time and strength for evangelistic work. Not only was there the loss of many from the ministry; but commercialism, theological doubts, and a general loss of earnestness combined to reduce greatly the number of young men studying in the theological schools.

The year 1895 brought an important change in the relations of the Kumi-ai Churches to the American Board Mission. The Kumi-ai Missionary Society had long received from the Board a subsidy that in recent years had amounted to about three times the contributions from Japanese sources. The missionaries, though often urging that this aid be relinquished, had not thought it wise to refuse it. Now at last, the churches decided to trust to their own resources for the support of the Missionary Society. For the most part the separation was made in a kindly spirit, though it was hastened by the dislike that the Japanese felt to the insistence by the Mission that, in justice to the interests of American contributors, it must retain the right of so far supervising the money entrusted to its care as to ensure that this would be used for propagating the fundamental truths of the Gospel. Some doubted whether the churches would be able to carry on a vigorous work alone, but increased responsibility gave new interest. The Japanese contributions in the last four years of joint support were respectively 1,130, 1,335, and 644 *yen;* but after the society became independent, its annual income never fell below 3,000 *yen,* a result the more noteworthy because the change took place at a time when the faith and earnestness of the churches seemed to be at the lowest ebb.

There had gradually arisen among the missionaries of the American Board much dissatisfaction with the conduct of the Doshisha.\* As the affairs of that institution occupy considerable space in the history of this and succeeding years, it may be well to recall a few facts concerning it. It will be remembered that it had been established by Dr. Neesima in co-operation with the missionaries. The American Board had given money for the erection of buildings and for other expenses, and had acted as the medium through which other contributions from American friends of missions had been bestowed. Its missionaries formed an important part of its teaching force. Since foreigners could not hold real estate in the interior of Japan, it was distinctly understood that the Board had no legal claim upon the property, unless possibly to insist that it should be used in conformity with the purpose for which it had been given. A company of Japanese had been formed with a brief constitution declaring that it should hold the property, should use it for the maintenance of Christian schools, and should have charge of all business arising between said schools and the Japanese Government. One article said that money contributed by the American Board should be expended under the direction of the missionaries of the Board after consultation with the President and the Japanese teachers of the school. After a time it seemed advisable to have a more thorough organisation and to put the financial management of the school entirely in the hands of a new company, which was necessarily composed of Japanese, though three members of the Mission were to act as Associate Trustees, giving advice but having no vote. The American Board continued to contribute to the funds of the Company, and gifts came from individual friends of the school in America. Money from Japanese donors was given with full knowledge that the Constitution declared Christianity to be "the foundation of the moral education promoted by the Company."

During Dr. Neesima's life and for a short time after his death, all went on satisfactorily. Then it seemed to the missionaries that the school was gradually losing its Christian character. Some of the teachers declared that they were in the school simply to give instruction, and that they were under no obligation to concern themselves with the moral condition of the pupils. One of the first marked occurrences to show the difference between the views of the missionaries and those of the Japanese teachers came in connection with a course of lectures given by Captain L. L. Janes. He was the man through whose influence the members of the "Kumamoto Band" had been led to a belief in Christianity. Some of them were now leading teachers in the Doshisha, one of them was its President, and others served on the Board of Trustees. Captain Janes had been in America for several years. His old pupils felt that the missionaries had failed to take his side as they ought when certain charges had been made against him; and this feeling lay at the bottom of many of the troubles that at this time crippled the educational and evangelistic work of the American Board Mission. After a while he returned to Japan, having been engaged as a teacher in one of the government schools in Kyoto. In the autumn of 1893 he was asked to speak before the Lecture Association of the Doshisha students. In his lectures he denounced theological instruction, criticised the church as the enemy of progress and liberty, sneered at missionaries, denied the existence of a personal God, and ridiculed fundamental Christian doctrines. The foreign teachers remonstrated with the person who, in the absence of the President, was in charge of the school; but he refused to interfere with the liberty of the students to have such lectures as they desired. Fortunately the students themselves, after two or three lectures, were unwilling to listen to more. They went to the lecturer, saying they did not care to have the course continued, and one of the advanced pupils, who had acted as interpreter, made a public apology of his own accord for having aided a person who was trying to tear down what Dr. Neesima had built up.

As time went on, the missionaries felt that more and more their influence was being undermined, especially by some of the teachers who, at the morning chapel exercises, in the classroom, and in public journals ridiculed them and their teaching. The missionaries were not alone in considering that the school was proving unfaithful to the principles on which it had been founded, for many of the alumni and Christian friends of the school grieved over what was being done.

For several years the Mission had been urging the Board to send some of its officers or corporate members to give advice regarding the settlement of perplexing questions. In the autumn of 1895 such a deputation, consisting of four members, reached Japan. Spending a little over two months in the country, they conferred with Japanese officials, missionaries of different societies, and prominent Japanese Christians, thus gathering much information about the general situation in Japan as also about that which gave rise to the specific problems calling for their consideration. In regard to the Doshisha they found "a marked concurrence in the opinion that a change had taken place in the spirit of the institution. It was quite generally affirmed that the Christian character and spiritual tone of the university are far less pronounced than formerly." In a conference with the Trustees an interpretation of the clause in the Constitution that made Christianity the foundation of the moral education promoted by the Company was sought. The following extract from the Report of the Deputation will show the position taken by each side:

"We asked if they would affirm as among the beliefs for which the Doshisha stood in Japan the personality of God, the divinity of Christ, and the future life. They declared that they could not. While as individuals they could affirm their acceptance of these beliefs, as Trustees they could not affirm them, since differences existed among Christians on these points, and they must not ally themselves with any party. When asked if they would accept the creed of the Kumi-ai churches in definition of the sense in which they used the word Christian, they declined, saying that they would thus identify themselves with a single denomination. When urged at two long conferences to make some statement, however brief, in language of their own, of what they meant by 'Christianity,' since the word did not in their minds involve the above-named beliefs, they declined. They said it was not necessary; that having declared their purpose to maintain a Christian institution they should be trusted so to do; that to affirm the above-named beliefs would narrow the basis of the university, would cause the resignation of professors whose services they did not wish to lose, would repel students who were encouraged now to enter the school by its spirit of free enquiry. . . . It was carefully explained to the Trustees that the American churches which contributed to the treasury of the Board, while not making a test of any creed, could hardly hold to be Christian those persons or institutions which deliberately refused to declare belief in a personal God and in the divinity of Jesus Christ, in the immortality of the soul, and in the supernatural elements of Christianity. The reply was that the whole subject had been a matter of thought with them; that theological opinion in Japan was in a formative state, and beliefs were unsettled; that for that reason and because it would be disastrous to act now under appearance of compulsion, they could make no statement whatever, except that they would maintain a Christian university."

It seemed to the Deputation that the American Board would not be justified in continuing indefinitely to use for the Doshisha money contributed for promoting Christian education in Japan; but in order not to make the change too abrupt, they recommended that for the time being the American teachers supplied to the Doshisha by the Board be continued, that co-operation in the Theological Department remain as before, and that the subsidy given by the Board to the Company be annually reduced, so as to cease at the end of the year 1898.

Concerning the condition of the churches the Deputation reported:

"Japan is characterised by the intensity with which it seizes a new idea. We believe the movement toward extreme liberalism in the Kumi-ai churches, which is not widespread, but which is championed by a few writers and public speakers, if left to its natural course, will soon disappear. A few who are involved may lose their faith in Christianity and leave the Church, but we believe the tendency to destructive criticism will be less in the future, and that the work of construction will be more prominent, The theological problems of the world are now discussed in Japan, and that too without a balancing foundation of Christian faith and life."

In October, 1895, a meeting of the pastors and evangelists of the Kumi-ai churches was held in Nara. It was so timed that the Deputation might attend some of its sessions. At this meeting the following "Declaration" was prepared:

"We who, believing and revering Jesus Christ as Saviour, are called of God, do greatly mourn over the present condition of the world, and assembled here in prayer unto God and in the rich enjoyment of the Holy Spirit's gracious influence, we determine to proclaim the Gospel and to establish the kingdom of God according to the following principles:

"1. That all men should repent of all sin, and through Christ should return unto obedience to the Heavenly Father.

"2. That all men being the children of God, the great principles of love and sympathy should be upheld among them.

"3. That the home should be purified by maintaining the principles of monogamy: and the mutual duties of parents and children, elder and younger brothers, should be fulfilled.

"4. That the nation should be elevated and the welfare of mankind promoted.

"5. That the hope of eternal life should be perfected through faith and righteousness."

By many, especially by those that desired to see a Japanese form of Christianity, this Declaration was hailed with great enthusiasm. A Japanese professor of the Doshisha wrote of it as being by far the most influential document yet issued by the Christians of Japan, and said: "Viewed from the standpoint of conciseness, of absence of dogmatism or theocratic tendency, and of the prominence given to morals and ethics based on the personal instructions of Christ, the instructions forming the basis of this creed must be considered as the best of their kind since the establishment of the Christian Church in Japan." By some others, who considered the document a production of those who were trying to combine Christianity with Confucian and Shinto elements, it was thought unsatisfactory because of what it omitted rather than for what it contained.

In September, 1895, the Salvation Army began work in Japan. Before this, two or three Japanese who had seen something of the Army in America or England had copied certain of its methods, but none of them had any connection with the central organisation. Those who now came began operations in both Yokohama and Tokyo. They adopted what was called "the native policy," that is, as in India and some other countries, they used the dress, food, and many customs of the people among whom they laboured. The sudden change to Japanese food brought serious illness to some of their number, and it was found advisable to modify the policy. Reports of what the Salvation Army had accomplished in England had preceded it to Japan, where not only were the Christians prepared to welcome it, but even some of the Buddhist periodicals praised what it had done for the degraded and criminal classes. Headquarters were opened in Tokyo, and the usual methods for attracting the attention of the people were pursued. Ere long a Japanese edition of *The War Cry* was published; and in after years, as the number of soldiers increased, the work extended to other cities; efforts for sailors, discharged convicts, prostitutes, and other classes, being added to the general proclamation of the Gospel.

In December the United Brethren in Christ established a mission in Japan, the Missionary Secretary of the denomination visiting the country in company with a Japanese minister who had been educated in America, and who was now put in charge of the work. He proved unfitted for such responsibility, and the work was continued in ways like those of other missions.

Leprosy is very common in Japan. Exact statistics are not obtainable; for the disease is considered to bring such disgrace upon the family which it enters that its existence is often concealed. When the family is in comfortable circumstances, the patient is usually shut off in a separate room in order that he may not be seen by outsiders, and there he must remain until his death. In other cases the man often becomes an outcast, being left to beg and prolong his miserable existence as best he may. Rev. M. L. Gordon, D.D., in "An American Missionary in Japan" tells of one such sufferer.

"He was one of the original members of the church, and it was known at the time that he had the taint of leprosy in his system. The dread disease was, however, quiescent, and it was hoped would remain so, and hence he mingled freely with the other Christians, visited us in our homes, and often sat with us at the communion table. But of late years the disease became virulent, and by the end of 1890 he was totally blind and otherwise greatly disfigured. The unchristian villagers drove him out of the village; his brothers and other relatives deserted him; and he lived alone in a rude hut in the mountains, receiving a little aid from the prefectural government and more from the Japanese Christians and missionaries. At a later period the Christians cooked his food and otherwise cared for him, but for quite a while he built his own fire and cooked his own rice, going, in his solitary blindness, to and from the spring that furnished him with water, guided by the straw rope which had been put there for that purpose. The evangelist. . . went to condole with him, but to his surprise he was met by the assurance that he was not an object of condolence; that his heart was full of joy, because *Kami* go *shiju maga ushiro ni oru, '*God is always behind me."'

About 1886 a Roman Catholic priest had established at Gotemba an asylum for lepers and in 1894 Miss Youngman of the Presbyterian Mission began a similar work in a suburb of Tokyo. The attention of Miss S. Riddell, an English missionary living in Kumamoto, was also drawn to this pitiable class of sufferers. In the vicinity of Kumamoto are small villages whose populations are almost wholly composed of such persons. Of one village it was commonly said: "Everybody in it is a leper except the stone idol." Large numbers of lepers from other parts of Japan make their way to Kumamoto in order to pray at a shrine dedicated to Kato Kiyomasa, the former persecutor of the Christians, which, because he became a leper, gained the reputation of being a favourable place for gaining relief from the dread disease. At almost any time many of them can be seen about this shrine engaged in prayer or asking for alms. There was reason to hope that by proper medical treatment some of these persons could be permanently benefited, and through the efforts of Miss Riddell and her friends funds were raised for the erection of a hospital which was dedicated in November, 1895. Since then it has brought both physical and spiritual blessings to those that have been gathered within its walls.

Among the indirect results of Christianity has been that it has spurred to new energy other systems with which it has come in contact. The Buddhists saw that it was necessary for them to exert themselves if they wished to retain their hold upon the people. Some of their leading magazines spoke in strong terms concerning the corruption and indolence of the priesthood. In May, 1895, the Minister of Home Affairs issued instructions that higher intellectual standards should be required of those becoming Shinto or Buddhist priests. Among other things this document said:

"Priests of either Shinto or Buddhist sects, charged as they are with the grave duty of propagating religious doctrines, ought to combine learning and virtue so as to command the respect of the people. Hence the processes pursued for testing their qualifications should be specially scrupulous and exact, everything savouring of partiality being carefully avoided. It is nevertheless commonly reported of the priests now in holy orders that not a few are distinguished neither by learning nor by virtuous conduct, and are entirely unfitted for their posts."

The better class of priests felt keenly the disgrace involved in this censure from the Government and in the comments made upon it by secular papers. One writer in a Buddhist magazine wrote in the gloomiest terms concerning the future of religion, which, he said, was holding its own only by the force of inertia, being sustained by the old and middle-aged, and even they were gradually growing cold in the faith. He added:

"Ten years hence nobody will be able to find religious peace in Buddhism. Within that time it will fail in all its endeavours. Its discipline will become powerless, its temples deserted, its believers and priests decimated. If present Buddhism is not reformed by some great man, it will have fallen into a state of hopeless decay by the end of the century."

The more progressive priests had before this imitated the methods adopted by Christians. They had established schools for boys and girls, summer schools, philanthropic societies, Young Men's Buddhist Associations, and other organisations. One magazine now published an article entitled "Learn from Christianity," in which the activity of the Christians, their readiness to adapt themselves to the national situation, and their spirit of devotion to principles rather than to money, were held up as worthy of imitation. Other magazines urged that the spirit and methods of the Christians be more generally copied. Though Buddhism as a system had given but little honour to women, it was now urged that they were well fitted to spread the tenets of their faith, and they were exhorted to speak of religion in their homes, to organise women's societies, and to establish kindergartens, girls' schools, and schools for nurses.

*The Church* for September, 1896, published an article by Rev. T. T. Alexander, D.D., on "The Problems before the Church of Japan." What he said upon two points will throw some light upon the condition of Christian work at the period that we are now considering. The first problem mentioned was that of how the masses were to be reached. He said:

"The last ten years have witnessed a very widespread evangelism in Japan. Both missionaries and Japanese evangelists have gone on evangelistic tours throughout the land, penetrating into the remotest country districts, not only preaching but, as far as possible, making the work permanent by establishing regular preaching places or churches. They have been followed and in many cases preceded by colporteurs and Bible-women carrying the Gospel to the very doors of the people. In the great centres, like Tokyo, Osaka, and Kyoto, churches and preaching-places may be counted by the score, in some of which the Gospel is preached daily. Preaching services are frequently held in the public parks. Opportunities are sought on festival days and at national or local expositions; and mass meetings are often held for preaching the Word. In short, there has been a steady, faithful, and persistent effort made to give the Gospel to the people, whether they would hear or forbear. Over and above more direct results, a general impression has been created that, after all, Christianity is not such a bad thing, that in fact it may be a very good thing. And yet, it must be confessed, the masses have hardly been touched and the question 'How shall we reach them?' presses hard upon the church to-day. . . The lower and peasant classes are still powerfully under the influence of the past and largely Buddhistic in faith, loose in morals, idolatrous and superstitious to the last degree. The middle classes are more hopeful but still largely indifferent, not to say hostile, toward Christianity; while the higher classes, for the most part, are sceptical and distant in their attitude. Young men of all classes are generally non-religious and atheistic."

Concerning the problem of education, Dr. Alexander wrote:

"This is one of the most important and most pressing of all the questions now before the church. Christian education must be had; but how can it be secured?\! The government schools from the kindergarten to the university are on a purely secular basis, religious instruction of every sort being strictly ruled out. Religion may, however, be freely taught in private schools, and these may be multiplied indefinitely without interference on the part of the Government. On the face of it, therefore, the problem would seem to be easy of solution. As long as so much liberty is accorded private schools, there ought to be no serious difficulty, one might suppose, in providing Christian education for all who will avail themselves of it. Now it is true that there are a great many Christian schools in Japan for both sexes and of different grades, most of them dependent upon the missions for financial aid as well as for help in teaching, and so long as the missions are willing to continue their support the schools can be kept going. The chief difficulty, however, does not lie here, but rather in the fact that private schools as such labour under very decided disadvantages when compared with the government schools. The latter confer upon their students certain privileges which private schools cannot confer—such as freedom from military conscription while in school, admission to competitive examinations for civil service, etc. To put it in another way, students of private schools are not exempt from military conscription and hence may be drafted into the army at any time; they cannot enter government schools except by examination, and when they have graduated from the private schools they are forever excluded from the civil service, so that no public career can ever be open to them, no matter how great their abilities or attainments. Hence the number of students, particularly of boys, in Christian schools is kept down to a comparatively low figure; even Christians preferring to forego their natural preference for a Christian education in order to secure for their sons the advantages which the government schools alone can give,"

In order to avoid the disadvantages under which private schools laboured, some of them sought and gained recognition from the Government as being on a par with the public schools, and so entitled to the same privileges. With some of the Christian schools this change apparently involved no interference with religion; but whether because of the rulings of local education officials, or because the spirit within the school itself led to the minimising of the religious element, the Doshisha decided that it was necessary to drop all Biblical study from the curriculum of the academical department, This became the subject of much earnest discussion in meetings of the faculty held for the purpose of revising the course of study; the foreign teachers protesting against the change and against other action that seemed to them subversive of the principles on which the school had been established. It was becoming more and more evident that the two elements, represented on the one side by the missionary teachers, and on the other by the most influential Japanese teachers and trustees, could no longer be harmonised. At the annual meeting of the trustees in April, they passed resolutions in which, after thanking the American Board for its former aid, they said: "In order to make clear our relation to the American Board, we decline to receive, after the close of 1896, its customary gift of annual subsidy and its aid of missionary teachers." An explanatory letter sent by the President of the Trustees to the missionaries said: "I can assure you that the Trustees have no intention whatever of turning you out from the institution where some of you have worked so long and so devotedly, nor any desire that your connection with it should cease. I say confidently that we all desire and earnestly hope that you will stay here and aid us in the good work of Christian education." The thought of the writer seems to have been that the missionaries might continue to give their services to the Doshisha as individuals and not as representatives of the Board that continued to support them.

The Mission of the American Board held its annual meeting in July. A letter sent to the Doshisha Trustees said:

"The fundamental principles of Christianity, which were dear to the hearts of the founders of the Doshisha, to those of the American friends who have given thousands of dollars for its support, and which are not less dear to the hearts of all the members of our Mission, have been publicly assailed or ridiculed from the platform of the school and in other ways by persons connected with the administration; and instead of listening to the earnest protests of the representatives of the Mission, the Trustees have in one instance promoted an instructor who has been most active in assailing the Christian foundations of the institution to be the head of an important department. . . . There is no longer a unity of feeling and practice in the Doshisha but rather such a wide divergence as to render it unwise, if not impossible, for any of our number to continue to cooperate as teachers in the school."

It was thought best by the foreign teachers that their connection with the school should cease at once, instead of in the middle of a school year, and accordingly they sent in their resignations. In September the President of the Doshisha gave to the Kyoto Government a paper containing the following promises:

"1. The moral education of the Doshisha Ordinary Middle School will be founded upon the Imperial Educational Rescript. Avoiding the needless discussion of the extremes of ethical theory, its aim will be practical. It will seek to inculcate an earnest spirit of loyalty and filial obedience by which the people shall each honour his own ancestors and all shall reverence the spirits of the Imperial Ancestors. The teachers will always seek to cultivate in the minds of the pupils an earnest desire for the country's good, for this we regard as the very highest aim of popular education.

"2. On the National Holidays the pupils will be called together, the Imperial Educational Rescript will be read to them, and they will be carefully instructed as to the Imperial will, or taught of the great virtues and illustrious deeds of past Emperors, or of the lives and teachings of the ancient sages; or other addresses suitable to the National Holidays may be given them in order to cultivate a spirit of loyalty to the Emperor and of love to the country. This is the purpose which we hope to carry into practice.

"3. In the graduation and like exercises in the Doshisha Ordinary Middle School religious exercises or ceremonies as a means of propagating religion will not, of course, be held, but there will be an effort to deeply impress the students with the precepts of the Imperial Educational Rescript."\*

Now the Constitution of the Doshisha said: "Christianity is the foundation of the moral education promoted by this company." Persons who criticised the present substitution of the Imperial Rescript for Christianity were accused of holding the view that the two were opposed to each other; an argument that could be made very effective in such a country as Japan. The future course of events showed that another important step had been taken in the departure of the institution from its original standards. Indeed, there seemed to be no need for the declaration made to the Kyoto Government unless it was to show to the officials that Christianity was no longer the controlling principle of the school.

The action of the Doshisha Trustees was severely criticised by many Japanese Christians and to some extent by others. One Shinto periodical spoke of the relations of the institution to the American Board as that of a child to its parent, and reprobated the unfilial spirit that had been shown. "Regarded altogether apart from Christianity," it said, "the conduct of the Doshisha is unseemly. How much worse does it appear when it is remembered that the chief actors in the scene just witnessed profess the gospel of love, peace, and charity."

Even with private schools of lower grades, there were advantages in obtaining the recognition of the Government. In some cases it was found impossible to do this without the surrender of principle. When the Ferris Seminary in Yokohama sought a license for its primary department, it was told that the request could be granted only on condition that the school would promise that no distinctively Christian instruction would be given to its pupils. Further enquiry showed that attendance at church and at morning prayers would be interpreted as receiving Christian instruction, and so the school saw no course but to withdraw its request.

In September, 1896, there was a gathering at the villa of Viscount Matsudaira in Tokyo, of prominent persons connected with different religious systems. Nineteen Buddhist priests, sixteen Christians, two Shintoists, and five other persons were present. The professed object of the meeting was to promote friendly feelings between those of different beliefs. The speakers, as was natural, emphasised the similarities and minimised the differences between the religions represented. Many of the addresses were permeated with nationalistic ideas. A prominent Christian pastor said: "At the present time the prevailing spirit in Japan is in favour of nationalism, and I take it that the object of this meeting is to adapt religion to this condition, to intensify the nationalistic spirit, and by showing that it is endorsed by the teaching of our creeds, to render those creeds a power in the world." Other speeches were of a similar tenor. Some Christian newspapers spoke of the meeting as a proof that Christianity had won for itself a place where other religions were forced to recognise it as on an equal footing with themselves. Many believers, however, regarded the meeting with little favour, considering it an outcome of the movement that was weakening the faith and zeal of many of the Christians by minimising fundamental doctrines.

It will be remembered that several Christians had been serving as moral instructors in the prisons of the Hokkaido. A change in administration brought in a superintendent strongly prejudiced against Christianity, who soon adopted such measures as made the instructors feel that it was unwise for them to remain. Some of them, however, found other ways in which they could labour for the criminal classes. The pioneer in the work for prisoners had been Mr. Hara Taneaki. He continued to publish for the benefit of convicts a magazine that was admitted into many prisons of the land. He also sent it to many discharged criminals, especially to those whom he had known in the prisons. At a later date he established in Tokyo a temporary home for ex-prisoners, and in other ways he did much to help this class of men.

The Hokkaido was being gradually occupied by settlers moving thither from the main island. In some cases, companies of Christians united in founding colonies. Rev. W. R. Andrews, of the Church Missionary Society, in 1898 thus described the condition of one of these villages whose very name showed the faith of its settlers:

"Emmanuel Mura is a settlement where there are sixty Christians. Of these, twenty belong to the Seikokwai \(Native Episcopal Church\) and the rest to the Congregational Church. The Seikokwai Christians have their own little church building, having erected it last year, mostly with their own hands. Sunday is well kept in this village; no one thinks of doing any work All get up later, don their best clothes, and come to church for service at ten, and stay in church till twelve or one. The service proper lasts an hour, but religious talk, etc., keeps them afterwards. The Sunday-school, too, is generally going on while the adults are having their talk. In the evening there is another service. I was told that, however fine the day, no one would ever go out into the fields for work."

In November of the same year, the present writer spent a Sunday with the Congregationalists of this village. The meeting was held in the cabin of one of the settlers, a rough building about thirty by fifteen feet in size, made of reeds bound to a framework of poles. The wind, rain, and sleet found easy access on every side. In the centre of the hut was a square fireplace, the fire being built on the ground. The fuel consisted of split logs about three feet long. One end of these blazed in the centre of the fireplace, and as the logs burned away they were gradually pushed up towards the flame, new ones being added from time to time. On three sides of the fireplace were the boards that covered one-half of the floor-space, the rest being the bare ground. There was no chimney and no opening in the roof except the crevices between the reeds with which it was thatched. In moments of calm, the smoke rose quietly upward to where the poles and reeds had been coloured a glossy, oily black from the accumulations of former years; but every few moments a puff of wind would send the smoke into the faces of those that sat about the fire. The colonists paid little attention to this beyond squinting up their eyes when the smoke was thicker than usual, but the visitor found it best to carry on the conversation with closed eyes, and when the time came for him to preach he became in truth a weeping prophet. The people themselves were not so rough as their surroundings. Their conversation showed them to be thoughtful persons, and some of them had received a good education. One shelf in the hut was heavily laden with books, most of them being of a solid character. These Congregationalists of the Hokkaido might well remind the visitor of those that colonised New England. The eastern boundary of their settlement was marked by a post inscribed: "Love never faileth," and the western by one on which was written: "The truth shall make you free."

Even in those sections of the country that had been brought into the closest relations with foreigners, the old feeling of bitter opposition to Christianity had not wholly passed away. The Southern Baptist Mission opened a new station in Nagasaki. At the first meeting a large crowd gathered about the doors to make a disturbance. The most abusive language was used so vociferously that even those close to the preacher could not hear what he said. It seemed so useless to continue the meeting that it was brought to a close and the doors were shut. There had been such threats of personal violence that there was fear of what might happen if another attempt should be made to open the preaching-place, A meeting was, however, advertised for a few evenings later. Hardly had it begun before an old man came in, and after making a profound bow took his seat upon the floor. He was followed by others until the room was nearly full. Although a crowd gathered before the house, there was no disturbance. The reason for this was learned at the close of the meeting when the old man introduced himself as the chief officer of the ward, and apologised for the previous disturbance.

Among the visitors that spent only a short time in Japan, perhaps none exerted a more beneficent influence than John R. Mott, Secretary of the World's Student Christian Federation, Reaching the country in November, 1896, he visited forty-two schools, and in all of them made a deep impression upon the students. At Tokyo, twelve hundred students of the Imperial University listened to his addresses, and eleven hundred young men were present at a meeting held in Kyoto. Many of the meetings took the form of evangelistic services with after-meetings, in which the way of salvation through Christ was carefully taught to those who remained. The eleven existing College Young Men's Christian Associations were greatly strengthened, and new ones that were organised increased the number to twenty-eight. About one-half were in other than the Christian schools. In January, 1897, their delegates met in Tokyo and formed a Union of the Student Young Men's Christian Associations of Japan, which the next summer was admitted to the World's Student Federation.

The number of missions was increased by the coming in November, 1896, of Elder W. C. Granger, the first representative of the Seventh-day Adventists. Elder Granger died in 1899, but by that time others had come to continue the work of this mission.

Several events occurring in 1897 brought up the old questions concerning the possibility of Christians being loyal to the Emperor. Some of them gave rise to considerable discussion in the newspapers. A student was expelled from the Normal School in Yamaguchi because of a criticism he was said to have made upon the Imperial Rescript, The persecution was begun by his fellow-students, who presented the following charges against him:

"1. He says that God is superior to His Majesty the Emperor.

"2. He tries to change the Imperial Rescript so as to make it accord with his own beliefs.

"3. He reads the Bible more than his text-books.

"4. He said that after his conversion to Christianity he became more desirous than before to enter the Normal School.

"5. He talked to Sunday school children in the summer vacation.

"6. He said that he was under great responsibility to lead others to the true religion."

More attention was drawn to a case occurring in the Normal School of Niigata, Every year two of its graduates were sent to the High Normal School in Tokyo. Nominally the choice of the persons to be sent rested with the prefectural Governor, who was supposed to base the appointment upon the examination papers of candidates; but in reality the principal of the school decided the matter. The graduate that passed the best examination in 1897 was a Christian. The principal refused to appoint him, giving as a reason that Christianity was contrary to the Imperial Rescript, and hence, one holding that religion ought not to receive the honour in question. Several members of the faculty protested against the decision. The discussion soon found its way into the newspapers of Niigata; one upholding the principal, while two condemned his action. The press in other parts of the country also published articles upon the matter. Finally, at a meeting held in the school, the Governor made an address in which he rebuked the principal and declared that there was nothing antagonistic between Christianity and the Rescript. He said that, since the Constitution guaranteed religious liberty, a man's belief should not affect his promotion, which ought to he based on ability alone. The principal's appointee had already begun his studies in Tokyo, so it seemed to the Governor that it would be unwise to recall him; but he gave assurance that the Christian could have the appointment the next year, and at once promoted him to a much better school than the one in which he had begun to teach.

A movement that attracted considerable attention because of the University professors and other scholars who were its leaders aimed at a revival of Shinto. A magazine entitled *Nihon Shugi* \(Japanese Principles\) was published, and the movement was popularly known by the same name. The writers contended that Japan was in danger of losing her national characteristics by wholesale borrowing from foreign countries, that an attempt must be made to arouse the nationalistic sentiments of the masses, and that the best way to do this would be by reviving the worship of the ancient gods. All Japanese Christians were challenged to give plain answers to the following questions:

"1. Can the worship of His Sacred Majesty the Emperor, which every loyal Japanese performs, be reconciled with the worship of God and Christ by Christians?

"2. Can the existence of authorities that are quite independent of the Japanese State, such as God, Christ, the Bible, the Pope, the Head of the Greek Church \(the Czar\), be regarded as harmless?

"3, Can a Japanese who is a faithful servant of Christ be regarded as at the same time a faithful servant of the Emperor and a true friend of His Majesty's faithful subjects? Or, to put the question in another way, is our Emperor to follow in the wake of Western emperors and to pray: 'Son of God, have mercy upon me'?

"4. Can the Christian convert answer the above questions in a manner that will satisfy our reason?"

The Christian papers ridiculed these questions as showing that loud professions of loyalty were being used as a device to uphold a weak cause. The movement, though at first pushed with considerable vigour, soon passed from notice without having presented any formidable obstacle to the progress of Christianity.

Much began to be written about the same time by Buddhists concerning the dangers that might come to their religion when in 1899, according to the revised treaties, foreigners would be permitted to reside in any part of the country. It seemed to be the common opinion in Japan that large numbers of Europeans and Americans would hasten to avail themselves of the new privileges. A Buddhist magazine collected opinions from other periodicals of the same faith, and thus summarised them:

"I. Mixed residence will help Christianity and prove disadvantageous to Buddhism for:

"1. Christianity will gain new energy.

"2. Buddhism is like a body without a soul.

II. The prosperity of Christianity will prevent the unity of the people:

"1. Because of collision of feeling between Buddhism and Christianity.

"2. Because of the close relations of Christianity with foreign nations.

"3. Because Christians do not place much importance upon the state.

"III. Ecclesiastical police regulations should be strictly enforced.

"IV. The establishment of religious institutions should require the approval of the Government.

"V. Labourers should not be neglected by religious teachers.

"VI. Buddhists should take advantage of education for the discipline of their minds.

"VII. Rolls of parishioners should be prepared."

In the Church of Christ in Japan \(Presbyterian\) the question of the relation between the presbyteries and the foreign missions was vigorously discussed. The missions associated with this church gave financial aid to the evangelistic efforts of the presbyteries. In addition to this some missions had such work of their own, paying wholly or in part the salaries of evangelists, who were therefore under the direction of the missions concerned. This was displeasing to many of the Japanese, who wished all such work to be brought under the direction of presbyteries, and to have these entrusted with all funds used in this way. In July, 1897, the Synod, after hearing the report of a committee which declared that it had not found "a single case of proper co-operation," passed a resolution whose preamble defined a cooperating mission as one "that plans and executes all its evangelistic operations through a committee composed of equal numbers of the representatives of a mission working within the bounds of a presbytery of the Church of Christ in Japan, and of members of said presbytery." The position of the Japanese is more fully expressed in the following words of Rev, Oshikawa Masayoshi, one of their leaders:

"Our desire is to control all evangelistic work under these proposed co-operating committees. My opinion and that of others is that the work of missions independent of presbyteries is hostile to the genuine work of the presbytery and the Church. It tends to create a missionary party composed of men of inferior class who obey the missionary and have a foreign, exotic character."

Another person said:

"This is no longer the time for missionaries to control, but they and the boards should stand off and let the Japanese control The old slavish time must end and the Japanese Church established by the Christians of America must be followed, not

This last quotation shows one of the difficulties that has attended attempts at what from an Occidental standpoint would be considered co-operation. The Japanese have had but little idea of the association of partners with equal rights. In business matters one member of the firm was recognised as its head and all others were subordinate to him. He expected that his plans would be followed, even though the majority might not think his policy the best. If dissatisfaction grew too strong, either the head partner withdrew or the whole partnership came to an end. The same method prevailed in political matters; the parties being made up of those that followed such leaders as Ito, Itagaki, Okuma, etc., rather than of those whose political views were similar. To the Japanese Christians it seemed as though in their relations with the missionaries they must be either servants or masters; that one side must acknowledge the pre-eminence of the other. Hence, it is not strange that with the increase of the nationalistic spirit the Japanese desired to make it evident that they were not controlled by the foreigners, and that everything connected in any way with their church was fully under its authority. Where the experiment of having joint committees composed of equal numbers of Japanese and foreigners was tried, it was usually found that the latter must always yield to the views of the former, or else find themselves the object of much ill-feeling, which sometimes led to efforts for undermining their work and influence.

To the missionaries it did not seem advisable to put everything out of their own hands at so early a date. They feared that the interest of the Japanese in some features of the work would lead them to neglect others of equal importance. Moreover, the placing of a large sum of money coming from foreign sources in the hands of committees such as were proposed seemed inadvisable, at least until the raising of larger amounts by the Japanese Church than it was then contributing should increase the sense of responsibility for choosing men well fitted to administer the funds. Accordingly the Council of Co-operating Missions declared its opinion that co-operation is "best carried out where the Japanese Church in its Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synod directs all ecclesiastical matters, availing itself of the counsels and assistance of missions or missionaries as occcasion arises; while the missions direct their own educational, evangelistic, and other missionary operations, availing themselves, likewise, of whatever counsel and assistance they may be able to obtain from their brethren in the Japanese Church." This decision was far from pleasing to the Japanese leaders, and though open discussion of the question ceased for a while, it was actively renewed a few years later.

In considering this question of co-operation the Council was helped by the advice of Mr. Robert E. Speer, a secretary of the \(Northern\) Presbyterian Board of Missions, who was spending a short time in japan. Mr. Speer also rendered valuable aid to the missionary work in general by addresses made in several cities. Another visitor of the year was Rev. J. H. Barrows, D.D., who, as President of the World's Parliament of Religions, held at the Columbian Exhibition, had become well known to Buddhists and Shintoists as well as to Christians. Large audiences listened to his lectures, some of which were afterwards published.

In 1898 the attention of Christians and of the general public was drawn in an increasing degree to the course of events in the Doshisha. We have already seen that in the preceding year Biblical instruction had been abolished from its Ordinary Middle School and that in its graduation and other public exercises all religious features were discontinued. In order to make plain what was now done, it is necessary to look at the first chapter of the Constitution of the Doshisha, which was as follows:

"chapter 1.-fundamental principles.

"1. This Company is established to promote moral and intellectual education in close union.

"2. The name of the Company is *The Doshisha.* All schools of the Company must have *Doshisha* as a part of their name, and this Constitution applies to them all.

"3. Christianity is the foundation of the moral education promoted by this Company.

"4, This Company is located at Kyoto.

"5. The principal of the permanent funds of the Company is not to be used under any circumstances.

"6. The above five articles are unchangeable,"

Another article of the Constitution required the Trustees to promise that they would "labour for the interests of the Company in accordance with its Fundamental Principles."

The confidence that this Constitution inspired in the minds of foreign friends of the Doshisha had made them willing to pursue the plan, which, at least on so large a scale, was unprecedented in the history of missions, of placing large sums of money for building and endowment in the hands of the natives of the country for whose benefit they were intended. It was a bold experiment. Had it worked satisfactorily, it would have had great influence on mission policy in Japan and other lands; but the course pursued by the Trustees alienated the sympathies of those who considered that their gifts had been misused, and excited the condemnation of others who felt that injustice had been done. Few Japanese upheld the action of the Trustees; and even opponents of Christianity censured them, perhaps being glad of this opportunity to declare that Christian leaders were guilty of grave dishonesty.

When the Trustees applied to the Government for privileges like those enjoyed by public schools and by a few private schools of the same grade, the officials of the Educational Department said it would be impossible to grant the request to a school that was avowedly religious; but that, if this defect could be remedied, the desired privilege would be given. The Trustees found a shrewd way in which to gain the tempting prize thus held out to them. As with Achilles, the weak point in the First Chapter of the Constitution was in its heel. It will be noticed that the Sixth Article declared the preceding five to be unchangeable. In February, 1898, it was voted to *strike out this Sixth Article,* thus leaving the others at the mercy of the Trustees. Their purpose was then accomplished by dropping from the Second Article the words: "And this Constitution applies to them all." This allowed what the President of the Doshisha called "taking down the Christian sign" by making the Third Article no longer applicable to the departments known as the Middle School, the College, the School of Law and Economics, and the Scientific School; while it was still in force with the remnant of the Theological School, which since the withdrawal of missionary teachers had been reduced to five students.

It should be said that this action was brought about by a company of men deeply imbued with the nationalistic spirit and an extremely liberal theology. Of the ten Trustees that were present when the vote was taken, five had served less than a year, and some of the others had not for a long time taken any active interest in the Doshisha. One Trustee, who had not been present at the meeting, immediately resigned because unwilling to countenance such action, while another is said to have sent a letter of protest. The acquiescence of some others was owing to that characteristic of the Japanese which, as already noticed, gives the responsibility for the conduct of a firm or company to the one that is recognised as its head. They considered that loyalty to the President required that they allow him to carry out his own policy without let or hindrance. The only alternatives would be the deposition of the President or their own resignation, and they were not ready to take either of these steps. Hence in the discussion that followed they felt compelled to defend the action that had been taken or at least not to express any dissatisfaction with it.

An outburst of indignation followed the announcement of what had been done. In several cities the alumni of the school met and passed resolutions in which they called upon the Trustees either to rescind their action or to resign. The alumni of one city, however, voted in their favour. Some local conferences of the Kumi-ai Churches expressed strong disapproval, and soon afterwards the General Conference of all these churches passed the following resolutions:

"1. That the recent action of the Doshisha Trustees in changing the Constitution was immoral.

"2. That the Kumi-ai Churches admonish the Trustees to restore the Constitution to its original form."

The leading newspapers abounded with editorials and contributed articles concerning the Doshisha, nearly all of them condemning the action of the Trustees, These, in trying to propitiate public opinion, offered various explanations of their deed. They asserted that whatever obligations there might be to foreign donors of funds to the school, these must yield precedence to what was due to Japan itself. Considerable money had come from Japanese who had no interest in Christianity, and in future years more and more dependence must be placed upon such support. The views of the missionaries ought no longer to control. The time had come for deciding whether the Doshisha was a Japanese or a foreign institution. It was folly to speak of an unchangeable constitution. Even the constitutions of great nations are amended from time to time, and that of a school must be adapted to changing circumstances. Though the Christian sign had been taken down, the reality remained. Had not the Constitution been amended, there would have been left little except the sign, for it would have been impossible to retain many students. The teachers were now exerting a religious influence over the pupils. On Sundays there were preaching services and Bible classes for those that wished to attend them. Thus the real Christian character of the school was retained and was even stronger than before. Was it not better to be exerting Christian influence over a large number of young men than to have empty buildings, even though the latter displayed the sign, "This is a Christian institution"?

In regard to these last arguments it must be said that in the opinion of most persons the general religious and moral condition of the school did not justify the assertion that Christian influences were strong. Some said, also, that if the statements made by the Trustees when trying to propitiate Christian opinion were correct, then the promise made to the Educational Department was being violated. Thus the *Japan Mail* said: "Either the pledge has not been kept in good faith, or the paramount object of the school has been abandoned. Either the Japanese authorities are the victims of deception or the American contributors have been deceived."

Most of the foreign contributions to the Doshisha had either been given directly by the American Board or obtained through its influence. Accordingly this society felt that it ought to do all in its power to prevent such marked perversion of funds. It sent out as its legal representative, Hon. N. W. McIvor, who had at a former period been the United States Consul General in Japan. The reputation that he had gained in his term of office, and his acquaintance with prominent men, gave him special fitness for a task in which he showed great skill and tact. Besides his efforts to make the Trustees see the mistake they had made, he enlisted the interest of some high officials in the case. Some of these were men who had highly esteemed Dr. Neesima and contributed to the fund that he collected for the Doshisha. Mr. Mc-Ivor was able to show them that the nation itself was likely to suffer from what had occurred. Foreigners were adducing the case of the Doshisha as a proof that the Japanese were not to be trusted in financial matters. In one case a commercial company that tried to raise funds in America had been met with the objection that after what had taken place in Kyoto no one could have faith in the Japanese. Courteously, but firmly, Mr. Mc Ivor said that, unless a satisfactory settlement could be made in some other way, he should feel compelled to bring the matter into the courts. He was aware that the condition of Japanese law rendered the prospect of success very dubious; but that would not prevent him from pushing the matter, if necessary, to the Supreme Court. The foreign merchants, who had been almost unanimously opposed to the new treaties that put their interests under Japanese law, were urging Mr. McIvor to do this, for they thought that thus their own contention that the laws were defective would be proved to the world. Count Okuma, who was then Prime Minister, had before Mr. McIvor's coming, expressed disapproval of the Trustees, and it was evident to him as to others that it would be very unfortunate for the reputation of Japan to have the case made so prominent. A judgment in favour of the Trustees would be more disastrous than one against them, since it would show that Japanese law did not provide sufficient security for entrusted funds. Hopes were entertained that the Department of Education would grant religious freedom to private schools, and that this would help to bring about a satisfactory arrangement with the Trustees; but just then the Ministry went out of office. Count Okuma, however, continued to take an active interest in the affairs of the Doshisha and helped in bringing about a settlement. In December the Trustees decided to resign, and another board was elected that adopted a new Constitution, embodying the principles of the original one. It must be said in praise of the resigning Trustees that in the end they acted in a most courteous manner, providing a way by which the transfer to their successors was made easy.\*

One of the new Trustees of the Doshisha was Rev. Tomeoka Kosuke, a graduate of the Theological Department, who had formerly been one of the Christian teachers of morals employed in the prisons of the Hokkaido. Afterwards he had spent two years in the United States. For several months he was in the Reformatory at Concord, Massachusetts, living for the most part the life of the prisoners themselves, though retaining his liberty. He ate their food, laboured with them in the workshops, and in other ways gained a clear idea of the practical working of the institution. He also spent six months in the office of the Secretary of the New York Prison Association. By the time that he returned to Japan, a change of officials had put an end to the work of Christian teachers in the Hokkaido prisons. Mr. Tomeoka therefore became the pastor of a church in Tokyo, and the editor of a Christian paper. About the beginning of 1898 the newly appointed warden of the Sugamo Prison in Tokyo, found that there were connected with it three Buddhist priests whose duties consisted in the reading of prayers and the preaching of sermons. He decided to dismiss two of these and to appoint Mr. Tomeoka as an instructor in morals. As soon as this became known, the temple to which the priests belonged said that it would not allow the last one to remain and share his duties with the teacher of a foreign faith. At the same time a high official of the sect addressed a letter to the Minister of Home Affairs, inquring whether, in view of the fact that Buddhism was the publicly recognised religion of Japan, while Christianity was merely a private belief adopted by individuals, the Minister approved of the ignoring of this distinction at Sugamo and the placing of both religions upon the same footing. Other temples and sects joined in remonstrating against what had been done; and the Buddhist Young Men's Association issued a circular letter threatening that, if the authorities did not withdraw the Christian teacher, a violent agitation would be begun against the Government. The Buddhists won a partial victory, for the warden was removed to another prison. It was said at the time that Mr. Tomeoka, following a suggestion from the Department of Home Affairs, given through the Chief of Police, sent in his resignation. However that may have been, he continued for some time to act as teacher in the prison, and after a while was made an instructor in the School for Prison Officials, a position in which he was able to accomplish much for prison reform, while he also had time to open before long a school for the reform of wayward children. In connection with this last he afterwards had a training-school for officials who were to engage in reformatory work.

It will be noticed that in the remonstrance against Mr. Tomeoka's appointment Buddhism was spoken of in terms that virtually asserted its claim to be considered the state religion; and about that time there began an agitation in favour of its receiving acknowledgment as such. A club was formed whose membership was open to those belonging to any Buddhist sect, or, "whose hearts have felt the influence of Buddhism." Among its objects were; "To induce the Government to recognise Buddhism publicly; to urge the Government to proclaim clearly and speedily the policy it intends to pursue towards religion; to persuade the Government to take the publicly recognised faith under its protection, subjecting it at the same time to strict supervision; and to work for the spread of Buddhism, thrusting aside every one, whether official or layman, who attempts to place obstacles in the path." A representation was sent to the next Parliament urging such action as would insure that in future only such persons as were followers of the state religion should be appointed in the prisons as instructors in morals.

The Unitarian Mission stood so apart from the others that it may be well to learn, by an extract from a report made in 1898, how it estimated the results of its efforts:

"The Unitarian Mission has been a unique experiment, and in so far as it has been faithful to its original purpose, it has achieved an almost dramatic success. In its inception it was a frank departure from the customary aim and method of foreign missionary work. It was commissioned 'not to convert but to confer.' The great Christian missionary societies have always gone to work in a spirit of patronage. They have regarded non-Christian people as the Hebrew prophets regarded the idolators of Edom and Moab. They have taken literally the Scriptural injunction, 'Go preach, to all nations repentance.' Our Mission has proclaimed a new missionary motive. It has sought to discover the good in all existing forms of faith. It has recognised the underlying sympathy in all religions, and emphasised unities rather than diversities. It has wrought in the spirit of Paul in his great missionary speech at Athens, proclaiming the unknown God already ignorantly worshipped, using the existing symbols and the sayings of local poets to reinforce the new message. Our Mission has not tried to free men from one superstition by inviting them into another superstition. It has refrained from arrogance and taunt of error, but with respect for all that is good in the Japanese systems of thought and faith, it has invited friendly conference and co-operation, and acquainted thinking Japanese with the adaptability of liberal Christianity to the spiritual needs of the lusty empire. If it has done no more than to show that Christianity also means kindliness, courtesy, and sympathy toward a foreign people and faith, it has served a good purpose; but besides this it has done a work of great practical value and attracted the attention, sometimes friendly and sometimes hostile, of many of the best minds in Japan. The expense of conducting this unique experiment has decreased more rapidly than is usually the case with our home missionary work Five years ago the Japan Mission cost over $10,000 annually; last year, without suffering any appreciable loss in efficiency, it cost a little more than half that sum; next year its activities will be entirely supported by the income of the Hayward fund, which, under the terms of the bequest, must be spent for foreign missions, the only charge upon the unrestricted income of the Association being the salary of the director."

The new treaties made with Western nations permitted the citizens of those countries to travel and reside in any part of Japan after July, 1899. Many of the Japanese had exaggerated ideas about the number of persons that would avail themselves of this privilege. The Buddhists became very much excited over the dangers that confronted them in the coming of so many persons not of their religion. Buddhist magazines abounded with appeals to the people not to be led away by the foreigners. In at least one section of the country prominent priests visited all the cities and towns to hold "preparation meetings" in anticipation of the coming invasion. The burden of the speeches was "Resist the foreign religion," and an old custom was revived requiring that a man who moved into a community should present a document from a temple in his former residence certifying that he was not a follower of the "evil way."

The new conditions did indeed favour the entrance of missionaries into the interior, for residence there was no longer conditioned on their being in the employ of Japanese. The doing away with the necessity for passports permitting travel seemed like the removal of fetters that had impeded freedom of movement. In reality, most of the annoyances connected with the passports had been ended by the Government as soon as the revised treaties were signed \(1894\) and without waiting for the time when they came into effect.

In August, 1899, the Government issued regulations concerning private schools. One article declared that "A private school, unless it is qualified to serve as a substitute for a public school, shall not have the right to admit a child of school-going age who has not discharged his educational obligations." This, as at first interpreted, would have led to the exclusion from Christian schools of all children under fourteen years of age. As a consequence, a number of primary schools were discontinued. After many interviews with officials, some others were allowed to continue under certain conditions.

More troublesome was the following "Instruction" issued by the Educational Department on the same day with the above regulations: "It being essential from the point of view of educational administration that general education should be independent of religion, religious instruction must not be given or religious ceremonies performed at Government Schools, Public Schools, or schools whose curricula are regulated by provisions of law, even outside the regular course of instruction."

Many Christian schools had found it desirable to secure recognition from the Department of Education, as this made it possible for their graduates to enter the national colleges and universities, and in some cases for their pupils to postpone the time of military service. All this must now be given up, or else religious teaching and worship must be discontinued. A committee of Japanese and foreigners, representing the leading Christian schools, presented a memorial to the Minister of Education, and held interviews with prominent men. The secular press for the most part condemned the action of the Department. The regulations for private schools were soon so far relaxed that so-called "special schools" of primary grade could obtain licenses and were given full liberty for religious teaching. It was also decided that the "Instructions" should be so interpreted that, by considering the dormitories as distinct from the schools, religious instruction could be given in the former. This was so unsatisfactory to most of the higher institutions that they gave up their connection with the national system.

It should be noticed that the regulations affected Buddhist as well as Christian schools. It was the policy of the Government to favour a complete divorce between education and religion. Another evidence of the Government's desire to treat all religions alike was shown in a notification that was issued from the Home Department to persons engaged in religious propagandism. It prescribed rules to be observed by those seeking permission from local officials to erect "a house for religious uses, a church, a lecture-hall, or a preaching-place." This was equivalent to putting Christianity on a basis similar to that on which other religions stood, and in accordance with this policy the Government presented to Parliament a bill for the regulation of religions, which, as we shall see, gave great offence to Buddhists.

The *Fukuin Maru* \(Gospel Ship\), a schooner of sixty-eight tons register that had been presented by a Scotch ship-owner to the American Baptist Missionary Union, was dedicated September 13, 1899, and at once set forth under the charge of Captain Luke W. Bickel to carry the Gospel message to the many islands scattered through the Inland Sea. It soon proved itself an efficient instrument for reaching many communities whose separation from the main land had hitherto prevented their evangelisation, A report that apparently covers a period of not more than three or four months, tells of visits to thirteen islands, and says;

"These islands contain a population of 110,000 souls distributed among 123 towns and villages, 113 of which we have been able to reach by tract distributing, small talks, and public meetings. In these places we have held upward of fifty prearranged public meetings with an attendance of 150 to 500 per meeting. In addition, about sixty small meetings in farm yards, on the beach, in small factories, have been held with an attendance of about fifteen to fifty at a meeting. . . . Among these 113 places we have found one in which, on one occasion, a Gospel address has been given. We have found one believer and heard of one more. We have met certainly not more than fifty persons among the thousands with whom we have come in personal contact who have ever heard a Gospel address or received a tract. Out of the thirteen islands we have reached, eleven were last visited by a foreigner in 1869, when the islands were temporarily surveyed."\*

As has already been noted, Japan had tried to regulate the social evil by licensing courtesans and houses of ill-fame. New regulations, issued in 1896, required that "a woman who wishes to become a courtesan must send in a written petition for license to the police station having jurisdiction." This petition was to be accompanied by "a document of consent signed and sealed by the applicant's father or mother, or by her nearest relative if she is an orphan. The paper must state the period of service contracted for and the amount of money received as a loan."

Although this made the act nominally that of the girl herself, and though the money received from the brothel keeper was styled a loan to be paid back from her earnings, the reality was that she was sold by her parents, or other relatives, into the most debasing slavery. Moreover, while a term of service was mentioned in the document, the girls were kept in debt so that their slavery continued so long as they were profitable to their owners.

We have recorded the agitation that for a while had beers vigorously conducted against this system by the Christians. Unfortunately the movement was shortlived, and in only two prefectures was the licensing system abolished. In 1899 a new movement in a city that was a stronghold of the evil began to attract attention. Rev. U. G. Murphy, of the Methodist Protestant Mission, who resided in Nagoya, had noticed in the local papers several items that told of prostitutes who had attempted to escape from their masters, but had been captured and returned by the police. Enquiry showed him that it was almost impossible for a girl to obtain her freedom, however much she might detest the life that she was leading. He was not able to find a single case where the girl had been able to pay her debts, and it was considered that so long as anything was due she was bound by contract to continue the business.. The prefectural laws recognised the validity of the contracts by providing that a girl could not go away until her master gave consent. While still looking up these facts, Mr. Murphy's attention was accidentally called to the following sections of the new civil code of 1898:

"Majority is attained at twenty years of age."

"Legal acts having for their object that which is contrary to public order or morality are invalid."

It was decided to test the possibility of securing through these articles a decision in favour of prostitutes who wished to escape. With considerable care a girl was selected who sent to the police a notification that she wished to cease business from a certain date. The police found an excuse for not receiving it, and in later proceedings they put various obstacles in the way of the reformers. When an appeal was made to the courts, the keepers of the brothels united in choosing a committee to oppose the girl's release. The powerful influence of the Buddhist temples—for Nagoya was a stronghold of Buddhism as of vice—was enlisted on their side. When the court ordered that the girl be set at liberty, the police refused to enforce the order, since, though based on national laws, it was contrary to local regulations; and their position was approved by the Governor of the prefecture. While the attention of the Central Government was being called to this strange action, further proceedings were made impossible by the poor girl's yielding to a deceptive compromise proposed by the keeper.

Soon after this a girl ran away from Nara and sought refuge in the house of a pastor in Nagoya. One day, when she was at Mr. Murphy's house to meet persons interested in her case, she was kidnapped and forced into a *jinrikisha,* which with one man to pull and two to push it, hurried away. When Mr. Murphy was called, he rushed out of the house as he was, bareheaded and with slippered feet, jumped on a bicycle, and gave chase. He soon caught up with the *jinrikisha*, but was unable to get possession of the girl because of eight or ten men who opposed him. Notwithstanding the attempt of the men to hold him back, he followed on until he came to a policeman, who took the whole party to the police station. The girl was then allowed to return with Mr. Murphy. Afterwards she was sentenced to ten days' imprisonment for running away from her keeper, a sentence that on appeal was reduced to a fine of one *yen*, Her former master thought it best not to make further trouble and the girl thus obtained her freedom.

Other cases soon followed. The newspapers throughout the country began to discuss the questions involved. The *Mainichi Shimbun,* one of the leading journals of Tokyo, became an earnest advocate for the removal of restrictions upon prostitutes who wished to obtain their freedom, and its editor in other ways took an active part in the campaign that followed. The agitation reached its height in 1900. The Supreme Court decided that, if local regulations made the brothel-keeper's signature necessary to a prostitute's declaration of her desire to leave him, he must accede to her demand that he affix it. In some cases mobs prevented the escape of girls or assailed those that tried to help them. A Japanese pastor in Shizuoka was for this reason severely beaten, and some blows fell upon a missionary who tried to shield him. Two homes for the reception of the refugees were opened. One was under the care of the Salvation Army, which, in order to let the girls of Tokyo know what was being done in their behalf, sent into the prostitute quarters a detachment of its followers to distribute tracts and to urge all who wished to lead a better life to come to the headquarters of the Army. The brothel-keepers hired a company of roughs, who attacked these crusaders and wounded some of them. Persons connected with newspapers were also assaulted, so that it was said to be dangerous for any person who looked as though he might be a newspaper correspondent or a Salvationist to go into those sections of the city. The office of a paper that had favoured the liberation movement was attacked by a mob that destroyed much of its property. Some who had been patrons of the brothels had their consciences quickened or their fears aroused; for it is said that for a time there was an average decrease of over two thousand *per noctem* in the number of visitors to the prostitute quarters of Tokyo.

The intervention of the Plome Department was sought by both the reformers and their opponents, the victory finally resting with the former. A set of regulations was issued by which all it was necessary for a girl to do was to make a statement, written or verbal, to the police that she wished to cease from her trade. In the case of minors, the parents or guardians might make the request, even against the wishes of the girls, and they must then be set free. Severe penalties were decreed for any interference with the liberty of the girls. Statistics that were official in forty-one out of forty-seven prefectures, showed the following changes in the number of licensed prostitutes.  



1896
> > > 39,097
1897
> > > 47,055  \(20 per cent. increase\)
1898
> > > 50,553  \(7.7 " " "\)
1899
> > > 52,274  \(3 " " "\)
1901
> > > 40,195  \(23 " " decrease\)
The statistics for 1900 were not collated. Doubtless various causes combined to produce the change shown in 1901; but prominent among them must be those connected with the agitation and with the new regulations. It must be remembered that the figures given above include only the licensed prostitutes. In addition, there were about 30,000 *geisha,* many of whom differed but little from those of the other class. There were also many unlicensed prostitutes. Statements concerning their probable numbers have greatly varied, prejudices in favour of the licensing system or against it having doubtless affected the estimates. It was asserted by many that the freeing of the courtesans would increase the amount of immorality; but the arrests for illegal prostitution showed a decrease of twenty per cent, from 1899 to 1901. Doubtless many of the unlicensed prostitutes were held by masters under much the same system as were those that were licensed; and the knowledge of what was being done by the latter class encouraged the former to break away.

It is noteworthy that, as in the former movement against the licensing system, most of the Buddhist papers and leaders set themselves against the reformers. An example of this was seen in a grand campaign in behalf of Buddhism that was conducted in some of the provinces by "The Great Association for Honouring the Emperor and Preserving Buddhism," whose organisation has previously been mentioned. Interspersed among addresses explaining Buddhist doctrines and denouncing Christianity were others bearing such titles as "The Sinfulness of the Salvation Army's Crusade against Licensed Prostitution," "Is the Salvation Army a Lantern-carrier \[helper\] to Secret Prostitution" "The Immorality of Allowing Licensed Prostitutes freely to Stop their Business," etc. While such action might help to retain the favour of brothel-keepers, who in some places were liberal contributors to the temples, it did much to discredit Buddhism in the minds of those who desired the purification of public morals.

In 1900 the Buddhists were much excited over what was known as the "Bill concerning Religions," which the Government had proposed the preceding year to Parliament. This was based on the legislation found in some German states, and was framed in a liberal spirit. It placed Christianity on an equality with Buddhism and Shintoism. This was directly contrary to the movement inaugurated by a large section of Buddhists, who hoped to get their own system recognised as the state religion. In Tokyo, and other cities, mass-meetings were held to protest against the passage of the bill. Objection was made, not only because it put all religions on the same footing, but also because it lessened the authority of the main temples over their branches. This would make it more difficult for the former to raise funds from their subordinates. The Eastern Division of the great Shin sect, which was burdened by a large debt, was a leader in the agitation, while the Western Division supported the bill. It was commonly believed, and by one party within its own fold was openly charged, that the Eastern Division spent large sums of money in bribing members of the Upper House and so succeeded in preventing the passage of the bill.

The general tendency of thought seemed at this time to become more favourable to Christianity. This was in part because of the reproach that Buddhism was bringing upon itself by opposition to the Bill concerning Religions and to reform movements, and in part was due to a growing conviction that, at least for the common people, some religious belief was necessary in order to prevent moral deterioration. There was a marked advance in the circulation of the Scriptures; the number of Bibles, Testaments, and "portions" distributed in 1900, being 137,422 copies, an increase of 39,000 over that of the preceding year. Very few of these were given away. It may be noticed in passing that Japan was becoming a centre for the multiplication of copies of the Scriptures; editions in the Chinese, Korean, and Thibetan languages and in two dialects of the Philippine Islands, being printed at this time in Japan.

In the Japanese army, one hundred and fifty-five officers, or about three per cent, of the whole number, were known as Christians. In the navy, the two 12,500 ton battle-ships, the largest with one exception of those then in commission, were at the beginning of 1900 under the command of Christians, One of these, Rear Admiral Serata, died in the summer. He had for many years been known as an active Christian. When on shore duty in Tokyo, he had not only taught classes in the Sunday school, but he also had on Saturday afternoons in his own house, a class of young men, whom he instructed in Christian truth. He was President of the Tokyo Young Men's Christian Association. On naval cruises, when his vessel touched at different ports, he would go with other Christian officers to hunt up any church that could be found, and his public addresses given in such places often gave great encouragement to little companies of believers and called the attention of the citizens to a religion that they had hitherto thought beneath their notice. He was much interested in Biblical and theological studies. The Gospel of John had been his favourite book, and it is said that his knowledge of it was far beyond that of most preachers. When stationed at Weihaiwei at the close of the war with China, he gave much of his leisure to a study of Canon Gore's book on "The Incarnation of the Son of God." His funeral under the auspices of the Navy Department was conducted with Christian rites, the arrangements being given into the care of Vice-Admiral Uryu, a life-long friend and a fellow-Christian.

In January, 1900, a convention of those interested in Christian schools was held in Tokyo, one hundred and thirty-eight persons being present. The chief interest centred about the question of religious instruction in mission schools. The policy of the Educational Department was declared to be unjust and contrary to the spirit of the National Constitution. It was not very long, however, before the Department so changed the regulations that private schools which in the judgment of the Minister maintained a standard equal to that of a national "middle school" could obtain for their students a postponement of military service, while their graduates could be admitted to examination for the "higher schools" on the same terms as those of government institutions. Thus were done away the disabilities that had rested on those schools that, on account of religious instruction, were unable to affiliate themselves with the national system.

Some of the Christian Endeavour Societies organised after the visit of Rev. F. E. Clark, D.D., in 1892, had ceased to exist, and others manifested but little activity. A second visit of Dr. Clark in 1900 gave the movement renewed life and led to its more perfect organisation. Since then, the annual conventions of the national society have been more fully attended, and the monthly mazagine that serves as an official organ has by its increased circulation helped to make the local societies more effective.

In March, 1900, Rev. Clay MacCauley, D.D., who had for some time been the only representative of the Unitarian Mission, committed the work to the Japanese adherents and returned to America. In a farewell address, after contrasting the spirit of the Unitarians with that of others, he said:

"We are the first to leave the country on account of action taken by the Japanese. They have entered upon an autonomous commercial and practical life, and we have urged them to another life also autonomous—an autonomous religious life. And I think such a life growing out of the people themselves will be permanent because it is of the people and not from without, and that it will grow and prosper."\*

The income from a fund in America continued to be used for the sustenance of the work at Unity Hall, and the support of a Japanese superintendent. The organisation that had been effected was not considered a church, but rather an association of persons who, belonging to any church or to none, were united by similar sentiments and aspirations. Their interest was more in matters connected with social and ethical reforms than in those that were distinctively religious.

The Third General Conference of Protestant Missionaries in Japan was held October 24-31, 1900, in the hall of the Tokyo Young Men's Christian Association. Nearly four hundred missionaries residing in Japan were present, besides some fifty from China and other countries. Rev. J. D. Davis, D.D., was the Chairman; Rev. W. Andrews, Rev. W. Imbrie, D.D., and Rev. D. S. Spencer, being the Vice-Chairmen. In addition to papers and discussions by missionaries, Hon. Ando Taro spoke on the subject of temperance, Mr. Hara Taneaki concerning work for ex-convicts, and Hon. Shimada Saburo on the movement in favour of abolishing licensed prostitution. Among the resolutions of permanent interest were one recommending missionaries to co-operate with the Japanese in special evangelistic efforts to be made in connection with the opening of the twentieth century, one providing for the appointment of a committee to decide on a uniform translation of about one hundred of the most important hymns, and a series upon the subject of union and co-operation. As these last led to considerable discussion and to the appointment of an important committee, they may be quoted in full;

"1. This Conference of Missionaries assembled in the city of Tokyo proclaims its firm belief that all those who are one with Christ by faith are one body; and it calls upon all who love the Lord Jesus and His Church in sincerity and truth to pray and to labour for the full realisation of such corporate oneness as the Master Himself prayed for on that night in which He was betrayed.

"2. Whereas, while this Conference gratefully recognises the high degree of harmony and cordial co-operation which has marked the history of Protestant missions in Japan, it is at the same time convinced that the work of evangelisation is often retarded by an unhappy competition, especially in the smaller fields, and by the duplication of machinery which our present arrangements involve; therefore

"3. Resolved, that this Conference elect upon the nomination of the President and Vice-Presidents a promoting committee of ten whose duty it shall be to prepare a plan for the formation of a representative Standing Committee of the Missions, such plan to be submitted to the various missions for their approval and to go into operation as soon as approved by such a number of missions as include in their membership not less than two-thirds of the Protestant missionaries in Japan."

Great harmony prevailed throughout the Conference; but the discussions were full, frank, and earnest. A report of the proceedings was afterwards published with extensive supplements, the resulting volume being invaluable for those studying the history of Protestant missions in Japan, and for those who wish to know how the missionaries at the close of the nineteenth century looked upon the questions that were then claiming their attention.

The following are some of the important items in the statistics of Protestant missions for 1900:  



Married male missionaries
215 
Unmarried male missionaries
30 
Unmarried female missionaries
257 
Organised churches
416 
Of these wholly self-supporting
71 
Adults baptised or confirmed in the year.
3,195 
Children baptised
678 
Members of churches
43,273 
Day schools
74 
Pupils
5,111 
Boys' boarding schools
15 
Pupils
1,898 
Girls' boarding schools
44 
Pupils
2,962 
Theological schools
14 
Pupils
98 
Sunday schools
864 
Pupils
33,039 
Ordained Japanese ministers
306 
Unordained ministers and helpers \(male\)
518 
Bible-women
289 
Hospitals and dispensaries
14 
In-patients treated in year
2,268 
Out-patients treated in year
26,729 
Contributions of native churches for year
Yen 107,459 
**Footnotes**

\* The *Japan Weekly Mail,* July 19, 1850, gives an epitome of this article, which appeared in the *Rikugo Zasshi.*

\* A few months before his death he had been given the degree of LL.D. by Amherst College, his *alma mater.*

\* In 1904 Dr. Harris went again to Japan, having been appointed Bishop of the Methodist Church in Japan and Korea.

\* Rev. J. H. DeForest, D.D., in the New York *Independent,* March 8, 1894.

\* If this book has any reader fifty years from the date of its publication, he will probably think it strange that space should be granted to a paragraph that speaks only of such fellowship as followers of Christ would naturally be expected to have in remembrance of their one Lord; but in these dark days, though most Protestant denominations readily unite in communion services, there are some in which most of the clergy discourage such fellowship, it is the saddest of irony that the Lord's Supper, which should be the great symbol of union between all Christians, has become the point of the greatest separation, not only between the three great divisions of the Church, but at times between the sub-divisions of Protestantism.

\* *Japan Weekly Mail,* March 31, 1894.

\* Gladly would I omit from the record of the next few years many of the things that must be written concerning the Doshisha, and this the more gladly because most of those who differed concerning the policy of the institution were able after some years to unite again in its support; but while these desire so far as possible to let bygones be bygones, history does not permit the dead past to bury its dead, and it is necessary that events so greatly affecting Christian work in Japan should be duly narrated.

\* It is said that the paper as originally written contained the following clause, which the Government refused to accept because it seemed to provide for Christian prayer: "In these exercises we shall regard it as our duty to pray for divine help and heavenly blessing upon the Imperial House and upon the Nation."

\* Again I must express regret that these events could not have been passed over in silence. It has been necessary to speak plainly, or otherwise it would he impossible to explain why they attracted so much attention and why public opinion was so nearly unanimous in condemnation of what was done by the Trustees. I hope that my personal interest in the matter has not made this account of it unfair to any person.

\* *Japan Evangelist,* July, 1900.

\* *Japan Weekly Mail,* March 10, 1900.




