+++
title = "08 THE OPENING OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY 1901-1903"

+++





ALTHOUGH the system of dating years from the birth of Christ had not become common even among the Christians of Japan, so much was said in Western journals about the transition from the nineteenth to the twentieth century that the Japanese could not fail to be affected by the thought that a new chapter in the world's history was being opened. In Great Britain and America various forms of religious activity were inaugurated under the name of "twentieth century forward movements," and we have already seen that the Conference of Protestant Missionaries, held in Tokyo, had recommended co-operation with the Japanese Christians in special evangelistic efforts to be begun in 1901. A committee was chosen by the missionaries to join with one appointed by the Japanese Evangelical Alliance in making the necessary arrangements. While most of the churches and Christian workers united in the movement, those commonly known as "liberal" were excluded by the rules that the Alliance adopted. These rules led to considerable criticism, not only by those that held liberal views, but also by some others who thought it unwise to shut out any that were willing to join such efforts as were proposed. Some of the methods adopted were either new or had hitherto been used only by such organisations as the Salvation Army. It was necessary in the first place to prepare the Christians by arousing their zeal and securing their active participation in the movement; then public attention had to be secured and the people brought together that they might hear the Gospel. In the neighbourhood of the place where meetings were to be held, striking placards were posted to advertise the services. Notices of the meetings were inserted in the newspapers and special letters of invitation were sent to persons that were thought most open to Christian influences, Sometimes there was a house to house visitation. For an hour or two before a meeting was to commence, companies of believers marched through the streets, carrying banners and lanterns, singing Christian hymns, and distributing printed invitations to the meeting. The younger members of the church were the most active in these processions; but pastors, evangelists, missionaries, business men, and others did not consider it beneath their diginity to fall into the ranks and take a part in gathering an audience. Whether or not those critics were right who thought these methods led people of the better class to despise Christianity, and so did as much harm as good, it is certain that Christianity once more secured the attention which it had largely lost and that large audiences were gathered. Though some had feared that only a noisy rabble would be brought together, the audiences listened quietly to what was said and the meetings were seldom disturbed in any way. The addresses were usually simple and direct. Many preachers who had before delighted in giving learned dissertations upon themes that perhaps had but slight relations to Christ's teaching now found out the power that there is in the earnest and plain teaching of the Gospel, Near the close of each meeting, those that were willing to express a desire to learn more about the Christian religion were asked to sign papers giving their names and residences. These papers were distributed among the churches so that the persons might be visited in their homes. It was customary to have a second service for those that wished to remain after the large audience had been dismissed. It must be remembered that a large proportion of those brought into the meetings had hitherto heard little or nothing of Christianity, and so these second meetings were much different from those that are held after evangelistic services in Christian lands. Many of those that remained did so from curiosity or with but very slight thought of Christianity as having personal claims upon them. Many, too, of those that signed the papers had no eager desire for further information. It was unfortunate that the use of the words "enquirers" or "seekers" for such persons led many in Christian lands and some in Japan itself to have exaggerated ideas of what was being accomplished. In Tokyo, after a campaign of about six weeks, the number of those enrolled as "converts and seekers" was over five thousand. Reports for the whole country were not obtained, but the statistics of this "forward movement" for the year 1901 showed that, so far as the efforts of 376 churches were concerned, there had been an attendance of 322,245 at the meetings, with 15,440 enquirers and converts,\* and 1,181 baptisms.

The indirect benefits of this movement were many. It gave new courage to the Christians, it led them to more activity than they had been manifesting in recent years, and it increased the spirit of Christian unity by leading those of different denominations to work together to an extent hitherto unknown. Some of the methods adopted were either in their original forms, or with such modifications as experience suggested, used afterwards in other evangelistic movements. In some places the Buddhists were aroused to imitate in this, as they had in so many other things, the methods used by the Christians.

The general evangelistic movement of this period was helped by two workers from America. One of these was Mr. J. L. Mott, who, as on his former visit in 1896, exerted a strong influence upon students. In Tokyo, among other audiences, he had one of eight hundred students belonging to the Imperial University, eighty-four of whom declared their purpose to follow Christ. The method usually pursued by Mr. Mott was first to address a general audience of students upon some subject that led the way for speaking of their need of power that would help them to meet temptation and live righteous lives. Those that wished to learn more specifically of the way such power could be gained through Christ were asked to remain for a second meeting. After another earnest address, those that were ready to declare a desire and purpose to become disciples of Christ, taking Him as their personal Saviour and Lord, were asked to raise their hands. After the meaning of this declaration had been carefully explained, cards were passed to receive the names of those that still wished to make it. In order that a third meeting might be held with these alone, other persons were then dismissed. It will be seen that great care was taken that none should give in their names without knowing what was expected of them. Most of these students had in other ways heard more or less about Christianity, so that its teachings were not wholly new to them. At the eighteen meetings held in different educational centres, 1,464 persons signed the cards. In each city a committee was chosen to look after these enquirers, to get them into Bible classes and in other ways to follow up the work. In addition to direct evangelistic services, Mr, Mott gave in the halls of several national high schools an address on "The Influence of Christianity among the Students of All Lands." It is said that he was the first distinctively religious worker invited to speak in the Imperial University at Tokyo. Early in 1902, Rev, R. A. Torrey spent a short time in Japan. He also led many persons to express their determination to be Christians. Both of these workers, and others that came after them, accomplished much permanent good; yet it is easy to be misled by the numerical reports of converts and enquirers. Speaking through interpreters to audiences having but very dim conceptions of a personal God and unaccustomed to put into the Japanese terms any such meanings as the speakers had in mind when they used the English words "sin," "salvation," "repentance," and "holiness," it is not strange that these evangelists, who often held but one or two meetings in a city, failed to attain results commensurate with the hopes raised in their minds by the large number of cards signed by their auditors. In following up the supposed converts, it was found that many of those that signed cards were already members of churches, some had given false names and addresses that could not be found, and some others were not thoroughly in earnest. One disappointing feature was that many of those students that had apparently been honest in signing the cards were unwilling to have anything to do with churches, pastors, evangelists, or other Christians. Sometimes in a school where there was a Young Men's Christian Association, they were disinclined to identify themselves openly with Christianity by joining that organisation. Losing the help that would come through association with fellow-believers and the instruction of older Christians, they made little if any advance in the religious life. Apparently they had been attracted more by the personality of the men whose addresses had interested them than by the Christ whom the speakers proclaimed. Hence it was that afterwards when enquiries were made about these persons, the reply would be given: "Oh, he is a Mott Christian," or, "He is a Torrey Christian." In writing these things there is no desire to overlook the great good that was done by Messrs. Mott, Torrey, and others; but it is necessary to recognise that their failure to appreciate the readiness of the Japanese to sign cards or make other signs of consenting to what was urged by effective speakers, led them to give readers of their reports exaggerated ideas of what had been accomplished. Missionaries that had long lived in the country were also misled at first by the large numbers of those that signed cards. This method of trying to keep in touch with those influenced by evangelistic services had been used but little before the inauguration of the "Forward Movement," and the hesitation formerly shown by the Japanese about doing anything that might connect them with the Christian religion led to the supposition that only those thoroughly in earnest would go so far as to give in their names, even though it were only as an expression of desire for further instruction.

Disinclination to join a church was not uncommon among young men who yet considered themselves believers. While in most cases this may have been a sign of a lack of religious earnestness, it would be unfair to say that it was always so. One of the most popular Christian writers, who exerted what was in many respects a helpful influence upon young men, was a person of such a temperament as made it difficult for him to work with others, A sharp critic of what he believed to be defects in the churches, he held himself aloof from them and advised others to do the same. The national characteristics of the Japanese often incline them to prefer the position of free lances or lead them to break away from an organisation when there is anything connected with it that is not in accord with their own desires.

In the period covered by this chapter there were visits by other evangelists from abroad; such as Rev. G. F. Pentecost, D.D.; Rev, F. Franson; Rev. Grattan Guinness, D.D.; and others. There also arose among the Japanese themselves a class of evangelists who, by combining their knowledge of foreign methods with that of the language and characteristics of their own people, were fitted to exert a great influence and to achieve good results. One of the first to become prominent in this line of work was Mr. Kimura Seimatsu. He had spent several years in America, where he came under D. L. Moody's influence and received instruction in the Chicago Bible Institute established by the latter. There were now in the cities where the Gospel had long been proclaimed many persons who had as children been taught in Sunday schools, or who had in other ways learned about Christ, but who had never made a definite decision to be His followers; and it was among such persons that these evangelists could do their most effective work by leading them to make an open profession of their desire to be disciples of Christ. Others to whom the message was new were also attracted to the meetings and led to a belief in the truths that were so earnestly proclaimed.

As a part of the general evangelistic movement of this period and as exemplifying some of its methods, mention may be made of the work carried on during a National Exhibition that was held in Osaka from March 1 to July 31, 1903. A committee appointed by the Missionary Association of Central Japan obtained a building that was situated on the open square before the main entrance to the Exhibition. On its roof was placed a large sign with the invitation, "Come and see," while other signs upon the front of the building bore the name "Christian Union Evangelistic Hall," or were inscribed with appropriate passages of Scripture. The lower story contained an audience-room and a stand for the sale of Christian literature. The Japanese churches joined with the missionaries in raising the money required for expenses and in furnishing the necessary workers. The first two weeks the different denominations united in a joint conduct of the meetings, and the same plan was adopted for the last three days of the Exhibition; but the rest of the time was divided between Baptist, Congregationalist, Episcopalian, Methodist, and Presbyterian groups of churches, each being responsible for two periods of a fortnight in length. With slight variations the method adopted was somewhat as follows: in the morning, as soon as the number of people passing through the square made it probable that an audience could be gathered, some of the workers stood before the hall and sang a few hymns, the favourite one and the most effective being set to the stirring tune of "Marching through Georgia." Sometimes a cornet or an accordion added to the volume of sound. By the help of a megaphone an invitation was given to attend the meeting. The floor of the building was on a level with the ground and, as most of the front was open, persons could easily step inside. When a sufficient number had entered, the meeting commenced. In addition to songs, there were two short, pointed addresses, after which papers and pencils were carried through the audience so that those who desired further instruction concerning Christianity might give their names and residences. Tracts were then distributed and the audience dismissed, the whole service having lasted from half to three-quarters of an hour. By that time the number of people in the square had so increased that it usually took only four or five minutes to fill the hall for another meeting. On days when the largest crowds were visiting the Exhibition, there was an almost constant succession of these meetings from nine o'clock in the morning until ten o'clock at night. The audiences were quiet and respectful, there being only two or three occasions when individuals made any objection to what was said. The whole attendance at the Exhibition was about four million, and, as that of the meetings was 246,000, it may be said that about one in sixteen of the visitors had the Gospel preached to him. There must have been many others that stood outside the hall and listened for a few minutes before passing on. Those that wished for personal conversation were invited to meet Christian workers in the second story of the building. Those that signed the papers numbered over sixteen thousand. These included persons from every prefecture, and among them were representatives of nearly all classes of people—farmers, merchants, jinrikisha-pullers, officials, teachers, students, soldiers, and even one nobleman. Christian literature was afterwards mailed to these persons and their names were sent to Christian workers in the districts where they lived. In after years it was not uncommon to hear candidates for baptism say that their first knowledge of Christianity had been gained in the Gospel Hall" at the Osaka Exhibition.

Among the incidents connected with this work is the following as narrated by one of the pastors:

The editor of a magazine published in Osaka "on visiting the Exposition grounds saw near the front gateway in a very prominent place these words: '*Kitarite Miyo,'* 'Come and See.' This was the sign in large letters over the Preaching Hall rented to carry on daily preaching during the five months of the Exposition. He was angered as he saw the sign—so large and conspicuous. Being an unbeliever, if not an atheist, he scarcely knew how to restrain his feelings. 'How dare,' thought he 'these Christians to come right in front of our great Exposition and preach their detestable doctrines?' One day as he was passing in front of the Preaching Hall—crowded inside and outside—he ventured to thrust his head in through the outer row of listeners to see what was going on that so many persons were attracted. Just as he did so, an earnest Japanese—doubtless preaching on the existence of God and trying to show its reasonableness—uttered such words as these: 'The man who refuses to believe in the existence of God is a fool.' So convincing were the evidences in favour of the existence of God in the mind of the speaker that he was led to utter these strong words.

The editor on whose ears fell these words was filled with rage. Without waiting to hear more, in disgust he left for home. But the words of the evangelist kept ringing in his ears. That night he could not dismiss these daring words. They had found a lodgment in his heart. He said: 'I don't believe in God; but, if there should be a God and my soul immortal, then it becomes a serious matter.' 'What if there is a God and my soul immortal?' kept returning to him during the sleepless and restless night. These words would not down. The next day he called on three of the Osaka pastors, but found none of them at home. He then found his way to the Southern Methodist Mission of which the Rev. Mr. Meyers is the head in Osaka. Here he had a. long talk with the pastor or evangelist. He became very serious and penitent. He decided to take the risks no longer. He became an earnest enquirer and gave his name as a candidate for baptism."—*Tidings from Japan,* June, 1903.

The advance made by Christianity in this period was largely due to the growing sense among thinking men of the need that the country had for religion as the basis for morality. Official Shintoism was no longer regarded as a religion. Buddhism was criticised as failing to be a strong ethical force. Some of the Buddhist sects were weakened by internal dissensions. The most powerful of these, the Eastern Division of the Shin sect, was burdened with a heavy debt that was declared by a large portion of its adherents to be due to speculation and to the money squandered on the notoriously immoral pleasures of its Chief Abbot. One of the most prominent men in the country had been asked to make arrangements for saving the sect's property, as it was in danger of being seized by creditors. It was generally understood that one of the conditions under which he would have accepted was that the Abbot would reform his manner of life, but the latter was unwilling to do this. Under such circumstances, the moral influence of Buddhism could not but be greatly weakened. Men that seemed indifferent to their own spiritual condition declared that religion was the great need of the people as a whole. Professor Inoue Tetsujiro, of the Imperial University in Tokyo, who had a great influence as a writer and lecturer on religious and philosophic subjects, declared that both Buddhism and Christianity contained too many superstitious ideas to be acceptable to men of modern times, and so he proposed that learned men unite with him in constructing a new religion that should contain all that was good in others, while having special adaptation to the needs of Japan. Others believed that Buddhism could be reformed and re-vivified. Baron Maejima, who was known as the "Father of the Japanese Postal Service," said: "I firmly believe we must have religion as the basis of our national and personal welfare. No matter how large an army or navy we may have, unless we have righteousness at the foundation of our national existence, we shall fall short of the highest success. I do not hesitate to say that we must rely upon religion for our highest welfare, and when I look about me to see what religion we may best rely on, I am convinced that the religion of Christ is the one most full of strength and promise for the individual and for the nation."\*

The need was felt not only for the lower classes, but also for the students in the higher institutions of learning, of whom it was said that their conduct was far from upright. Baron Kikuchi, at one time President of the Imperial University and afterwards Minister of Education, wrote in a magazine article that there were two books that he recommended to all young men—the New Testament and Smiles's "Self-Help."

The need of Japanese students for religion was emphasised by the prevalence among them of pessimistic views. Early in the twentieth century, the word *"hammon"* became very common in articles and lectures dealing with the condition of young men. The word has been variously translated by such terms as "torment of mind," "anxiety," or "despair." It was brought into common use by its appearance in a writing left by a student of philosophy, who, on account of this torment of mind, committed suicide by throwing himself down a waterfall. The notoriety gained by this young man led to his having many imitators until another student changed the fashion of self-destruction by leaping into the crater of an active volcano. The epidemic of suicide was but an outward symptom of the spiritual unrest and pessimistic feeling that were common among students, and thus it added another proof that a religion of hope, courage, and power was needed by the educated young men of Japan.

Young Men's Christian Associations have been effective instruments for exerting a religious and moral influence upon students. Societies were formed in most of the higher institutions, and these were visited from time to time by secretaries of the national organisation. In some of the educational centres the associations had buildings that afforded opportunities for recreation, literary exercises, and religious services. Christian hostels furnishing board and rooms for students brought them into surroundings calculated to develop their characters and to strengthen them against the temptations that beset young men away from home.

One of the resolutions adopted by the General Conference of Missionaries in 1900 favoured the formation of a representative standing committee of the missions. The committee was duly organised and held its first meeting in January, 1902, It has ever since had such an important part in the joint work of the missions and in matters affecting their mutual relations that it may be well to give the first two articles of its Constitution:—

"article I. Name.

"This Committee shall be called The Standing Committee of Co-operating Missions in Japan.

"article II. Functions.

"\(1\) This Committee shall serve as a general medium of reference, communication, and effort for the co-operating missions in matters of common interest and in cooperative enterprises. On application of interested parties, and in cases of urgent importance on its own initiative, the Committee may give counsel:

"\(a\) With regard to the distribution of forces for evangelistic, educational, and eleemosynary work, especially where enlargement is contemplated;

"\(b\) With regard to plans for union or co-operation on the part of two or more missions for any or all of the above forms of missionary work;

"\(c\) And in general with a view to the prevention of misunderstandings and the promotion of harmony of spirit and uniformity of method among the co-operating missions.

"\(2\) The work of this Committee may include: "\(a\) The formation of plans calculated to stimulate the production and circulation of Christian literature;

"\(b\) The arranging for special evangelistic campaigns, for the services of visitors from abroad as preachers or lecturers, and for other forms of co-operative evangelistic effort;

\(c\) Securing joint action to meet emergencies affecting the common interests of the co-operating missions.

"\(3\) In serving as a means of communication between the co-operating missions the Committee shall be authorised to publish at least once a year a record of social and religious conditions and progress."

It was in accordance with the section last quoted that there has since been published annually a pamphlet entitled "The Christian Movement in Japan," whose successive numbers give a history of the growth of Christianity, and also contain much valuable information upon allied subjects.

Under the general oversight of this Committee arrangements have from time to time been made for lectures by distinguished scholars from Western lands. One of the first of those who came in this way was Dr. Charles Cuthbert Hall, President of Union Theological Seminary, who in 1903 repeated the lectures that he had just given in India on the Haskell Foundation, and that were afterwards published in America as well as in India and Japan.

Another measure favoured by the General Conference of 1900 was the preparation of a union hymnal. Ten years earlier a joint committee of the Kumi-ai \(Congregational\) body and the Church of Christ in Japan \(Presbyterian\), assisted by the missions with which they were associated, had prepared for the use of these churches a hymn-book which was also used by some of the smaller denominations. In the autumn of 1900 the two churches above mentioned, together with the Baptists, and joined the next year by the Methodists and the Disciples of Christ, began to prepare a new book. It was at one time hoped that the Episcopalians might be willing to co-operate; but they decided not to do so, one reason being that a new hymnal of their own preparation was nearly completed. An arrangement was made, however, by which one hundred and twenty-five of the most common hymns were revised in co-operation with their committee, and these, under the name of "Uniform Hymns," were included in both books. One advantage of this has been that in union meetings there is this large number of hymns that can be drawn upon with the assurance that all have been accustomed to use them in the same form. The union hymnal was completed in 1903, and was at once adopted, not only by the churches directly concerned in its compilation, but by nearly all other Protestant bodies with the exception of the Episcopalians.

Another form of co-operation was that by which a committee representing the Council of Missions \(Presbyterian\), the American Board, the Methodist, and the Baptist Missions united in preparing various publications to be used in connection with the International Sunday School Lessons.

In the summer of 1901 a few Mormons under the leadership of Mr. Heber T. Grant came to Yokohama. They soon became the subject of lively controversies. The English proprietor of a boarding-house much frequented by missionaries refused to receive them as guests. One of the English newspapers published in Yokohama at once attacked him for what it styled his fanaticism, while another upheld him on the ground that his obligations to other guests justified him in shutting out persons who came as representatives of a religion that favoured polygamy. Mr. Grant wrote several articles containing arguments in favour of plural marriage, though declaring that his fellow-believers in the United States had given up the practice because it was prohibited by law. When application was made for official permission to open preaching-places, the request was at first refused on technicalities. Meanwhile, the Mormons and their views concerning marriage had become a subject of discussion among the Japanese, the public press being for the most part strongly opposed to them. Finally, they obtained the Government's consent for the propagation of their religious views; but it is said that this was granted only on condition that polygamy should not be advocated. This restriction was in accordance with the National Constitution, which in the article guaranteeing religious freedom restricts this to "limits not prejudicial to peace and order."

A few items may here be inserted to show the liberal treatment that the Japanese Government was now ready to accord to Christianity.

One of the regulations of the Home Department forbade any general collection of money for religious purposes without its permission. In gathering contributions for the erection of houses of worship the churches had been satisfied to get the consent of the local police offices; and as the needed money was drawn from a limited circle, no trouble was experienced. In 1902, however, after waiting five months for careful enquiry to be made into the history, purpose, financial ability, and doctrines of the church concerned, the Home Minister issued to the pastor and eleven members of the Kumi-ai Church in Wakamatsu a formal document authorising them to raise money for the erection of a Christian church.

Even after the revised treaties came into force, foreigners as individuals were not allowed to own real estate. Nevertheless, a company incorporated under Japanese law, even though made up wholly of foreigners, became a juridical person, and was thus free from this restriction. Up to that time the houses and land that had been bought outside the open ports had of necessity been held in the names of Japanese, In a number of cases these persons had proved untrustworthy, and several missions had suddenly discovered that some of the property had been sold or mortgaged. Even where the original holder was honest, his failure in business made the property liable for his debts, or his death might throw it into the hands of heirs who would take it for themselves. It was now found possible to have a mission or a number of its members incorporated and thus endued with power to hold real estate. When application was made for a charter, documents were required telling the source of the funds held by the company, the doctrines of the denomination it represented, and many other related facts. The purpose for which the property or any income coming from it would be used was also to be carefully stated. For example, in the charter of "The Association of Congregational Missionaries in Japan" \(those of the American Board\) the stated object of the company was "to hold land, buildings, or other property for the extension of Christianity, the carrying on of Christian education, and the performance of works of charity and benevolence." Though the minute regulations governing these associations and the necessity of preparing the many different documents that Japanese officialdom delights in requiring were a source of considerable annoyance, it was a great relief to know that the property was held in the most secure way that could well be devised, while the granting of incorporation after careful examination of creeds and enquiry concerning the relations of the missions to the boards showed how far the country had advanced since "the evil sect called Christian" had been strictly prohibited.

There was also a changed attitude towards Christian schools. The regulations issued by the Department of Education in 1899 had ordered that no religious instruction should be given or religious service held in any institution that shared such privileges as were accorded to national schools. In deference to the representations made by persons connected with Christian institutions, these regulations, though not withdrawn, were modified by others, and in 1903 licenses giving most of the desired privileges were granted to several of these schools. Even theological schools of sufficiently high grade found it possible to obtain formal recognition as "special schools," so that their students shared with others such advantages as the postponement of military service.

Only a change in the feeling of the Government towards Christianity would have permitted the bestowal of the badge of the Blue Ribbon, in 1902, upon Mr. Ishii Juji in recognition of his work as founder and superintendent of the Okayama Orphanage, which was everywhere known as a Christian institution.

While the limits of this history do not permit extended notices in connection with the death of prominent Christians, an exception may well be made in the case of Hon. Kataoka Kenkichi, who died October 31, 1903.

He was born December, 1843, in the province of Tosa, which was one of those that a quarter of a century later took an important part in overthrowing the Shogunate and restoring the Imperial power. In the struggles connected with that movement he was in command of one-half of the Tosa troops. In 1871 he was one of ten young men that were sent abroad for study. They went to America under the care of Rev. David Thompson, a Presbyterian missionary. In an account that Mr. Kataoka gave of his own life\* he says that in that country he was deeply impressed by the philanthropic institutions and by the Christian homes. The latter seemed to him to present a strong contrast to those of his own land because their governing spirit was love instead of propriety. From America he went to England, where he spent a little more than one year. After his return to Japan he was for a while in the navy, and there attained the rank of lieutenant-commander. The politicians of Tosa took a leading part in the agitation for constitutional government, and Mr. Kataoka became the trusted lieutenant of Mr. Itagaki, the leader of what afterwards became the Liberal Party. In 1877, at the time of the Satsuma Rebellion, he was suspected of plotting with its promoters and was imprisoned for one hundred days. While in prison he became very much interested in reading Dr. Martin's Chinese work on Christian evidences that has elsewhere been mentioned as being widely read by Japanese.

Mr. Kataoka joined the Presbyterian Church in Kochi, Tosa, in May, 1885, and soon afterwards was chosen to the eldership, an office that he continued to hold until his death. In 1887 he went with a number of his political associates to Tokyo for the purpose of petitioning for various reforms, especially for freedom of speech and of the press, At least one other of this delegation was a Christian. Suddenly the Government issued Regulations for the Preservation of the Peace," and in connection with these the petitioners were ordered to leave the city at once. Mr. Kataoka and some others declared that their consciences would not allow them to yield to what they considered tyrannical action; they had come in a peaceful manner to present their petition; for them to depart now would cause the object of their coming to be misunderstood. As a result of this refusal they were arrested and imprisoned for several months. An account of their experiences in prison has been given in a previous chapter. On the day of the promulgation of the National Constitution, February 11, 1889, political prisoners were released, and the next year Mr. Kataoka was elected a member of the first Parliament. His refusal to help his political prospects by resigning his office in a Christian church has already been related. He was four times chosen Speaker of the Lower House, and held that office at the time of his death. He had hoped to withdraw from political life in order to give himself more completely to the duties of the presidency of the Doshisha, an office that he had taken in 1902, but circumstances were such as to make him feel that until a certain important crisis had been passed he could not honourably refuse the appeals of his party that he retain the speakership. Throughout the severe suffering that attended his last illness He found Christ the source of strength and comfort. Just before the end came he asked his wife, children, grandchildren, and pastor, who were all standing at his bedside, to sing his favourite hymn, a translation of

"Jesus, Thy love, it cheers my heart."

"A verse may find him who a sermon flies," and a religions story may attract the attention of those that would not read an apologetic treatise. Among the Christians there had for some time been those who as editors of newspapers or writers for magazines were helping to give a Christian tinge to national thought, even when discussing subjects not directly connected with religion. More and more, Christians began to become prominent in other departments of literature. In 1902 a newspaper in Tokyo received twenty-six hundred poems in competition for prizes that it had offered. Of the forty that were selected as the most worthy, more than half were written by Christians, and to them went the three highest prizes. Those that tried to account for this remarkable result were inclined to explain it by saying that the religion of the writers had helped to inspire them with fresh and lofty thoughts. In 1901 a novel that attracted much attention to itself and to Christianity was likewise drawn out by the offer of a prize, coming in this case from a newspaper published in Osaka. The successful competitor was Mr, Nakamura Kichizo, whose novel "Ichijiku" \(The Figtree\) has for its heroine an American lady married to a Japanese evangelist who after a time falls into sin and leaves the ministry. By her Christian life and deeds she leads him to repentance and also wins the hearts of her parents-in-law, who at first had done their best to make her life miserable. A skilful novelist is able to enlist the sympathies of his readers for one that is in sorrow or unjustly treated, and the daily instalments of this story were eagerly awaited by those that had become interested in the heroine and had shed many tears over the sad position in which she found herself. The story has frequent quotations from the Bible, and when issued in book form it was preceded by Christ's parable of the Barren Figtree, while the cover was embellished with a large gilt cross.

About the same time Mr. Tokutomi Kenjiro published "Omoide no Ki" \(Reminiscences\). This tale, which is thought to be founded on the author's own experiences, is largely occupied with the religious perplexities of a young student whose faith in Christ finally becomes firmly established. The book quickly passed through many editions and helped to establish Mr. Tokutomi's position as one of the leading writers of Japan. He and Mr. Nakamura did not stand alone, but were followed by others who, by means of their stories, have helped to remove prejudice against Christianity, and to make its teachings more widely known.

**Footnotes**

\* Those persons are included that signed papers in connection with Mr. Mott's meetings hereafter to be described.

\* Quoted in Gulick's "The White Peril," p. 79.

\* "Jikkenjo no Shukyo," p. 34, sq.




