+++
title = "59 CHAPTER VIII MUSLIM ALTERNATIVE TO PAKISTAN"

+++
-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) --

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER VIII

MUSLIM ALTERNATIVE TO PAKISTAN  


I  
\[The proposed Hyderabad scheme of legislative reform is not promising\]

 The Hindus say they have an alternative to Pakistan. Have the
Muslims also an alternative to Pakistan? The Hindus say yes, the Muslims
say no. The Hindus believe that the Muslim proposal for Pakistan is only
a bargaining manoeuvre put forth with the object of making additions to
the communal gains already secured under the Communal Award. The Muslims
repudiate the suggestion. They say there is no equivalent to Pakistan
and, therefore, they will have Pakistan and nothing but Pakistan. It
does seem that the Musalmans are devoted to Pakistan and are determined
to have nothing else, and that the Hindus in hoping for an alternative
are merely indulging in wishful thinking. But assuming that the Hindus
are shrewd enough in divining what the Muslim game is, will the Hindus
be ready to welcome the Muslim alternative to Pakistan? The answer to
the question must, of course, depend upon what the Muslim alternative
is.

 What is the Muslim alternative to Pakistan? No one knows. The
Muslims, if they have any, have not disclosed it and perhaps will not
disclose it till the day when the rival parties meet to revise and
settle the terms on which the Hindus and the Muslims are to associate
with each other in the future. To be forewarned is to be forearmed. It
is, therefore, necessary for the Hindus to have some idea of the
possible Muslim alternative to enable them to meet the shock of it; for
the alternative cannot be better than the Communal Award and is sure to
be many degrees worse.

 In the absence of the exact alternative proposal one can only make a
guess. Now one man's guess is as good as that of another, and the party
concerned has to choose on which of these he will rely. Among the likely
guesses, my guess is that the Muslims will put forth as their
alternative some such proposal as the following :—

> "That the future constitution of India shall provide:
>
> \(i\) That the Muslims shall have 50% representation in the
> Legislature, Central as well as Provincial, through separate
> electorates.
>
> \(ii\) That 50% of the Executive in the Centre as well as in the
> Provinces shall consist of Muslims.
>
> \(iii\) That in the Civil Service 50% of the posts shall be assigned
> for the Muslims.
>
> \(iv\) That in the Fighting Forces the Muslim proportion shall be one
> half, both in the ranks and in the higher grades.
>
> \(v\) That Muslims shall have 50% representation in all public bodies,
> such as councils and commissions, created for public purposes.
>
> \(vi\) That Muslims shall have 50% representation in all international
> organizations in which India will participate.
>
> \(vii\) That if the Prime Minister be a Hindu, the Deputy Prime
> Minister shall be a Muslim.
>
> \(viii\) That if the Commander-in-Chief be a Hindu, the Deputy
> Commander-in-Chief shall be a Muslim.
>
> \(ix\) That no changes in the Provincial boundaries shall be made
> except with the consent of 66% of the Muslim members of the
> Legislature.
>
> \(x\) That no action or treaty against a Muslim country shall be valid
> unless the consent of 66% of the Muslim members of the Legislature is
> obtained.
>
> \(xi\) That no law affecting the culture or religion or religious
> usage of Muslims shall be made except with the consent of 66% of the
> Muslim members of the Legislature.
>
> \(xii\) That the national language for India shall be Urdu.
>
> \(xiii\) That no law prohibiting or restricting the slaughter of cows
> or the propagation of and conversion to Islam shall be valid unless it
> is passed with the consent of 66% of the Muslim members of the
> Legislature.
>
> \(viv\) That no change in the constitution shall be valid unless the
> majority required for effecting such changes also includes a 66%
> majority of the Muslim members of the Legislature.

 This guess of mine is not the result of imagination let loose. It is
not the result of a desire to frighten the Hindus into an unwilling and
hasty acceptance of Pakistan. If I may say so, it is really an
intelligent anticipation based upon available data coming from Muslim
quarters.

 An indication of what the Muslim alternative is likely to be, is
obtainable from the nature of the Constitutional Reforms which are
contemplated for the Dominions of His Exalted Highness the Nizam of
Hyderabad.

 The Hyderabad scheme of Reforms is a novel scheme. It rejects the
scheme of communal representation obtaining in British India. In its
place is substituted what is called Functional Representation, i.e.
representation by classes and by professions. The composition of the
Legislature, which is to consist of 70 members, is to be as follows :—  


|                                                                         |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [THE PROPOSED HYDERABAD SCHEME OF LEGISLATIVE REFORM](tables/308a.html) |

 Whether the scheme of functional representation will promote better
harmony between the various classes and sections than communal
representation does is more than doubtful. In addition to perpetuating
existing social and religious divisions, it may quite easily intensify
class struggle by emphasizing class consciousness. The scheme appears
innocuous, but its real character will come out when every class will
demand representation in proportion to its numbers. Be that as it may,
functional representation is not the most significant feature of the
Hyderabad scheme of Reforms. The most significant feature of the scheme
is the proposed division of seats between Hindus and Musalmansn in the
new Hyderabad Legislature. Under the scheme as approved by H. E. H. the
Nizam, communal representation is not altogether banished. It is
retained along with functional representation. It is to operate through
joint electorates. But there is to be equal representation for "the two
majority communities" on every**[/1/](#n01)** elective body including
the legislature and no candidate can succeed unless, he secures 40
percent, of the votes polled by-members of his community. This principle
of equal representation to Hindus and Muslims irrespective of their
numbers**[/2/](#n02)** is not only to apply to every elective body but
it is to apply to both elected as well as nominated members of the body.

 In justification of this theory of equal representation it is stated
that:

> "The importance of the Muslim community in the state, by virtue of its
> historical position and its status in the body politic, is so obvious
> that it cannot be reduced to the status of a minority in the
> Assembly."

 Quite recently there have appeared in the press**[/3/](#n03)** the
proposals formulated by one Mr. Mir Akbar Ali Khan calling himself the
leader of the Nationalist Party, as a means of settling the Hindu-Muslim
problem in British India. They are as follows :—

> \(1\) The future Constitution of India must rest upon the broad
> foundation of adequate military defence of the country and upon making
> the people reasonably military minded. The Hindus must have the same
> military mindedness as the Muslims.
>
> (2) The present moment offers a supreme opportunity for the two
> communities to ask for the defence of India being made over to them.
> The Indian Army must consist of an equal number of Hindus and Muslims
> and no regiment should be on a communal, as distinguished from
> regional, basis.
>
> \(3\) The Governments in the Provinces and at the Centre should be
> wholly National Governments composed of men who are reasonably
> military minded. Hindu and Muslim Ministers should be equal in number
> in the Central as well as all Provincial cabinets; other important
> minorities might wherever necessary be given special representation.
> This scheme will function most satisfactorily with joint electorates,
> but in the present temper of the country separate electorates might be
> continued. The Hindu Ministers must be elected by the Hindu members of
> the legislature and the Muslim Ministers by the Muslim members.
>
> \(4\) The Cabinet is to be removable only on an express vote of
> no-confidence, against the Cabinet as a whole, passed by a majority
> of 2/3rd of the whole house which majority must be of Hindus and
> Muslims taken separately.
>
> \(5\) The religion, language, script and personal law of each
> community should be safeguarded by a paramount constitutional check
> enabling the majority of members representing that community in the
> legislature to place a veto on any legislative or other measure
> affecting it. A similar veto must be provided against any measure
> designed or calculated to affect adversely the economic well-being of
> any community.
>
> \(6\) An adequate communal representation in the services must be
> agreed to as a practical measure of justice in administration and in
> the distribution patronage.

 If the proposals put forth by a Muslim leader of the Nationalist
Party in Hyderabad State is an indication of the direction in which the
mind of the Muslims in British India is running, then, the guess I have
made as to what is likely to be the alternative to Pakistan derives
additional support.

II  
\[The "Azad Muslim Conference" thinks along similar lines\]

 It is true that in the month of April 1940 a Conference of Muslims
was held in Delhi under the grandiloquent name of "The Azad Muslim
Conference." The Muslims who met in the Azad Conference were those who
were opposed to the Muslim League as well as to the Nationalist Muslims.
They were opposed to the Muslim League, firstly because of their
hostility to Pakistan, and secondly because they did not want to depend
upon the British Government for the protection of their
rights.**[/4/](#n04)** They were also opposed to the Nationalist
Musalmans (i. e. Congressites out and out) because they were accused of
indifference to the cultural and religious rights of the
Muslims.**[/5/](#n05)**\]

 With all this, the Azad Muslim Conference was hailed by the Hindus
as a conference of friends. But the resolutions passed by the Conference
leave very little to choose between it and the League. Among the
resolutions passed by the Azad Muslim Conference, the following three
bear directly upon the issue in question.

 The first of these runs as follows :—

> "This conference, representative of Indian Muslims who desire to
> secure the fullest freedom of the country, consisting of delegates and
> representatives of every province, after having given its fullest and
> most careful consideration to all the vital questions affecting the
> interest of the Muslim community and the country as a whole declares
> the following:—
>
> "India will have geographical and political boundaries of an
> individual whole and as such is the common homeland of all the
> citizens irrespective of race or religion who are joint owners of its
> resources. All nooks and comers of the country are hearths and homes
> of Muslims who cherish the historic eminence of their religion and
> culture which are dearer to them than their lives. From the national
> point of view every Muslim is an Indian. The common rights of all
> residents of the country and their responsibilities, in every walk of
> life and in every sphere of human activity, are the same. The Indian
> Muslim by virtue of these rights and responsibilities, is
> unquestionably an Indian national and in every part of the country is
> entitled to equal privileges with that of every Indian national in
> every sphere of governmental, economic and other national activities
> and in public services. For that very reason Muslims own equal
> responsibilities with other Indians for striving and making sacrifices
> to achieve the country's independence. This is a self-evident
> proposition, the truth of which no right thinking Muslim will
> question. This Conference declares unequivocally and with all emphasis
> at its command that the goal of Indian Muslims is complete
> independence along with protection of their religion and communal
> rights, and that they are anxious to attain this goal as early as
> possible. Inspired by this aim they have in the past made great
> sacrifices and are ever ready to make greater sacrifices.
>
> "The Conference unreservedly and strongly repudiates the baseless
> charge levelled against Indian Muslims by the agents of British
> Imperialism and others that they are an obstacle in the path of Indian
> freedom and emphatically declares that the Muslims are fully alive to
> their responsibilities and consider it inconsistent with their
> traditions and derogatory to their honour to lag behind others in the
> struggle for independence."

 By this Resolution they repudiated the scheme of Pakistan. Their
second Resolution was in the following terms:—

> "This is the considered view of this Conference that only that
> constitution for the future Government of India would be acceptable to
> the people of India which is framed by the Indians themselves elected
> by means of adult franchise. The constitution should fully safeguard
> all the legitimate interests of the Muslims in accordance with the
> recommendations of the Muslim members of the Constituent Assembly. The
> representatives of other communities or of an outside power would have
> no right to interfere in the determination of these safeguards."

 By this Resolution the Conference asserted that the safeguards for
the Muslims must be determined by the Muslims alone. Their third
Resolution was as under:—

> "Whereas in the future constitution of India it would be essential, in
> order to ensure stability of government and preservation of security,
> that every citizen and community should feel satisfied, this
> Conference considers it necessary that a scheme of safeguards as
> regards vital manors mentioned below should be prepared to the
> satisfaction of the Muslims.
>
> "This Conference appoints a board consisting of 27 persons. This
> board, after the fullest investigation, consultation and
> consideration, shall make its recommendations for submission to the
> next session of this Conference, so that the Conference may utilise
> the recommendations as a means of securing a permanent national
> settlement of the communal question. This recommendation should be
> submitted within two months. The matters referred to the board are the
> following:
>
> > "1. The protection of Muslim culture, personal law and religious
> > rights.
> >
> > "2. Political rights of Muslims and their protection.
> >
> > "3. The formation of future constitution of India to be non-unitary
> > and federal, with absolutely essential and unavoidable powers for
> > the Federal Government.
> >
> > "The provision of safeguards for the economic, social and cultural
> > rights of Muslims and for their share in public services
>
> "The board will be empowered to fill up any vacancy in a suitable
> manner. The board will have the right to co-opt other members. It will
> be empowered also to consult other Muslim bodies and if it considers
> necessary, any responsible organisation in the country. The 27 members
> of the board will be nominated by the president.
>
> "The quorum for the meeting will be nine.
>
> "Since the safeguards of the communal rights of different communities
> will be determined in the constituent assembly referred to in the
> resolution which this Conference has passed, this Conference considers
> it necessary to declare that Muslim members of this constituent will
> be elected by Muslims themselves."

 We must await the report**[/6/](#n06)** of this board to know what
safeguards the Azad Muslim Conference will devise for the safety and
protection of Muslims. But there appears no reason to hope that they
will not be in favour of what I have guessed to be the likely
alternative for Pakistan. It cannot be overlooked that the Azad Muslim
Conference was a body of Muslims who were not only opposed to the Muslim
League but were equally opposed to the Nationalist Muslims. There is,
therefore, no ground to trust that they will be more merciful to the
Hindus than the League has been or will be.

 Supposing my guess turns out to be correct, it would be interesting
to know what the Hindus will have to say in reply. Should they prefer
such an alternative to Pakistan? Or should they rather prefer Pakistan
to such an alternative? Those are questions which I must leave the
Hindus and their leaders to answer. All I would like to say in this
connection is that the Hindus, before determining their attitude towards
this question, should note certain important considerations.

 In particular they should note that there is a difference between
*Macht Politic***[/7/](#n07)** and *Gravamin Politic***[/8/](#n08)**;
that there is a difference between Communitas Communitatum and a nation
of nations; that there is a difference between safeguards to allay
apprehensions of the weak, and contrivances to satisfy the ambition for
power of the strong; that there is a difference between providing
safeguards and handing over the country. Further, they should also note
that what may with safety be conceded to *Gravamin Politic* may not be
conceded to *Macht Politic*. What may be conceded with safety to a
community may not be conceded to a nation; and what may be conceded with
safety to the weak to be used by it as a weapon of defence may not be
conceded to the strong who may use it as a weapon of attack.

 These are important considerations, and if the Hindus overlook them,
they will do so at their peril. For the Muslim alternative is really a
frightful and dangerous alternative.  


======================

**[/1/](#m01)** Beside the Central Legislature there are to be
constituted under the scheme of Reforms other popular bodies such as
Panchayats, Rural Boards, Municipalities and Town Committees.

**[/2/](#m02)** The distribution of population of Hyderabad State
(excluding Berar) is, according to the census of 1931, as follows;—

Hindus Untouchables Muslims Christians Others Total

96,99,615 24,73,230 15,34,666 1,51,382 5,77.255
1,44,36,148

**[/3/](#m03)** See **Bombay Sentinal**, June 22nd, 1940. Mr. Mir Akbar
Ali Khan says that he discussed his proposals with Mr. Srinivas Iyengar,
ex-president of the Congress, and the proposals published by him are
really proposals as approved by Mr. lyengar.

**[/4/](#m04)** Mufti Kifayat Ullah, a prominent member of the
conference, in the course of his speech is reported to have said: "They
had to demonstrate that they were not behind any other community in the
fight for freedom. He wished to declare in clear terms that they did not
rely on the British Government for the protection of their rights. They
would themselves chalk out the safeguards necessary for the protection
of their religious rights and would fight out any party, however
powerful, that would refuse to accept those safeguards as they would
fight the Government for freedom." (Prolonged cheers). **Hindustan
Times**, April 30, 1940.

**[/5/](#m05)** See the speeches of Maulana Hafizul Rehman and Dr. K. M.
Ashraf in the same issue of the **Hindustan Times**.

**[/6/](#m06)** This report has not appeared even now.

**[/7/](#m07)** *Macht Politic* means Power Politics.

**[/8/](#m08)** *Gravamin Politic* means in which the main strategy is
to gain power by manufacturing grievances.  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) -- [Dr. Ambedkar's
work](../../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#ambedkar) --
[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html#index) -- [Map
index](../../00maplinks/index.html#index) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
