+++
title = "66 CHAPTER XII NATIONAL FRUSTRATION"

+++
-- [Table of
contents](../../../C:/00FWP/00/partition/index.html#contents) --

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER XII

NATIONAL FRUSTRATION  


V  
\[The vision of Pakistan is powerful, and has been implicitly present
for decades\]

  
  

 While it is necessary to admit that the efforts at Hindu-Muslim
unity have failed and that the Muslim ideology has undergone a complete
revolution, it is equally necessary to know the precise causes which
have produced these effects. The Hindus say that the British policy of
divide and rule is the real cause of this failure and of this
ideological revolution. There is nothing surprising in this. The Hindus
having cultivated the Irish mentality, to have no other politics except
that of being always against the Government, are ready to blame the
Government for everything including bad weather. But \[the\] time has
come to discard the facile explanation so dear to the Hindus. For it
fails to take into account two very important circumstances. In the
first place, it overlooks the fact that the policy of divide and rule,
allowing that the British do resort to it, cannot succeed unless there
are elements which make division possible, and further if the policy
succeeds for such a long time, it means that the elements which divide
are more or less permanent and irreconcilable and are not transitory or
superficial. Secondly, it forgets that Mr. Jinnah, who represents this
ideological transformation, can never be suspected of being a tool in
the hands of the British even by the worst of his enemies. He may be too
self-opinionated, an egotist without the mask, and has perhaps a degree
of arrogance which is not compensated by any extraordinary intellect or
equipment. It may be on that account he is unable to reconcile himself
to a second place and work with others in that capacity for a public
cause. He may not be overflowing with ideas although he is not, as his
critics make him out to be, an empty-headed dandy living upon the ideas
of others. It may be that his fame is built up more upon art and less on
substance. At the same time, it is doubtful if there is a politician in
India to whom the adjective incorruptible can be more fittingly applied.
Anyone who knows what his relations with the British Government have
been, will admit that he has always been their critic, if indeed he has
not been their adversary. No one can buy him. For it must be said to his
credit that he has never been a soldier of fortune. The customary Hindu
explanation fails to account for the ideological transformation of Mr.
Jinnah.

 What is then the real explanation of these tragic phenomena, this
failure of the efforts for unity, this transformation in the Muslim
ideology?

 The real explanation of this failure of Hindu-Muslim unity lies in
the failure to realize that what stands between the Hindus and Muslims
is not a mere matter of difference, and that this antagonism is not to
be attributed to material causes. It is formed by causes which take
their origin in historical, religious, cultural and social antipathy, of
which political antipathy is only a reflection. These form one deep
river of discontent which, being regularly fed by these sources, keeps
on mounting to a head and overflowing its ordinary channels. Any current
of water flowing from another source, however pure, when it joins it,
instead of altering the colour or diluting its strength becomes lost in
the main stream. The silt of this antagonism which this current has
deposited, has become permanent and deep. So long as this silt keeps on
accumulating and so long as this antagonism lasts, it is unnatural to
expect this antipathy between Hindus and Muslims to give place to unity.

 Like the Christians and Muslims in the Turkish Empire, the Hindus
and Muslims of India have met as enemies on many fields, and the result
of the struggle has often brought them into the relation of conquerors
and conquered. Whichever party has triumphed, a great gulf has remained
fixed between the two and their enforced political union either under
the Moghuls or the British instead of passing over, as in so many other
cases, into organic unity, has only accentuated their mutual antipathy.
Neither religion nor social code can bridge this gulf. The two faiths
are mutually exclusive and whatever harmonies may be forged in the
interest of good social behaviour, at their core and centre they are
irreconcilable. There seems to be an inherent antagonism between the two
which centuries have not been able to dissolve. Notwithstanding the
efforts made to bring the creeds together by reformers like Akbar and
Kabir, the ethical realities behind each have still remained, to use a
mathematical phrase, which nothing can .alter or make integers capable
of having a common denominator. A Hindu can go from Hinduism to
Christianity without causing any commotion or shock. But he cannot pass
from Hinduism to Islam without causing a communal riot, certainly not
without causing qualms. That shows the depth of the antagonism which
divides the Hindus from the Musalmans.

 If Islam and Hinduism keep Muslims and Hindus apart in the matter of
their faith, they also prevent their social assimilation. That Hinduism
prohibits intermarriage between Hindus and Muslims is quite well known.
This narrow-mindedness is not the vice of Hinduism only. Islam is
equally narrow in its social code. It also prohibits intermarriage
between Muslims and Hindus. With these social laws there can be no
social assimilation and consequently no socialization of ways, modes and
outlooks, no blunting of the edges and no modulation of age-old
angularities.

 There are other defects in Hinduism and in Islam which are
responsible for keeping the sore between Hindus and Muslims open and
running. Hinduism is said to divide people and in contrast Islam is said
to bind people together. This is only a half truth. For Islam divides as
inexorably as it binds. Islam is a close corporation and the distinction
that it makes between Muslims and non-Muslims is a very real, very
positive and very alienating distinction. The brotherhood of Islam is
not the universal brotherhood of man. It is brotherhood of Muslims for
Muslims only. There is a fraternity, but its benefit is confined to
those within that corporation. For those who are outside the
corporation, there is nothing but contempt and enmity. The second defect
of Islam is that it is a system of *social* self-government and is
incompatible with *local* self-government, because the allegiance of a
Muslim does not rest on his domicile in the country which is his but on
the faith to which he belongs. To the Muslim *ibi bene ibi patria* is
unthinkable. Wherever there is the rule of Islam, there is his own
country. In other words, Islam can never allow a true Muslim to adopt
India as his motherland and regard a Hindu as his kith and kin. That is
probably the reason why Maulana Mahomed Ali, a great Indian but a true
Muslim, preferred to be buried in Jerusalem rather than in India.

 The real explanation of the ideological transformation of the Muslim
leaders is not to be attributed to any dishonest drift in their opinion.
It appears to be the dawn of a new vision pointing to a new destiny
symbolized by a new name, Pakistan. The Muslims appear to have started a
new worship of a new destiny for the first time. This is really not so.
The worship is new because the sun of their new destiny which was so far
hidden in the clouds has only now made its appearance in full glow. The
magnetism of this new destiny cannot but draw the Muslims towards it.
The pull is so great that even men like Mr. Jinnah have been violently
shaken and have not been able to resist its force. This destiny spreads
itself out in a concrete form over the map of India. No one who just
\[=even\] looks at the map can miss it. It lies there as though it is
deliberately planned by Providence as a separate National State for
Muslims. Not only is this new destiny capable of being easily worked out
and put in concrete shape but it is also catching, because it opens up
the possibilities of realizing the Muslim idea of linking up all the
Muslim kindred in one Islamic State and thus avert\[ing\] the danger of
Muslims in different countries adopting the nationality of the country
to which they belong and thereby bring\[ing\] about the disintegration
of the Islamic brotherhood.**[/1/](#n01)** With the separation of
Pakistan from Hindustan, Iran, Iraq, Arabia, Turkey and Egypt are
forming a federation of Muslim countries constituting one Islamic State
extending from Constantinople down to Lahore. A Musalman must be really
very stupid if he is not attracted by the glamour of this new destiny
and completely transformed in his view of the place of Muslims in the
Indian cosmos.

 So obvious is the destiny that it is somewhat surprising that the
Muslims should have taken so long to own it up\[=adopt it\]. There is
evidence that some of them knew this to be the ultimate destiny of the
Muslims as early as 1923. In support of this, reference may be made to
the evidence of Khan Saheb Sardar M. Gul Khan who appeared as a witness
before the North-West Frontier Committee appointed in that year by the
Government of India under the chairmanship of Sir Dennis Bray, to report
upon the administrative relationship between the Settled Districts of
the N.-W. F. Province and the Tribal Area and upon the amalgamation of
the Settled Districts with the Punjab. The importance of his evidence
was not realized by any member of the Committee except Mr. N. M.
Samarth, who was the one member who drew pointed attention to it in his
Minority Report. The following extracts from his report illuminate a
dark comer in the history of the evolution of this new
destiny.**[/2/](#n02)** Says Mr. Samarth :â€”

> "There was not before the Committee another witness who could claim to
> speak with the authority of personal knowledge and experience of not
> only the North-West Frontier Province and Independent Territory but
> Baluchistan, Persia and Afghanistan, which this witness could justly
> lay claim to. It is noteworthy that he appeared before the Committee
> as a witness in his capacity as 'President, Islamic Anjuman, Dera
> Ismail Khan.' This witness (Khan Saheb Sardar Muhammad Gul Khan) was
> asked by me: 'Now suppose the Civil Government of the Frontier
> Province is so modelled as to be on the same basis as in Sind, then
> this Province will be part and parcel of the Punjab as Sind is of the
> Bombay Presidency. What have you to say to it?' He gave me, in the
> course of his reply, the following straight answer: 'As far as Islam
> is concerned and the Mahommedan idea of the League of Nations goes, I
> am against it.' On this answer, I asked him some further questions to
> which he gave me frank, outspoken replies without mincing matters. I
> extract the pertinent portions below :â€”
>
> 'Q.â€”The idea at the back of your Anjuman is the Pan-lslamic idea which
> is that Islam is a League of Nations and as such amalgamating this
> Province with the Punjab will be detrimental, will be prejudicial, to
> that idea. That is the dominant idea at the back of those who think
> with you? Is it so?
>
> 'A.â€”It is so, but I have to add something. Their idea is that the
> Hindu-Muslim unity will never become a fact, it will never become a
> *fait accompli*, and they think that this Province should remain
> separate and a link between Islam and Britannic Commonwealth. In fact,
> when I am asked what my opinion isâ€”1, as a member of the Anjuman, am
> expressing this opinionâ€”we would very much rather see the separation
> of the Hindus and Muhammadans, 23 crores of Hindus to the south and 8
> crores of Muslims to the north. Give the whole portion from
> Raskumarit**[/3/](#n03)** to Agra to Hindus and from Agra to Peshawar
> to Muhammadans, I mean transmigration from one place to the other.
> This is an idea of exchange. It is not an idea of annihilation.
> Bolshevism at present does away with the possession of private
> property. It nationalizes the whole thing and this is an idea which of
> course appertains to only exchange. This is of course impracticable.
> But if it were practicable, we would rather want this than the other.
>
> 'Q.â€”That is the dominant idea which compels you not to have
> amalgamation with the Punjab?'
>
> 'A.â€”Exactly.
>
> \*\*\*
>
> 'Q.â€”When you referred to the Islamic League of Nations, I believe you
> had the religious side of it more prominently in your mind than the
> political side?
>
> 'A.â€”Of course political Anjuman is a political thing. Initially, of
> course, anything Muhammadan is religious, but of course Anjuman is a
> political association.
>
> ' Q.â€”1 am not referring to your Anjuman but I am referring to the
> Musalmans. I want to know what the Musalmans think of this Islamic
> League of Nations, what have they most prominently in mind, is it the
> religious side or the political side?' A.â€”Islam, as you know, is both
> religious and political.
>
> 'Q.â€”Therefore politics and religion are intermingled?
>
> 'A.â€”Yes, certainly.'
>
> \*\*\*

 Mr. Samarth used this evidence for the limited purpose of showing
that to perpetuate a separate Pathan Province by refusing to amalgamate
the N.-W. F. P. with the Punjab was dangerous in view of the Pathan's
affiliations with Afghanistan and with other Muslim countries outside
India. But this evidence also shows that the idea underlying the scheme
of Pakistan had taken birth sometime before 1923.

 In 1924 Mr. Mahomed Ali speaking on the resolution on the extension
of the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms to the N.-W. F. Province, which was
moved in the session of the Muslim League held in Bombay in that year is
said to have suggested**[/4/](#n04)** that the Mahomedans of the
Frontier Province should have the right of self-determination to choose
between an affiliation with India or with Kabul. He also quoted a
certain Englishman who had said that if a straight line be drawn from
Constantinople to Delhi, it will disclose a Mahomedan corridor right up
to Shaharanpur. It is possible that Mr. Mahomed Ali knew the whole
scheme of Pakistan which came out in the evidence of the witness
referred to by Mr. Samarth and in an unguarded moment gave out what the
witness had failed to disclose, namely, the ultimate linking of Pakistan
to Afghanistan.

 Nothing seems to have been said or done by the Muslims about this
scheme between 1924 and 1930. The Muslims appear to have buried it and
conducted negotiations with the Hindus for safeguards, as distinguished
from partition, on the basis of the traditional one-nation theory. But
in 1930 when the Round Table Conference was going on, certain Muslims
had formed themselves into a committee with headquarters in London for
the purpose of getting the R. T. C. to entertain the project of
Pakistan. Leaflets and circulars were issued by the committee and sent
round to members of the R. T. C. in support of Pakistan. Even then
nobody took any interest in it, and the Muslim members of the R. T. C.
did not countenance it in any way.**[/5/](#n05)**

 It is possible that the Muslims in the beginning, thought that this
destiny was just a dream incapable of realization. It is possible that
later on when they felt that it could be a reality they did not raise
any issue about it because they were not sufficiently well organized to
compel the British as well as the Hindus to agree to it. It is difficult
to explain why the Muslims did not press for Pakistan at the R. T. C.
Perhaps they knew that the scheme would offend**[/6/](#n06)** the
British, and as they had to depend upon the British for a decision on
the 14 points of dispute between them and the Hindus, the Musalmans,
perfect statesmen as they are and knowing full well that politics, as
Bismarck said, was always the game of the possible, preferred to wait
and not to show their teeth till they had got a decision from the
British in their favour on the 14 points of dispute.

 There is another explanation for this delay in putting forth the
scheme of Pakistan. It is far more possible that the Muslim leaders did
not until very recently know the philosophical justification for
Pakistan. After all, Pakistan is no small move on the Indian political
chess-board. It is the biggest move ever taken, for it involves the
disruption of the state. Any Mahomedan, if he had ventured to come
forward to advocate it, was sure to have been asked what moral and
philosophical justification he had in support of so violent a project.
The reason why they had not so far discovered what the philosophical
justification for Pakistan is, \[is\] equally understandable. The Muslim
leaders were, therefore, speaking of the Musalmans of India as a
community or a minority. They never spoke of the Muslims as a nation.
The distinction between a community and a nation is rather thin, and
even if it is otherwise, it is not so striking in all cases. Every state
is more or less a composite state and there is, in most of them, a great
diversity of populations, with varying languages, religious codes and
social traditions, forming a congeries of loosely associated groups. No
state is ever a single society, an inclusive and permeating body of
thought and action. Such being the case, a group may mistakenly call
itself a community even when it has in it the elements of being a
nation. Secondly, as has been pointed out earlier, a people may not be
possessed of a national consciousness although there may be present all
the elements which go to make a nation.

 Again from the point of view of minority rights and safeguards this
difference is unimportant. Whether the minority is a community or a
nation, it is a minority, and the safeguards for the protection of a
minor nation cannot be very different from the safeguards necessary for
the protection of a minor community. The protection asked for is against
the tyranny of the majority, and once the possibility of such a tyranny
of the majority over a minority is established, it matters very little
whether the minority driven to ask for safeguards is a community or is a
nation. Not that there is no distinction between a community and a
nation. The difference indeed is very great. It may be summed up by
saying that a community, however different from and however opposed to
other communities, major or minor, is one with the rest in the matter of
the ultimate destiny of all. A nation, on the other hand, is not only
different from other components of the state but it believes in and
cherishes a different destiny totally antagonistic to the destiny
entertained by other component elements in the state. The difference
appears to me so profound that speaking for myself I would not hesitate
to adopt it as a test to distinguish a community from a nation. A people
who, notwithstanding their differences accept a common destiny for
themselves as well as for their opponents, are a community. A people who
are not only different from the rest but who refuse to accept for
themselves the same destiny which others do, are a nation. It is this
acceptance or non-acceptance of a common destiny which alone can explain
why the Untouchables, the Christians and the Parsis are in relation to
the Hindus only communities and why the Muslims are a nation. Thus, from
the point of view of harmony in the body politic the difference is in
the most vital character, as the difference is one of ultimate destiny.
The dynamic character of this difference is undeniable. If it persists,
it cannot but have the effect of rending the State in fragments. But so
far as safeguards are concerned, there cannot be any difference between
a nation and a community. A community is entitled to claim the same
rights and safeguards as a nation can.

 The delay in discovering the philosophical justification for
Pakistan is due to the fact that the Muslim leaders had become
habituated to speaking of Muslims as a community and as a minority. The
use of this terminology took them in a false direction and brought them
to a dead end. As they acknowledged themselves to be a minority
community, they felt that there was nothing else open to them except to
ask for safeguards, which they did, and with which they concerned
themselves for practically half a century. If it had struck them that
they need not stop with acknowledging themselves to be a minority, but
that they could proceed further to distinguish a minority which is a
community from a minority which is a nation, they might have been led on
to the way to discover this philosophical justification for Pakistan. In
that case, Pakistan would, in all probability, have come much earlier
than it has done.

 Be that as it may, the fact remains that the Muslims have undergone
a complete transformation and that the transformation is brought about
not by any criminal inducement but by the discovery of what is their
true and ultimate destiny. To some, this suddenness of the
transformation may give a shock. But those who have studied the course
of Hindu-Muslim politics for the last twenty years, cannot but admit
feeling that this transformation, this parting of the two, was on the
way. For the course of Hindu-Muslim politics has been marked by a tragic
and ominous parallelism. The Hindus and Muslims have trodden parallel
paths. No doubt, they went in the same direction. But they never
travelled the same road. In 1885, the Hindus started the Congress to
vindicate the political rights of Indians as against the British. The
Muslims refused to be lured by the Hindus into joining the Congress.
Between 1885 and 1906 the Muslims kept out of this stream of Hindu
politics. In 1906 they felt the necessity for the Muslim community
taking part in political activity. Even then they dug their own separate
channel for the flow of Muslim political life. The flow was to be
controlled by a separate political organization called the Muslim
League. Ever since the formation of the Muslim League the waters of
Muslim politics have flown \[=flowed\] in this separate channel. Except
on rare occasions, the Congress and the League have lived apart and have
worked apart. Their aims and objects have not always been the same. They
have even avoided holding their annual sessions at one and the same
place, lest the shadow of one should fall upon the other. It is not that
the League and the Congress have not met. The two have met, but only for
negotiations, a few times with success and most times without success.
They met in 1916 at Lucknow and their efforts were crowned with success.
In 1925 they met but without success. In 1928 a section of the Muslims
were prepared to meet the Congress. Another section refused to meet. It
rather preferred to depend upon the British. The point is, they have met
but have never merged. Only during the Khilafat agitation did the waters
of the two channels leave their appointed course and flow as one stream
in one channel. It was believed that nothing would separate the waters
which God was pleased to join. But that hope was belied. It was found
that there was something in the composition of the two waters which
would compel their separation. Within a few years of their confluence
and as soon as the substance of the Khilafat cause vanishedâ€”the water
from the one stream reacted violently to the presence of the other, as
one does to a foreign substance entering one's body. Each began to show
a tendency to throw out and to separate from the other. The result was
that when the waters did separate, they did \[so\] with such impatient
velocity and determined violenceâ€”if one can use such language in
speaking of waterâ€”against each other that thereafter they have been
flowing in channels far deeper and far more distant from each other than
those existing before. Indeed, the velocity and violence with which the
two waters have burst out from the pool in which they had temporarily
gathered have altered the direction in which they were flowing. At one
time their direction was parallel. Now they are opposite. One is flowing
towards the east as before. The other has started to flow in the
opposite direction, towards the west. Apart from any possible objection
to the particular figure of speech, I am sure it cannot be said that
this is a wrong reading of the history of Hindu-Muslim politics. If one
bears this parallelism in mind, he will know that there is nothing
sudden about the transformation. For if the transformation is a
revolution, the parallelism in Hindu-Muslim politics marks the evolution
of that revolution. That Muslim politics should have run a parallel
course and should never have merged in the Hindu current of politics is
a strange fact of modern Indian history. In so segregating themselves
the Muslims were influenced by some mysterious feeling, the source of
which they could not define, and guided by a hidden hand which they
could not see, but which was all the same directing them to keep apart
from Hindus. This mysterious feeling and this hidden hand was no other
than their pre-appointed destiny, symbolized by Pakistan, which, unknown
to them, was working within them. Thus viewed, there is nothing new or
nothing sudden in the idea of Pakistan. The only thing that has happened
is that, what was indistinct appears now in full glow, and what was
nameless has taken a name.  
  
  
  

VI  
\[Mutual antipathies have created a virus of dualism in the body
politic\]

  
  

 Summing up the whole discussion, it appears that an integral India
is incompatible with an independent India or even with India as a
dominion. On the footing that India is to be one integral whole, there
is a frustration of all her hopes of freedom writ large on her future.
There is frustration, if the national destiny is conceived in terms of
independence, because the Hindus will not follow that path. They have
reason not to follow it. They fear that that way lies the establishment
of the domination of the Muslims over the Hindus. The Hindus see that
the Muslim move for independence is not innocent. It is to be used only
to bring the Hindus out of the protecting shield of the British Empire
in the open and then by alliance with the neighbouring Muslim countries
and by their aid subjugate them. For the Muslims independence is not the
end. It is only a means to establish Muslim Raj. There is frustration if
the national destiny is conceived of in terms of Dominion Status because
the Muslims will not agree to abide by it. They fear that under Dominion
Status, the Hindus will establish Hindu Raj over them by taking benefit
of the principle of one man one vote and one vote one value, and that
however much the benefit of the principle is curtailed by weightage to
Muslims, the result cannot fail to be a government of the Hindus, by the
Hindus and therefore for the Hindus. Complete frustration of her destiny
therefore seems to be the fate of India if it is insisted that India
shall remain as one integral whole.

 It is a question to be considered whether integral India is an ideal
worth fighting for. In the first place, even if India remained
\[=remains\] as one integral whole, it will never be an organic whole.
India may in name continue to be known as one country, but in reality it
will be two separate countriesâ€”Pakistan and Hindustanâ€”joined together by
a forced and artificial union. This will be specially so under the
stress of the two-nation theory. As it is, the idea of unity has had
little hold on the Indian world of fact and reality, little charm for
the common Indian, Hindu or Muslim, whose vision is bounded by the
valley in which he lives. But it did appeal to the imaginative and
unsophisticated minds on both sides. The two-nation theory will not
leave room even for the growth of that sentimental desire for unity. The
spread of that virus of dualism in the body politic must some day create
a mentality which is sure to call for a life and death struggle for the
dissolution of this forced union. If by reason of some superior force
the dissolution does not take place, one thing is sure to happen to
Indiaâ€”namely, that this continued union will go on sapping her vitality,
loosening its cohesion, weakening its hold on the love and faith of her
people and preventing the use, if not retarding the growth, of its moral
and -material resources. India will be an anaemic and sickly state,
ineffective, a living corpse, dead though not buried.

 The second disadvantage of this forced union will be the necessity
for finding a basis for Hindu-Muslim settlement. How difficult it is to
reach a settlement no one needs to be told. Short of dividing India into
Pakistan and Hindustan, what more can be offeredâ€”without injury to the
other interests in the country,â€”than what has already been conceded with
a view to bring about a settlement, it is difficult to conceive. But
whatever the difficulties, it cannot be gainsaid that if this forced
union continues, there can be no political advance for India unless it
is accompanied by communal settlement. Indeed, a communal
settlementâ€”rather, an international settlement, for now and hereafter
the Hindus and the Muslims must be treated as two nationsâ€”will remain
under this scheme of forced union a condition precedent
\[=precondition\] for every inch of political progress.

 There will be a third disadvantage of this forced political union.
It cannot eliminate the presence of a third party. In the first place
the constitution, if one comes in\[to\] existence, will be a federation
of mutually suspicious and unfriendly states. They will of their own
accord want the presence of a third party to appeal to in cases of
dispute. For their suspicious and unfriendly relationship towards each
other will come in the way of the two nations ever reaching satisfaction
by the method of negotiation. India will not have in future even that
unity of opposition to the British which used to gladden the hearts of
so many in the past. For the two nations will be more opposed to each
other than before, \[too opposed\] ever to become united against the
British. In the second place, the basis of the constitution will be the
settlement between the Hindus and the Muslims, and for the successful
working of such a constitution the presence of a third party, and be it
noted, with sufficient armed force, will be necessary to see that the
settlement is not broken.

 All this, of course, means the frustration of the political destiny
which both Hindus and Muslims profess to cherish, and the early
consummation of which they so devoutly wish. What else, however, can be
expected if two warring nations are locked in the bosom of one country
and one constitution?

 Compare with this dark vista, the vista that opens out if India is
divided into Pakistan and Hindustan. The partition opens the way to a
fulfilment of the destiny each may fix for itself. Muslims will be free
to choose for their Pakistan independence or dominion status, whatever
they think good for themselves. Hindus will be free to choose for their
Hindustan independence or dominion status, whatever they may think wise
for their condition. The Muslims will be freed from the nightmare of
Hindu Raj. Thus the path of political progress becomes smooth for both.
The fear of the object being frustrated gives place to the hope of
fulfilment. Communal settlement must remain a necessary condition
precedent \[=a necessary precondition\], if India, as one integral
whole, desires to make any political advance. But Pakistan and Hindustan
are free from the rigorous trammels of such a condition precedent, and
even if a communal settlement with minorities remained t\[=remains\] o
be a condition precedent, it will not be difficult to fulfil. The path
of each is cleared of this obstacle. There is another advantage of
Pakistan which must be mentioned. It is generally admitted that there
does exist a kind of antagonism between Hindus and Muslims which, if not
dissolved, will prove ruinous to the peace and progress of India. But it
is not realized that the mischief is caused not so much by the existence
of mutual antagonism, as by the existence of a common theatre for its
display. It is the common theatre which calls this antagonism into
action. It cannot but be so. When the two are called to participate in
acts of common concern, what else can happen except a display of that
antagonism which is inherent in them. Now the scheme of Pakistan has
this advantage, namely, that it leaves no theatre for the play of that
social antagonism which is the cause of disaffection among the Hindus
and the Muslims. There is no fear of Hindustan and Pakistan suffering
from that disturbance of peace and tranquillity which has torn and
shattered India for so many years. Last, but by no means least, is the
elimination of the necessity of a third party to maintain peace. Freed
from the trammels which one imposes upon the other by reason of this
forced union, Pakistan and Hindustan can each grow into a strong stable
State with no fear of disruption from within. As two separate entities,
they can reach their respective destinies, which as parts of one whole
they never can.

 Those who want an integral India must note what Mr. Mahomed Ali as
President of the Congress in 1923 said. Speaking about the unity among
Indians, Mr. Mahomed Ali said:â€”

> "Unless some new force other than the misleading unity of opposition
> unites this vast continent of India, it will remain a geographical
> misnomer."

 Is there any new force which remains to be harnessed? All other
forces having failed, the Congress, after it became the Government of
the day, saw a new force in the plan of mass contact. It was intended to
produce political unity between Hindus and Muslim masses by ignoring or
circumventing the leaders of the Muslims. In its essence, it was the
plan of the British Conservative Party to buy Labour with "Tory gold."
The plan was as mischievous as it was futile. The Congress forgot that
there are things so precious that no owner who knows their value will
part with \[them\], and any attempt to cheat him \[in\]to part\[ing\]
with them is sure to cause resentment and bitterness. Political power is
the most precious thing in the life of a community, especially if its
position is constantly being challenged and the community is required to
maintain it by meeting the challenge. Political power is the only means
by which it can sustain its position. To attempt to make it part with it
by false propaganda, by misrepresentation, or by the lure of office or
of gold, is equivalent to disarming the community, to silencing its
guns, and to making it ineffective and servile. It may be a way of
producing unity. But the way is despicable, for it means suppressing the
opposition by a false and unfair method. It cannot produce any unity. It
can only create exasperation, bitterness and hostility.**[/7/](#n07)**
This is precisely what the mass contact plan of the Congress did. For
there can be no doubt that this mad plan of mass contact has had a great
deal to do with the emergence of Pakistan.

 It might be said that it was unfortunate that mass contact was
conceived and employed as a political lever and that it might have been
used as a force for social unity with greater success. But could it have
succeeded in breaking the social wall which divides the Hindus and the
Muslims? It cannot but be matter of the deepest regret to every Indian
that there is no social tie to draw them together. There is no
inter-dining and no inter-marriage between the two. Can they be
introduced? Their festivals are different. Can the Hindus be induced to
adopt them or join in them? Their religious notions are not only
divergent but repugnant to each other, so that on a religious platform,
the entry of the one means the exit of the other. Their cultures are
different; their literatures and their histories are different. They are
not only different, but so distasteful to each other that they are sure
to cause aversion and nausea. Can anyone make them drink from the same
fount of these perennial sources of life? No common meeting ground
exists. None can be cultivated. There is not even sufficient physical
contact, let alone their sharing a common cultural and emotional life.
They do not live together. Hindus and Muslims live in separate worlds of
their own. Hindus live in villages and Muslims in towns in those
provinces where the Hindus are in a majority. Muslims live in villages
and Hindus in towns in those provinces where the Muslims are in a
majority. Wherever they live, they live apart. Every town, every village
has its Hindu quarters and Muslim quarters, which are quite separate
from each other. There is no common continuous cycle of participation.
They meet to trade or they meet to murder. They do not meet to befriend
one another. When there is no call to trade or when there is no call to
murder, they cease to meet. When there is peace, the Hindu quarters and
the Muslim quarters appear like two alien settlements. The moment war is
declared, the settlements become armed camps. The periods of peace and
the periods of war are brief. But the interval is one of continuous
tension. What can mass contact do against such barriers? It cannot even
get over on the other side of the barrier, much less can it produce
organic unity.  


======================

**[/1/](#m01)** Sir Muhammad lqbal strongly condemned nationalism in
Musalmans of any non-Muslim country, including Indian Musalmans, in the
sense of an attachment to the mother country.

**[/2/](#m02)Report of the North-West Frontier Inquiry Committee**,
1924, pp. 122-23.

**[/3/](#m03)** This is as in the original. It is probably a misprint
for Kanya Kumari.

**[/4/](#m04)** For reference see Lala Lajpatrai's Presidential address
to the Hindu Maha Sabha session held at Calcutta on 11th April 1925 in
the **Indian Quarterly Register**, 1925, Vol. I, p. 379.

**[/5/](#m05)** If opposition to one common central government be taken
as a principal feature of the scheme of Pakistan, then the only member
of the R. T. C. who may be said to have supported it without mentioning
it by name was Sir Muhammad lqbal, who expressed the view at the third
session of the R. T. C. that there should be no central government for
India, that the provinces should be autonomous and independent dominions
in direct relationship to the Secretary of State in London.

**[/6/](#m06)** It is said that it was privately discussed with the
British authorities who were not in favour of it. It is possible that
the Muslims did not insist on it for fear of incurring their
displeasure.

**[/7/](#m07)** So sober a person as Sir Abdul Rahim, in his
presidential address to the session of the Muslim League held in Aligarh
on 30th December 1925, gave expression to this bitterness caused by
Hindu tactics wherein he "deplored the attacks on the Muslim community
in the form of Shuddhi, Sangalhan and Hindu Maha Sabha movements and
activities led by politicians like Lala Lajpal Rai and Swami
Shradhanand" and said "Some of the Hindu leaders had spoken publicly of
driving out Muslims from India as Spaniards expelled Moors from Spain.
Musalmans would be loo big a mouthful for their Hindu friends to
swallow. Thanks to the artificial conditions under which they lived they
had to admit that Hindus were in a position of great advantage and even
the English had learned to dread their venomous propaganda. Hindus were
equally adept in the art of belittling in every way possible the best
Musalmans in public positions excepting only those who had subscribed to
the Hindu political creed. They had in fact by their provocative and
aggressive conduct made it clearer than ever to Muslims that the latter
could not entrust their fate to Hindus and must adopt every possible
measure of self-defence."â€”**All-India Register**, 1925, Vol. II, p.
356.  


  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) -- [Dr. Ambedkar's
work](../../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#ambedkar) --
[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html#index) -- [Map
index](../../00maplinks/index.html#index) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
