---
title: Cold
---

## General strategy

### Layer up

Dressing with multiple layers of clothing essential, due to the wide use
of heated buildings. It also insulates better.

Wear a warm clothing a few minutes before stepping out - then, air will
be trapped inside the clothes.

### Accesorize

use faceguards, gloves, etc.. for extremities. This provides additional
comfort. Eg: a hood not attached to the jacket provides improved
mobility.

### Maintenance

Look for machine washable and dryable clothes.

## Base layer

See warm/ normal weather clothing.

### Purpose

Warmth, moisture control while maintaining ease of movement. Fibers will
wick (move) moisture away from your skin and pass it through the fabric
so it will evaporate.

#### Material choice

Underwear made of polyester fiber do this, but they irritate the skin.

Merino wool thermals and balaclavas have been tried successfully.

## Insulation layer

### Materials

Cold weather (\<50F) = a polyester-wool blend rip stop fabric.

Temperate (50-80F) = a 65%/35% polyester/cotton blend rip stop fabric.

### Sweatshirt

This can be used during dry days. Choose ones with light but warm hoods,
for convenience. Zipped sweatshirts’ insulation is adjustable, and they
are easy to remove.

80/20 and 50/50 Cotton, polyester/ fleece blends have been used before.

### Pants

Use polyester, which wicks away moisture while providing warmth Eg:
running pants.

### Long Underwear

Wear thermal underwear over normal underwear, in order to reduce need
for washing.

Avoid thermal underwear made out of artificial material, as this will
lead to skin irritation. Fine merino wool thermal underwear was used
successfully.

Thickness / Weight of the underwear should be chosen based on operating
temperature.

Don’t buy leg warmers/ sleeves: tendency to slip. Instead modify a
merino wool long underwear by cutting out the genital area: ye will use
it on top of normal underwear anyway.

### Pants

Can use pants made out of thick materials, such as Jeans/ Denim,
Corduroy, Cargo pants.

Corduroy pants made out of a 66/33 cotton/ polyester blend have been
successfully used for insulation.

Or can use down pant for excellent warmth. Eg: Made by Cabela’s.

28 inch waist, 30 inch inseam relaxed fit Denim jeans were too tight
around the crotch, restricted breath while sitting down. 29 inch and 30
inch waist relaxed fit corduroy pants have been successfully used.

## Outer layer

### Purpose

Protection from rain and wind. Must be easily packable.

This can be same as rain clothing.

### Overcoat

Buy slightly larger size to accommodate multiple layers of clothing.

Choose coats with large pockets.

This could be a rain and wind stopping shell, without insulation.

Choose coats with storm hoods, preferably detachable.

Choose clothes with strings to close sleeves.

belt for heavy coat - the waist is designed to carry weight.

### Pants

Choose clothes with strings to close sleeves.

Avoid cotton or denim, as they get wet easily.

## Insulation and protection of extremities

### Headgear

An estimated 30% of your body heat escapes through your head.

Hoods are more effective than caps and hats, as they protect the ears.
can take balaclava and alter it, so that you don’t have to pull it over.

Protecting face: Cold wind hits you while cycling. Use face guard with
hole for the nose: nose drips when you return to a warm place from the
cold.

#### Material choice

Wool can be irritating. Polyester and merino wool balaclava has been
tried successfully.

### Scarf

Better for mobility than attached hood. wind can get in between coat and
hood.

### Gloves

Leather gloves are breathable on hot days, while protecting from the
wind.

All weather light weight gloves provide good insulation too.

## Shoes

Instep crampons are useful for walking on ice.

## Sleeping gear

Down goose: Down bags are considered superior because of their
phenomenal warmth-to-weight and warmth-to-bulk ratios. While a synthetic
bag will weigh somewhat more than a down bag at an equivalent
temperature rating, synthetic bags perform better when wet.

Use sleeping bags with the right temperature rating. it is more
difficult to stay warm in an insufficiently insulated bag than it is to
vent a bag designed for cooler temperatures.

Prefer water resistant ones. Look for small stuff size and light weight.

Line the inside of the sleeping bag with a sheet, in order to reduce
need to wash. Wear long underwear and layers to sleep.

Consider sleeping bag liners to add insulation.

Mateable bags can be zipped together.
