+++
title = "10 "

+++
<div align="right">

**7. G.C. Chaudhary**

</div>

Dr. Shreerang Godbole has actually given vent to his deep anguish which
is gnawing at the heart and mind of the Hindu intelligentsia today. He
has spoken THE TRUTH - may it be bitter.

I am writing these lines not only from my knowledge but from my
experience and from what I have seen, and the events of recent past
which I have lived and borne.

Muslims of India propounded the two nation theory purely on the basis of
Islam, the only true religion. They claimed that they had a ‘different’
culture, tradition, language, living and that they could not co-exist in
Hindu-dominated India. Jinnah declared, “If the Congress wanted war,
Indian Muslims will accept the offer unhesitatingly. We shall have India
divided or India destroyed.” Muslims ultimately succeeded in
partitioning the country gaining Pakistan. So what remained was
naturally Hindusthan. But the majority of Muslim agitators who were from
Bengal, Bihar and U.P., stayed back with their mental aberrations
intact.

The fundamental tenet of Islam is hatred for all other faiths and
destruction of all KAFIRS: for all religions except Islam are false,
Darkness (*Jahiliya*). For Islam, civilization begins with Mohammad’s
messages received direct from Allah, the only true God. Islam recognises
only one book, the Quran, and only one and the LAST messenger, Mohammad.
The messages were deleted, substituted, and were sometimes received even
from the SATAN, leading astray the message and the Messenger. Since
Allah spoke for the last and all times to come, Islam brooks no change,
addition, alteration, re-definition, or re-interpretation. It is a
closed door. Every one not accepting the message, - even those who have
not heard of it - is condemned to Hell Fire eternally. To annihilate the
KAFIRS and destroy their places of worship is JEHAD, Holy War, with
confirmed reservation in Heaven for those waging it.

These tenets are continuously being propagated by MUSLIMS, taught in
minority schools - the Madarsas - and every Muslim child is brainwashed
into this psyche. They want DARUL ISLAM. See the world map: India is the
only KAFIRISTAN on this side of the globe, so grab it by any means
whatsoever.

Hindus are complaisant; the so-called secular leaders are wooing the
Muslim vote as if the history from 1885 is no guide. Muslims are ever
demanding concessions and are getting them.

The Constitution of India is not applicable to Muslims. Article 44
envisages Uniform Civil Code. But Muslims are opposed to it. Article 25
is for reform of Hindu religious bodies only. While Hindus are subjected
to continuous inroads into their religion, culture, tradition and usages
by innumerable legislations, Muslims are exempt. They actually have a
privileged status and they demand more; they are insatiable.

Hindus do not need any intermediary to achieve God; they do not need
sermons from the Macaulay-breed intellectuals and so-called secular
leaders, for Sanatan Dharma, commonly called Hinduism, declares: EKAM
SAD VIPRÃH BAHUDHÃ VADANTI - Truth is but one, propounded differently by
various Teachers. This, however, does not apply to Islam for it teaches
not God-realisation, but achievement of HEAVEN, and negates all other
paths except the one propagated by Mohammad.

With this fundamental difference between Hinduism and Islam, where is
place for SARVA DHARMA SAMABHÃV or SARVA PANTH SAMÃDAR? It is a slogan
born out of ignorance of history and known facts. Everybody seems to
preach to Hindus to bow down, to cower, to surrender to the Muslim might
in the hope of gaining power and earn the distinction of being SECULAR.

Let facts speak. Though Gandhi proclaimed that India would be divided
over his dead body, he succumbed to partition. Jinnah agreed to transfer
of population - a very natural corollary to Pakistan - but the Congress
did not, for it claimed to represent all communities. At the time of
partition Hindu population in N.W.F.P., Baluchistan and Sindh was 8%,
12% and 25% respectively. All were driven out. In West Pakistan Hindus
comprised 23%, now they are 3%, while in Bangladesh the 29% has come
down to 12%.  The Hindus who are still staying back have a life well
described and documented in the book *LAJJÃ*; they virtually live in
Hell - under constant terror.

The gradual decline of Hindu culture, religion and unity pained and
inspired a sage, Dr. Keshav Baliram Hedgewar, to found R.S.S. on 27
September 1925 with five Swayamsevaks at Nagpur. The basis was DHARMA
and SANSKRITI. The object was CHARITRA NIRMÃN and SHISHTA SAMÃJ - the
building of a good society through building of individual character. Has
the GOD FAILED? Has the policy been reversed?

Gandhi called R.S.S. “a communal organisation with a totalitarian
outlook”. There is no democracy in the R.S.S., it is true. But men of
the highest integrity sacrificed brilliant careers and joined the Sangh
with a mission to organise the nation - an undivided nation and a
powerful nation (RÃSHTRA). They unflinchingly worked for it. The R.S.S.
delved into Indian history and discarded Negationism. One aspect of
appeasement has been to negate the genocide, atrocities, conversions,
destruction of temples and seats of culture and learning by the Muslim
invaders and rulers which, to them, was JEHAD, Holy War. No nation
negates its history. Only the other day the B.B.C. had a full report on
the anniversary of the Nuremburg war crimes trials. The Japanese
remember Hiroshima and Nagasaki every year. The Jews have recorded the
atrocities perpetrated against them in various European countries. But
the Ruling Class in India is prepared to negate, even falsify history.

There has been a slow but marked decline on physical and intellectual
levels of R.S.S., specially the lower echelons. They are ignorant of or
have not assimilated the basic tenets of R.S.S. The higher ups also pay
routine visits, deliver lectures, and consider their duty accomplished.
They seem to be less interested in their own organisation, but are very
active in politics.

The B.J.P. which has its roots in Jana Sangh is also deviating. It has
of late become more vote-conscious. Power seems to be the aim, the
ultimate goal; means and principles can be ignored.

This is the picture of India today. Hindus, with one and only one
geographical area for habitat, have reason to be concerned.

The framers of secularist SLOGANS should first read the Quran and the
Biography of Mohammad to understand the Muslim psyche, thought process,
religious tenets, injunctions and aims. They will then understand that
Islam has no compromise with anything which is not as incorporated in
the Quran. The need to change is for the Muslims. They are aware of the
lust and weakness of Hindu secular politicians, and are playing a
balancing game for gaining ascendancy. They are nobody’s vote bank. All
Hindus from the Kashmir Valley were driven out and no tears were shed by
the secularists. Everybody is busy in winning over the Muslims.

It is high time that the Hindu masses are appraised of the real dangers
threatening their very existence. This can be done and the process
accelerated by R.S.S. A movement of mass contact can be and should be
launched. The R.S.S. can speak freely and frankly for it does not need
any vote bank. Framing of appeasing slogans is a dangerous exercise.

The B.J.P. is diluting its stand. It was Gandhi who conferred the title
of Qaide-Azam on Jinnah, but to what effect? Nothing helped, for Muslims
are a determined lot with only one aim - DARUL ISLAM. Let Hindus see the
truth and not put themselves on the road to total annihilation.

Time is indeed for stock taking. Once the Muslims are convinced that
Hindus are not a divided lot and are prepared for, the ultimate
sacrifice to save their country, religion, culture, and traditions, they
will cease to create trouble. Hindus will have to be assertive. Let
Muslims live in India as any other citizens with all the rights even
though they got their share in shape of Pakistan. But Hindu tolerance is
being misinterpreted as weakness and Muslims have become more and more
aggressive, intolerant and demanding. They should forget - LAD KE LIYA
PAKISTAN, HANS KE LENGE HINDUSTAN.

Most of the present leadership in the non-B.J.P. parties did not witness
the conditions before or during partition. The communal parties like
Muslim League and National Conference and mushroom parties like B.S.P.,
S.P., J.D. combine to keep the B.J.P. out of power. The nation is
secondary to all non-B.J.P. parties today, least realising that they are
working for total destruction of themselves.

A point naturally arises as to why the B.J.P. is untouchable for all?
Why every political party wants to keep away from it? Though the answer
is there in the foregoing paragraphs, a little further examination is
needed.

B.J.P., originally Jana Sangh, got its present name after the Janata
Party into which Jana Sangh had merged, disintegrated. Jana Sangh was
purely a party of Hindus. B.J.P. expanded its base and today admits
members of all religions including Muslims. But the Muslims are still
wary of it and mistrust it. There is a general feeling that it is
controlled and guided by the R.S.S. This belief gains from the fact that
most of the top leaders belong to the R.S.S. cadre. The R.S.S. controls
and guides other organisations like V.H.P., Bajrang Dal, Vidyarthi
Parishad etc. The R.S.S. deputes Swayamsevaks to the B.J.P. also. Thus
these organisations present a picture of expansion of the R.S.S..

Since the B.J.P. has also deviated and diluted its stand, people have
begun to equate it with other political parties and not essentially a
party with a difference. The B.J.P. instead of becoming vote conscious
should have a clear cut programme in National interest. The party has
become almost silent on the issues of Ram Mandir, Kashi and Mathura. The
B.J.P. should woo Hindu votes. This is the only alternative to save the
country left to us. It should give a call for aggressive Hinduism for it
is their land and any claim for further partition etc. has to be
resisted and fought. Slogans are not going to convince any Muslim but
may misguide Hindus.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer joined Bihar Labour Service in 1942 and retired as Joint
Labour Commissioner in 1980. He worked as District President of the VHP
in Madhubani, Bihar, from 1989 to 1992 when he resigned from the
organisation in utter disgust. At present he is active as a member of
the District Executive Committee of the BJP in Madhubani, where he
lives.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


