+++
title = "14 DOCUMENT 1: MY ANSWERS"

+++
<div align="right">

**11. Nachiketa Dogra**

</div>

Received your “Time for Stock Taking”. Each and every word of this
pamphlet especially from Dr. Godbole spoke my heart and mind. I bow down
before you and Godbole for such an unbeatable logic.

Hindu intellectuals should expose Quran and Hadith i.e. Islam. Islam in
itself is very very weak and fragile without any reason and philosophy.
It is medieval and unscientific. So it will not at all stand the test of
time. It violates human rights mercilessly. So it will crumble down with
double of the speed with which it rose up, once it is declothed. Muslims
and Secularists have covered it up with a black cloth like the one in
Mecca. Islam will depreciate in the mind of Muslims themselves when
Hindus start showing the real face of it.  Majority of the Muslims
(especially Indian Muslims) don’t know Quran and Hadith. Some Muslim
intellectuals (rather Muslim fanatics) have now started interpreting
Islam and Quran in a modified way so that its ugly face is not exposed.

Listen to Radio Iran or Radio Pakistan or even Radio Doche Vale Clon,
Germany. They give polished interpretations of Quran and Hadith and
present Hinduism in a bad shape. But we Hindus being citizens of Secular
India cannot rebut or counter them. Thus “Secularism” has become a curse
for Hindu Culture and Hinduism. The moment we speak of Hinduism,
Congress and Communists will cry and tell the Muslims, “Look, these
communal Hindus will eliminate you.”

Earlier there were efforts from some patriotic and daring Hindus to ban
the Quran in India but the Congress Government didn’t allow even
discussion on it. So now I feel we should adopt the other way i.e. to
propagate to people what the Quran contains, to educate people
(including Muslims) about its illogic, to expose to them its inhumanity
and obsoleteness. In Kashmir I observed that many well educated people
had not known some of the Ayats and their meaning which I showed them
from an English book. First they asserted that there were no such
injunctions from Quran but slowly they agreed to some extent though with
different explanations. The greatest difficulty in discussing Islam or
Quran with Muslims is that they avoid discussing it even among friends
lest they earn *wrath* from prophet Mohammad, or be disrespectful to any
Ayat or prophet or somebody may inform about this involvement in
discussion and thus get them declared Kafirs. In fact Muslims are too
much afraid of Imams and Maulvis. Muslim mobs are too much in the grip
of Imams and Maulvis and Allah’s wrath so much so that nobody dares to
think freely and speak openly about his opinion regarding the
*ultimateness* of the Quran. But one thing is there. Some Muslims do
have some genuine doubts about which they seldom open their mouths for
fear from their own community.

I doubt if true face of Islam can be exposed or much change in the
political and administrative set up of India take place even when the
BJP comes to power at Centre. I don’t know then why BJP also has adopted
the policy of appeasement towards Muslims and started Sarva Panth
Samãdar Manch. I think BJP can consolidate Hindus more if it speaks as a
communal Hindu instead of as secular Hindu. And as a Hindu it has to
educate Muslims of their past and of their Hindu ancestry. We have to
advertise that all Muslims had become converts from Hindus due to force
under Muslim rule, otherwise all Muslims are Hindus coming from Hindu
ancestors. So Islam is not a suitable ideology for them by tradition or
temperament.  
 

**DOCUMENT 1: MY ANSWERS**

1\. It is just beating about the bush.

2\. It is the biggest deceipt, amounting to cheating ignorant and
innocent people.

3\. It is rather the other way round.  Muslims are good, but Islam
(Quran and Hadith) are bad. Muslims are victims of Islam.

4\. Yes, true, if they are also educated about what Quran and Hadith
contain and how Islam is nothing but an imposition on them and not
suitable to their temperament as they are children of higher
civilisation and culture.

5\. This is also a misconception. It is the Muslims who exploited
Congress or blackmailed it.

6\. Sufis were ground-preparers for Islam.

7-8. Totally wrong and a baseless propaganda only.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is from Jalandhar City in Punjab.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


