+++
title = "86 "

+++
<div align="right">

*The Statesman*  
New Delhi, 29 March 1997  
**27. VHP drops plan to ‘liberate’**  
**Kashi, Mathura**  
MORAN SAHAY

</div>

AYODHYA.  March 28 - The Vishwa Hindu Parishad in a major policy shift
has dropped its “Direct action Plan” to “liberate” Kashi and Mathura.

At the three-day in-camera proceedings of the VHP which concluded at
Karsevakpuram here today, the front ranking leaders of the parishad
abandoned programmes to launch movement to “liberate” the two shrines by
taking possession of the Gyanvapi Mosque in Varanasi and the Shahi
Mosque in Mathura which they consider encroachment upon the Lord
Vishwanath Temple and Sri Krishna Janmabhoomi Temple respectively.

Mr. Ashok Singhal, working president of the VHP confirmed today that
“right now there is no programme for direct action to liberate the
shrines at Kashi and Mathura”.

Mr. Singhal soon after delivering the valedictory address to a gathering
of 200 delegates of the VHP drawn from different parts of the country
told *The Statesman* that “our thrust as for the present is to mobilise
mass support and go in for awakening drive to educate the people on the
historical excesses committed on the two shrines”.\*

But the VHP has not abandoned its claim on the shrines at Ayodhya, Kashi
or Mathura which continue to be on the agenda of the parishad.  “Any
decision on the shrines has to be approved by the ‘Dharma Sansad’
comprising Sants and  Shankaracharyas which is the apex body on the
subject”, Mr. Singhal clarified.

The VHP leaders also claimed that the parishad did not believe on
calling *kar sevaks* in large number in future at Mathura or Kashi as it
was done at Ayodhya leading to the demolition of the Babri Masjid in
December 1992.  For the time being the Dharma Sansad has decided against
mobilising kar sevaks around Kashi and Mathura temples.

Shifting the focus from the contentious issue of the shrines the three
day conclave emphasised on soft agenda which included cleansing of Ganga
from pollution and renewed agitation against cow slaughter. Besides, the
VHP would open front against conversion of Hindus to Islam and
Christianity. There is nothing new about it.

According to some delegates who refused to disclose their identity, the
VHP is against precipitating any crisis that may jeoparadise the
prospects of the Bharatiya Janata Party which is aiming for a national
acceptability.

Strategically, the VHP delegates say, the parishad would raise its own
band of followers region wise strong enough to mobilise a million
volunteers at any place to give effect to its programme. But this is a
continuous process to unite the Hindus and to achieve the cherished goal
of a government favourably disposed towards the cause of the Hindutva.

To put up a brave front Mr. Singhal said, “we are going to declare a war
against all those forces who are bent upon dividing the nation”. When
asked to elaborate, the VHP leader identified the onslaught of the
Islamic countries and the dubious role of the United States who wanted
India to disintegrate.

Nearer home the VHP would also take on the political parties and the
governments whether in the States or at the Centre whom it considered
hostile to the cause of the Hindutva that is nation.

The VHP’s shift in policy also indicates a joint attempt by the Sangh
Parivar to “cooperate” with the new political agenda of the BJP.  
 

**Footnotes:**

\* Ashok Singhal was speaking tongue-in-cheek.  He was hiding the truth
that the ‘Direct Action Plan’ was dropped at the behest of the BSP which
had formed a coalition Government with the BJP in U.P. a few days
earlier. The VHP is no more than a pretentious plank for fooling Hindus
into voting for the BJP. The rest of its blah blah about the cow, the
Ganga and liberating Hindu places of worship is no more than a
smokescreen.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


