+++
title = "82 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


  
**== APPENDIX XII ==**

> **Address[/1/](#n01) presented to H. E. Lord Minto, Viceroy and
> Governor General of India, By A Deputation of the Muslim Community of
> India on 1st October 1906 at Simla; and Reply thereto**

  
ADDRESS

"May it please your excellency,Ã·Availing ourselves of the permission
accorded to us, we, the undersigned nobles, jagirdars, taluqdars,
lawyers, zemindars, merchants and others representing a large body of
the Mahomedan subjects of His Majesty the King-Emperor in different
parts of India, beg most respectfully to approach your Excellency with
the following address for your favourable consideration.

We fully realise and appreciate the incalculable benefits conferred by
British rule on the teeming millions belonging to diverse races and
professing diverse religions who form the population of the vast
continent of India, and have every reason to be grateful for the peace,
security, personal freedom and liberty of worship that we now enjoy.
Further, from the wise and enlightened character of the Government, we
have every reasonable ground for anticipating that these benefits will
be progressive, and that India will in the future occupy an increasingly
important position in the comity of nations.

One of the most important characteristics of British policy in India is
the increasing deference that has so far as possible been paid from the
first to the views and wishes of the people of the country in matters
affecting their interests, with due regard always to the diversity of
race and religion which forms such an important feature of all Indian
progress.

Claims of the Community

Beginning with the confidential and unobtrusive method of consulting
influential members of important communities in different parts of the
country, this principle was gradually extended by the recognition of the
right of recognised political or commercial organisations to communicate
to the authorities their criticisms and views on measures of public
importance, and finally by the nomination and election of direct
representatives of the people in Municipalities, District Boards, and
above all in the Legislative Chambers of the country. This last element
is, we understand, about to be dealt with by the Committee appointed by
your Excellency with the view of giving it further extension, and it is
with reference mainly to our claim to a fair share in such extended
representation and some other matters of importance affecting the
interests of our community, that we have ventured to approach your
Excellency on the present occasion.

Past Traditions

The Mahomedans of India number, according to the census taken in the
year 1901, over sixty-two millions or between one-fifth and one-fourth
of the total population of His Majesty's Indian dominions, and if a
reduction be made for the uncivilised portions of the community
enumerated under the heads of animist and other minor religions, as well
as for those classes who are ordinarily classified as Hindus but
properly speaking are not Hindus at all, the proportion of Mahomedans to
the Hindu majority becomes much larger. We therefore desire to submit
that under any system of representation extended or limited a community
in itself more numerous than the entire population of any first class
European power except Russia may justly lay claim to adequate
recognition as an important factor in the State.

We venture, indeed, with your Excellency's permission to go a step
further, and urge that the position accorded to the Mahomedan community
in any kind of representation, direct or indirect, and in all other ways
affecting their status and influence should be commensurate, not merely
with their numerical strength, but also with their political importance
and the value of the contribution which they make to the defence of the
empire, and we also hope that your Excellency will in this connection be
pleased to give due consideration to the position which they occupied in
India a little more than hundred years ago and of which the traditions
have naturally not faded from their minds.

The Mahomedans of India have always placed implicit reliance on the
sense of justice and love of fair dealing that have characterised their
rulers, and have in consequence abstained from pressing their claims by
methods that might prove at all embarrassing, but earnestly as we desire
that the Mahomedans of India should not in the future depart from that
excellent and time-honoured tradition, recent events have stirred up
feelings, especially among the younger generation of Mahomedans) which
might, in certain circumstances and under certain contingencies easily
pass beyond the control of temperate counsel and sober guidance.

We therefore pray that the representations we herewith venture to
submit, after a careful consideration of the views and wishes of a large
number of our co-religionists in all parts of India, may be favoured
with your excellency's earnest attention.

European representative institutions

We hope your excellency will pardon our stating at the outset that
representative institutions of the European type are new to the Indian
people; many of the most thoughtful members of our community in fact
consider that the greatest care, forethought and caution will be
necessary if they are to be successfully adapted to the social,
religious and political conditions obtaining in India, and that in the
absence of such care and caution their adoption is likely, among other
evils, to place our national interests at the mercy of an unsympathetic
majority. Since, however, our rulers have, in pursuance of the
immemorial instincts and traditions, found it expedient to give these
institutions an increasingly important place in the Government of the
country, we Mahomedans, cannot any longer in justice to our own national
interests hold aloof from participating in the conditions to which their
policy has given rise. While, therefore, we are bound to acknowledge
with gratitude that such representation as the Mahomedans of India have
hitherto enjoyed has been due to a sense of justice and fairness on the
part of your Excellency and your illustrious predecessor in office and
the heads of Local Governments by whom the Mahomedan members of
Legislative Chambers have almost without exception been nominated, we
cannot help observing that the representation thus accorded to us has
necessarily been inadequate to our requirements, and has not always
carried with it the approval of those whom the nominees were selected to
represent. This state of things was probably under existing
circumstances unavoidable, for while on the one hand the number of
nominations reserved to the Viceroy and Local Governments has
necessarily been strictly limited, the selection on the other hand of
really representative men, has, in the absence of any reliable method of
ascertaining the direction of popular choice, been far from easy.

The Results of Election

As for the results of election, it is most unlikely that the name of any
Mahomedan candidate will ever be submitted for the approval of
Government by the electoral bodies as now constituted unless he is in
sympathy with the majority in all matters of importance. Nor can we in
fairness find fault with the desire of our non-Muslim fellow-subjects to
take full advantage of their strength and vote only for members of their
own community, or for persons who, if not Hindus, are expected to vote
with the Hindu majority on whose goodwill they would have to depend for
their future re-election. It is true that we have many and important
interests in common with our Hindu fellow-countrymen and it will always
be a matter of the utmost satisfaction to us to see these interests
safeguarded by the presence in our Legislative Chambers of able
supporters of these interests, irrespective of their nationality.

A Distinct Community

Still, it cannot be denied that we Mahomedans are a distinct community
with additional interests of our own which are not shared by other
communities, and these have hitherto suffered from the fact that they
have not been adequately represented. Even in the provinces in which the
Mahomedans constitute a distinct majority of the population, they have
too often been treated as though they were inappreciably small political
factors that might without unfairness be neglected. This has been the
case, to some extent, in the Punjab, but in a more marked degree in Sind
and in Eastern Bengal.

Before formulating our views with regard to the election of
representatives, we beg to observe that the political importance of a
community to a considerable extent gains strength or suffers detriment
according to the position that the members of that community occupy in
the service of the State. If, as is unfortunately the case with the
Mahomedans, they are not adequately represented in this manner, they
lose in the prestige and influence which are justly their due.

Employment in Government Service

We therefore pray that Government will be graciously pleased to provide
that both in the gazetted and the subordinate and ministerial services
of all Indian provinces a due proportion of Mahomedans shall always find
place. Orders of like import have at times been issued by Local
Governments in some provinces, but have not, unfortunately, in all cases
been strictly observed on the ground that qualified Mahomedans were not
forthcoming. This allegation, however well founded it may have been at
one time, is, we submit, no longer tenable now, and wherever the will to
employ them is not wanting the supply of qualified Mahomedans, we are
happy to be able to assure your excellency, is equal to the demand.

The Competitive Element

Since, however, the number of qualified Mahomedans has increased, a
tendency is unfortunately perceptible to reject them on the ground of
relatively superior qualifications having to be given precedence. This
introduces something like the competitive element in its worst form, and
we may be permitted to draw your Excellency's attention to the political
significance of the monopoly of all official influence by one class. We
may also point out in this connection that the efforts of Mahomedan
educationists have from the very outset of the educational movement
among them been strenuously directed towards the development of
character, and this we venture to think is of greater importance than
mere mental alertness in the making of good public servants.

Mahomedans on the Bench

We venture to submit that the generality of Mahomedans in all parts of
India feel aggrieved that Mahomedan Judges are not more frequently
appointed to the High Courts and Chief Courts of Judicature. Since the
creation of these Courts only three Mahomedan lawyers have held these
honourable appointments, all of whom have fully justified their
elevation to the Bench. At the present moment there is not a single
Mahomedan Judge sitting on the Bench of any of these Courts, while there
are three Hindu Judges in the Calcutta High Court, where the proportion
of Mahomedans in the population is very large, and two in the Chief
Court of the Punjab, where the Mahomedans form the majority of the
population. It is not, therefore, an extravagant request on our part
that a Mahomedan should be given a seat on the Bench of each of the High
Courts and Chief Courts. Qualified Mahomedan lawyers eligible for these
appointments can always be found, if not in one province then in
another. We beg permission further to submit that the presence on the
Bench of these Courts of a Judge learned in the Mahomedan Law will be a
source of considerable strength to the administration of justice.

Municipal Representation

As Municipal and District Boards have to deal with important local
interests affecting to a great extent the health, comfort, educational
needs and even the religious concerns of the inhabitants, we shall, we
hope, be pardoned if we solicit for a moment your Excellency's attention
to the position of Mahomedans thereon before passing to higher concerns.
These institutions form, as it were, the initial rungs in the ladder of
self-government, and it is here that the principle of representation is
brought home intimately to the intelligence of the people, yet the
position of Mahomedans on these Boards is not at present regulated by
any guiding principle capable of general application, and practice
varies in different localities. The Aligarh Municipality, for example,
is divided into six wards and each ward returns one Hindu and one
Mahomedan Commissioner, and the same. principle we understand is adopted
in a number of Municipalities in the Punjab and elsewhere, but in a good
many places the Mahomedan tax-payers are not adequately represented. We
would, therefore, respectfully suggest that the local authority should
in every case be required to declare the number of Hindus and Mahomedans
entitled to seats on Municipal and District Boards, such proportion to
be determined in accordance with the numerical strength, social status,
local influence and special requirements of either community. Once their
relative proportion is authoritatively determined, we would suggest that
either community should be allowed severally to return their own
representatives as is the practice in many towns in the Punjab.

Fellows of Universities

We would also suggest that the Senates and Syndicates of Indian
Universities might be similarly dealt with, that is to say, there
should, so far as possible, be an authoritative declaration of the
proportion in which Mahomedans are entitled to be represented in either
body.

Nomination to Provincial Councils

We now proceed to the consideration of the question of our
representation in the Legislative Chambers of the country. Beginning
with the Provincial Councils, we would most respectfully suggest that as
in the case of Municipalities and District Boards the proportion of
Mahomedan representatives entitled to seats should be determined and
declared with due regard to the important considerations which we have
ventured to point out in paragraph 5 of this address, and that the
important Mahomedan landowners, lawyers, merchants and representatives
of other important interests, the Mahomedan members of District Boards
and Municipalities and the Mahomedan graduates of universities of a
certain standing, say five years, should be formed into Electoral
Colleges and be authorised, in accordance with such rules of procedure
as your excellency's Government may be pleased to prescribe in that
behalf, to return the number of members that maybe declared to be
eligible.

The Viceroy's Council

With regard to the Imperial Legislative Council whereon the due
representation of Mahomedan interests is a matter of vital importance,
we crave leave to suggest (1) that in the cadre of the Council the
proportion of Mahomedan representatives should not be determined on the
basis of the numerical strength of the community, and that in any case
the Mahomedan representatives should never be an ineffective minority;
(2) that as far as possible, appointment by election should be given
preference over nomination; (3) that for the purposes of choosing
Mahomedan members, Mahomedan landowners, lawyers, merchants and
representatives of other important interests of a status to be
subsequently determined by your Excellency's Government, Mahomedan
members of the Provincial Councils and Mahomedan fellows of universities
should be invested with electoral powers to be exercised in accordance
with such procedure as may be prescribed by your Excellency's Government
in that behalf.

The Executive Council

An impression has lately been gaining ground that one or more Indian
Members may be appointed on the Executive Council of the Viceroy. In the
event of such appointment being made we beg that the claims of
Mahomedans in that connection may not be overlooked. More than one
Mahomedan, we venture to say, will be found in the country fit to serve
with distinction in that august chamber.

A Mahomedan University

We beg to approach your Excellency on a subject which must closely
affect our national welfare. We are convinced that our aspirations as a
community and our future progress are largely dependent on the
foundation of a Mahomedan University which will be the centre of our
religious and intellectual life. We therefore most respectfully pray
that your Excellency will take steps to help us in an undertaking in
which our community is so deeply interested.

In conclusion, we beg to assure your Excellency that in assisting the
Mahomedan subjects of His Majesty at this stage in the development of
Indian affairs in the directions indicated in the present address, your
Excellency will be strengthening the basis of their unswerving loyalty
to the Throne and laying the foundation of their political advancement
and national prosperity, and your Excellency's name will be remembered
with gratitude by their posterity for generations to come, and we feel
confident that your Excellency will be gracious enough to give due
consideration to our prayers. We have the honour to subscribe ourselves)
Your Excellency's most obedient and humble servants.  
  


LORD MINTO'S REPLY  


Appreciation of Mahomedan aspirations

After the address; His Excellency rose and delivered a most sympathetic
reply, which was frequently punctuated with cheers and cries of "Hear,
hear" from the members of the deputation, particularly when his
Excellency declared that he was entirely in accord with the views of the
deputation that any electoral system must take cognizance of the various
religious beliefs of this great Empire and that the British Government
would always in the future as in the past safeguard the political rights
of the different communities entrusted to their charge. The Viceroy
concluded by thanking the deputation for affording him the unique
opportunity of meeting so many representative men.

The Viceroy said :Ã·

Your Highness and Gentlemen, Allow me before I attempt to reply to the
many considerations your address embodies, to welcome you heartily to
Simla.Your presence here to-day is very full of meaning. To the document
which you have presented me are attached the signatures of nobles, of
Ministers of various States, of great landowners, of lawyers, of
merchants and of many others of His Majesty's subjects. I welcome the
representative character of your deputation as expressing the views and
aspirations of the enlightened Muslim community of India. I feel that
all you have said emanates from a representative body basing its
opinions on a matured consideration of the existing political conditions
of India, totally apart from the small personal or political sympathies
and antipathies of scattered localities, and I am grateful to you for
the opportunity you are affording me of expressing my appreciation of
the just aims of the followers of Islam and their determination to share
in the political history of our Empire.

As your Viceroy, I am proud of the recognition you express of the
benefits conferred by British rule on the diverse races of many creeds
who go to form the population of this huge continent. You yourselves,
the descendants of a conquering and ruling race, have told me to-day of
your gratitude for the personal freedom, the liberty of worship, the
general peace and the hopeful future which British administration has
secured for India.

Help in the Past

It is interesting to look back on early British efforts to assist the
Mahomedan population to qualify themselves for the public service. In
1782 Warren Hastings founded the Calcutta Madrassah with the intention
of enabling its students to compete on more equal terms with the Hindus
for employment under Government. In 1811 my ancestor, Lord Minto,
advocated improvements in the Madrassah and the establishment of
Mahomedan Colleges at other places throughout India. In later years the
efforts of the Mahomedan Association led to the Government resolution of
1885 dealing with the educational position of the Mahomedan community
and their employment in the public service, whilst Mahomedan educational
effort has culminated in the College of Aligarh that great institution
which the noble and broad-minded devotion of Sir Syed Ahmed Khan has
dedicated to his co-religionists.

The Aligarh College

It was in July 1877 that Lord Lytton laid the foundation stone of
Aligarh, when Sir Syed Ahmed Khan addressed these memorable words to the
Viceroy: "The personal honour which you have done me assures me of a
great fact and fills me with feelings of a much higher nature than mere
personal gratitude. I am assured that you, who upon this occasion
represent the British rule, have sympathies with our labours and this
assurance is very valuable and a source of great happiness. At my time
of life it is a comfort to me to feel that the undertaking which has
been for many years, and is now the sole object of my life has roused on
the one hand the energies of my own countrymen, and on the other has won
the sympathy of our British fellow-subjects and the support of our
rulers, so that when the few years I may still be spared are over, and
when I shall be no longer amongst you, the College will still prosper
and succeed in educating my countrymen to have the same affection for
their country, the same feelings of loyalty for the British rule, the
same appreciation of its blessings, the same sincerity of friendship
with our British fellow-subjects as have been the ruling feelings of my
life."

Sir Syed's Influence

Aligarh has won its laurels. Its students have gone forth to fight the
battle of life strong in the tenets of their own religion, strong in the
precepts of loyalty and patriotism,and now when there is much that is
critical in the political future of India the inspiration of Sir Syed
Ahmed Khan and the teachings of Aligarh shine forth brilliantly in the
pride of Mahomedan history, in the loyalty, commonsense and sound
reasoning so eloquently expressed in your address. But, gentlemen, you
go on to tell me that sincere as your belief is in the justice and fair
dealings of your rulers, you cannot but be aware that "recent events"
have stirred up feelings amongst the younger generation of Mahomedans
which might ''pass beyond the control of temperate counsel and sober
guidance."

Policy in Eastern Bengal

Now I have no intention of entering into any discussion upon the affairs
of Eastern Bengal and Assam, yet I hope that without offence to anyone I
may thank the Mahomedan community of the new Province for the moderation
and self-restraint they have shown under conditions which were new to
them, and as to which there has been inevitably much misunderstanding,
and that I may at the same time sympathise with all that is sincere in
Bengalee sentiments. But above all, what I would ask you to believe is
that the course the Viceroy and the Government of India have pursued in
connection with the affairs of the new Province, the future of which is
now I hope assured, has been dictated solely by a regard for what has
appeared best for its present and future populations as a whole,
irrespective of race or creed and that the Mahomedan community of
Eastern Bengal and Assam can rely as firmly as ever on British justice
and fair play for the appreciation of its loyalty and the safeguarding
of its interests.

The unrest in India

You have addressed me, gentlemen, at a time when the political
atmosphere is full of change. We all feel it would be foolish to attempt
to deny its existence, hopes and ambitions new to India are making
themselves felt. We cannot ignore them Ã·we should be wrong to wish to do
soÃ·but to what is all this unrest due? Not to the discontent of
misgoverned millions Ã·1 defy anyone honestly to assert that Ã· not to say
uprising of a disaffected people.

Fruits of Western Education

It is due to that educational growth in which only a very small portion
of the population has as yet shared, of which British rule first sowed
the seed and the fruits of which British rule is now doing its best to
foster and to direct. There may be many tares in the harvest we are now
reaping. The Western grain which we have sown may not be entirely
suitable to the requirements of the people of India but the educational
harvest will increase as years go on, and the healthiness of the
nourishment it gives will depend on the careful administration and
distribution of its products. You need not ask my pardon, gentlemen, for
telling me that "Representative institutions of the European type are
entirely new to the people of India" or that their introduction here
requires the most earnest thought and care. I should be very far from
welcoming all the political machinery of the Western world amongst the
hereditary instincts and traditions of Eastern races. Western breadth of
thought, the teachings of Western civilisation, the freedom of British
individuality can do much for the people of India, but I recognise with
you that they must not carry with them an impracticable insistence of
the acceptance of political methods.

Political Future of Mahomedans

And now, gentlemen, I come to your own position in respect to the
political future; the position of the Mahomedan community for whom you
speak. You will, I feel sure, recognise that it is impossible for me to
follow you through any detailed consideration of the conditions and the
share that the community has a right to claim in the administration of
public affairs. I can at present only deal with generalities. The points
which you have raised are before the Committee, which, as you know, I
have lately appointed to consider the question of presentation (?
representation), and I will take care that your address is submitted to
them, but at the same time I hope I may be able to reply to the general
tenor of your remarks without in any way forestalling the Committee's
report.

The Question of Representation

The pith of your address, as I understand it, is a claim that in any
system of representation whether it affects a Municipality, a District
Board or a Legislative Council, in which it is proposed to introduce or
increase an electoral organisation, the Mahomedan community should be
represented as a community. You point out that in many cases electoral
bodies, as now constituted, cannot be expected to return a Mahomedan
candidate, and that if by chance they did so it could only be at the
sacrifice of such a candidate's view to those of a majority opposed to
his own community whom he would in no way represent, and you justly
claim that your numerical strength both in respect to the political
importance of your community and the service it has rendered to the
Empire entitle you to consideration. I am entirely in accord with you;
please do not misunderstand me. I make no attempt to indicate by what
means the representation of communities can be obtained, but I am as
firmly convinced as I believe you to be that any electoral
representation in India would be doomed to mischievous failure which
aimed at granting a personal enfranchisement regardless of the beliefs
and traditions of the communities composing the population of this
continent. The great mass of the people of India have no knowledge of
representative institutions. I agree with you, gentlemen, that the
initial rungs in the ladder of self-government are to be found in the
Municipal and District Boards and that it is in that direction that we
must look for the gradual political education of the people.

An Assurance

In the meantime I can only say to you that the Mahomedan community may
rest assured that their political rights and interests as a community
will be safeguarded in any administrative reorganization with which I am
concerned and that you and the people of India may rely upon the British
Raj to respect, as it has been its pride to do, the religious beliefs
and the national traditions of the myriads composing the population of
His Majesty's Indian Empire.

Your Highness and Gentlemen, I sincerely thank you for the unique
opportunity your deputation has given me of meeting so many
distinguished and representative Mahomedans. I deeply appreciate the
energy and interest in public affairs which have brought you here from
great distances, and I only regret that your visit to Simla is
necessarily so short.  
  


======================

**[/1/](#m01)** This document has a great importance and significance in
the history of India. It marks the beginning of the British Government's
policy of giving favourable treatment to the Muslims in the
administration of India which, it is alleged, was intended to wean them
away from the Congress and to create a breach and disunity between the
Hindus and the Musalmans. It has also acquired a certain amount of
notoriety in the minds of the Indians in view of the statement made by
\[the\] late Maulana Mohammad Ali in his address as President of the
Congress, stating that "it was a command performance," meaning thereby
that the address was arranged by the British Government. On this account
there has been a great deal of curiosity on the part of many Indians to
know the text of the address and the reply given by Lord Minto. I had
made a long search to obtain the same. I had even approached elderly
Muslim politicians prominent in those days for a copy, but none of them
had it or knew where it was available. Newspapers of that day do not
appear to have carried the text of the address and the reply. I was,
however, lucky to get a copy of it from my friend Sir Raza Ali, M.L.A.
(Central), who happened to have kept a cutting of \[=from\] the **Indian
Daily Telegraph**Ã·a paper then published from Lucknow but \[which\] had
long ago become defunct, in which the full text of the address as well
as of the reply was printed. I am grateful to Sir Raza Ali for a loan of
the cutting. As the document marks a historic event in the political
history of British administration in India, it might be of some interest
to reproduce details about the function which the Simla correspondent of
the **Indian Daily Telegraph** had published in its issue of October
3rd, 1906. Says the correspondent:Ã·

> "The representatives of the Mahomedan community who were to present
> the address to His Excellency the Viceroy this morning at Viceregal
> Lodge collected in the Ballroom at 11 A.M. They numbered thirty-five
> and were seated in a horse-shoe facing His Excellency's chair.
> Precisely at 11 A.M. Lord Minto, preceded by his staff, entered the
> room, all standing to receive him. His Excellency was taken round and
> personally introduced to each member by the Aga Khan. The Khalifa from
> Patiala then asked, permission for the presentation of the address and
> the Aga Khan then advanced and facing His Excellency read the petition
> given below, all the representatives standing."

Those who formed the deputation were:Ã·His Highness Aga Sir Sultan
Mahomed Shah Aga Khan, G.C.I.E., (Bombay); Shahzadah Bakhtiar Shah,
O.I.E., Head of the Mysore family, Calcutta; Hon'ble Malik Omar Hayat
Khan, C.I.E., Lieutenant 17th Prince of Wales' Tiwana Lancers, Tiwana,
Shahpur (Punjab); Hon'ble Khan Bahadur Mian Mohomed Shah Din,
Bar.-at-Law, Lahore; Hon'ble Maulvi Sharfuddin, Bar.-at-Law, Patna; Khan
Bahadur Syed Nawab Ali Chowdhury, Mymensingh (Eastern Bengal); Nawab
Bahadur Syed Amir Husan Khan. C.I.E., Calcutta; Naseer Hussain Khan
Khayal, Calcutta; Khan Bahadur Mirza Shujaat Ali Beg; Persian
Consul-General, Murshidabad, Calcutta (Bengal); Syed Ali Imam,
Bar.-at-Law, Patna (Behar); Nawab Sarfraz Husain Khan, Patna (Behar);
Khan Bahadur Ahmad Mohiuddin Khan, Stipendiary of theCarnatic family
(Madras); Maulvi Rafiuddin Ahmed, Bar.-at-Law (Bombay); Ebrahimbhoy
Adamji Peerbhoy, General Merchant (Bombay); Mr. Abdur Rahim,
Bar.-at-Law, Calcutta: Syed Allah-dad Shah, Special Magistrate and
Vice-President, Zamindars' Association, Khairpore (Sindh); Maulana H. M.
Malak, Head of Mehdi Bazh Bohras, Nagpur (Central Provinces);
Mushir-ud-Doula Mumtazal-ul-Mulk Khan Bahadur; Khalifa Syed Mohamed
Hussain, Member of the State Council of Patiala (Punjab); Khan Bahadur
Col. Abdul Majid Khan, Foreign Minister, Patiala (Punjab); Khan Bahadur
Khwaja Yusuf Shah, Hony. Magistrate, Arnritsar (Punjab); Mian Mahomed
Shafi, Bar.-at-Law, Lahore (Punjab); Shaikh Ghulam Sadik, Arnritsar
(Punjab); Hakim Mohamed Ajmul Khan, Delhi (Punjab); Munshi Ihtisham Ali,
Zamindar and Rais,. Kakori (Oudh); Syed Nabi Ullah, Bar.-at-Law, Rais
Kara, Dist. Allahabad; Maulvi Syed Karamat Husain, Bar.-at-Law,
Allahabad; Syed Abdulraoof, Bar.-at-Law, Allahabad; Munshi Abdur Salam
Khan, retired Sub-Judge, Rampur; Khan Bahadur Mohamad Muzammil Ullah
Khan, Zamindar, Secretary, Zamindars' Association, United Provinces, and
Joint Secretary, M. A. 0. College Trustees, Aligarh; Haji Mohamed Ismail
Khan, Zamindar, Aligarh; Sahabzadas Aitab Ahmad Khan, Bar.-at-Law,
Aligarh: Maulvi Mushtaq Hussain, Rais, Arnroha, United Provinces; Maulvi
Habibul Rahaman Khan, Zamindar, Bhikhanpur, United Provinces; Nawab Syed
Sirdar Ali Khan. son of the late Nawab Sirdar Diler-ul-mulk Bahadur,
C.I.E., Hyderabad (Deccan); Maulvi Syed Mahdee Ally Khan
(Muhsin-ul-Mulk), Hony. Secretary, M. A. 0. College, Aligarh, Etawah,
United Provinces.

The following gentlemen intended to have attended the presentation of
the address to the Viceroy, but were prevented by illness or other
causes:Ã· Hon'ble Nawab Khwaja Salimulla, Nawab of Dacca; Hon'ble Nawab
Haji Mohamed Fateh Ali Khan, Qazel-bash, Lahore; Hon'ble Syed
Zainul-Edros, Surat; Khan Bahadur Kasim Mir Ghayas-uddin Peerzadah of
Broach; Khan Bahadur Raja Jahandad of Hazara; and Shaik Shahid Hussain
of Lucknow. The correspondent of the **Telegraph** adds:Ã·

> Lady Minto, the Ladies Elliot and the Hon. Mrs. Hewett were present at
> the function.
>
> At the presentation of the address today most of the deputies wore
> ordinary European dress with a fez as distinguishing head-dress, but
> the Patiala representatives, Lieut. Hon. Malik Omar Hayat Khan, Khan
> Bahadur Ali Choudhary, Khan Bahadur Ahmad Mohiuddin Khan and a few
> others, were in Indian dress, while a few others wore uniforms with
> gold lace. His Excellency the Viceroy was in morning dress with the
> Order of the Star of India on his frock coat.
>
> GARDEN PARTY AT VICEREGAL LODGE
>
> This afternoon a garden party was held in the Viceregal Lodge grounds
> when the Mahomedan representatives were received by the Viceroy, who
> spoke with each deputy individually.
>
> The Hon. Mr. Baker, Financial Secretary, has invited the following
> Bengal gentlemen of the Mahomedan deputation to lunch tomorrow :Ã·
>
> Nawab Amir Hosein, Mirza Shujat Ali, Nawab Nasar Hossein, Hon.
> Shurfuddin and Ali Imam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [back to Table of Contents](../index.html#contents) --  

