+++
title = "94 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


  
**== APPENDIX XXIV ==**

**Government of India Resolution of 1943 on Representation of the
Scheduled Castes in the Services**

New Delhi, the 11th August 1943

  

No. 23/5/42-Ests(S).÷In pursuance of the undertaking given in the
Central Legislative Assembly in 1942, the Government of India have
carefully reviewed the policy which they have followed since 1934 in
regard to the representation of Depressed Classes, since described in
the Government of India Act, 1935 as 'Scheduled Castes', in services
under their administrative control. In their Resolution No. F.
14/17-B/33, dated the 4th July 1934, the Government of India stated that
in the then state of general education among these classes they did not
consider that any useful purpose would be served by reserving for them a
definite percentage of vacancies. In order, however, to secure fair
representation for Scheduled Castes they directed that duly qualified
members of these classes might be nominated to a public service even
though recruitment to that service was being made by competition.
Various measures have been taken since then to secure increased
representation of the Scheduled Castes in the public services. The
results obtained so far have, however, not been substantial. While the
Government of India recognise that this is mainly due to the difficulty
of getting suitably qualified candidates, they now consider that the
reservation of a definite percentage of vacancies might provide the
necessary stimulus to candidates of these castes to obtain better
qualifications and thus make themselves eligible for various Government
posts and services. It is believed that the grant of age concessions and
the reduction of prescribed fees might also help to secure qualified
candidates from among members of the Scheduled Castes. The Government of
India have accordingly decided to prescribe the rules mentioned in
paragraph 4 below.

**(2.)** On the basis of the proportion which the population of the
Scheduled Castes bears to the population of the other communities
entitled to a share in the present unreserved vacancies, the Scheduled
Castes would be entitled to 12.75 percent out of the total number of
such vacancies. It is, however, not likely that sufficient number of
candidates from the Scheduled Castes would be forthcoming to fill the
full number of vacancies to which they are entitled on a population
basis. The Government of India have, therefore, come to the conclusion
that for the present it will be sufficient to reserve a somewhat smaller
percentage, viz., 8 1/3. They propose to consider the question of
raising this percentage as soon as a sufficient number of qualified
candidates from these classes are found to be available.

**(3.)** The rules mentioned below will apply only to direct recruitment
and not to recruitment by promotion which will continue to be made as at
present without reference to communal considerations. They will apply to
Central Services (Class I and Class II) and the Subordinate Services
under the administrative control of the Government of India with the
exception of a few services and posts for which highly technical or
special qualifications are required and which have been excluded from
the purview of the communal representation orders contained in their
Resolution No. F. 14/17-B/33, dated the 4th July 1934. In regard to the
Railways, the rules will apply to all posts other than those of inferior
servants and labourers. The administrations of the Company-managed
Railways will be asked to adopt similar rules for the services on those
Railways.

**(4.)** The following rules will therefore be observed in future in
order to secure better representation of the Scheduled Castes in public
services :÷

\(1\) 8 1/3 percent of all vacancies to be filled by direct recruitment
of Indians in the Central and Subordinate Services to which recruitment
is made on an all-India basis will be reserved for Scheduled Castes
candidates.

\(2\) In the case of services to which recruitment is made by local
areas or circles and not on an all-India basis, e.g., subordinate posts
in the Railways, Posts and Telegraphs Department, the Customs Services,
the Income-Tax Department, etc., the total reservation for India as a
whole of 8 1/3 percent of vacancies for Scheduled Castes candidates
will be obtained by fixing a percentage for each local area or circle
having regard to the population of Scheduled Castes in the area or
circle concerned and the rules for recruitment adopted by the Provincial
Government of the area or circle concerned.

\(3\) When recruitment is made by open competition and Scheduled Castes
candidates obtain fewer vacancies than are reserved for them, the
difference will, if possible, be made up by the nomination of duly
qualified candidates of those castes.

\(4\) If Scheduled Castes candidates obtain less than the number of
vacancies reserved for them in open competition and duly qualified
candidates of these castes are not available, or not available in
sufficient numbers, for nomination, the remaining vacancies reserved for
such candidates will be treated as unreserved; but a corresponding
number of vacancies will be reserved for them in that year under clause
(1) or clause (2) above.

\(5\) If duly qualified candidates of the Scheduled Castes are again not
available to fill the vacancies carried forward from the previous year
under clause (4) the vacancies not filled by them will be treated as
unreserved.

\(6\) In all cases, a minimum standard of qualification will be
prescribed and the reservation will be subject to this condition.

\(7\) The maximum age limit prescribed for appointment to a service or
post will be increased by three years in the case of candidates
belonging to the Scheduled Castes.

\(8\) The fees prescribed for admission to any examination or selection
will be reduced to one-fourth in the case of candidates belonging to the
Scheduled Castes.

\(9\) The orders contained in the foregoing rules will also apply to
temporary vacancies lasting three months or longer, including vacancies
in permanent posts filled temporarily by persons not permanently
employed in Government service.

\(10\) For the purposes of these roles a person shall be held to be a
member of the Scheduled Castes if he belongs to a caste which under the
Government of India (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1936, has been declared to
be a Scheduled Caste for the area in which he and his family ordinarily
reside.

**Order.**÷Ordered that a copy of this Resolution be communicated to all
Chief Commissioners, the several Departments of the Government of India,
the Director, Intelligence Bureau, and the Federal Public Service
Commission for information and guidance; to the Political Department,
the Crown Finance Department, the Secretary to the Governor-General
(Public), the Secretary to the Governor-General (Reforms), the Secretary
to the Governor-General (Personal), the Legislative Assembly Department,
the Federal Court, the Military Secretary to His Excellency the Viceroy,
and all Provincial Governments for information, and also that the
Resolution be published in the Gazette of India.  


E. CONRAN-SMITH, Secy.  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [back to Table of Contents](../index.html#contents) --  

