+++
title = "84 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
  
\*[THE HINDU-MUSLIM PROBLEM (1924)](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\*  
by Lala Lajpat Rai

PART 1 -- \[The Hindu-Muslim problem is the problem of India\]  


**\[A\]** THE HINDU-MUSLIM PROBLEM is the problem of India. We have
heard and read much of Hindu-Muslim unity. It is always a matter of
controversy between the Anglo-Indian \[=British person in India\] and
the Nationalist. The former asserts, and the latter denies, the
impossibility of Hindus and Muslims uniting together to form one nation.
The amount of unity or disunity existing at a particular moment is also
always an issue. Yet it is a fact that from 1919 to the end of 1921
Hindus and Muslims of India were fairly united. It was during this
period that for the first time in the history of India a *Kafir*
preached from the pulpit of the biggest and historically the most
important and the most magnificent mosque of Northern
India.**[/1/](#n01)** It was during the same period that the *Malechhas*
fraternised with the Hindus on the occasion of their religious
festivals.

It is also a fact that the amount of unity achieved in this short
period, has since then melted down, and for the last three years Hindus
and Mussalmans have been at daggers drawn with each other to an extent
never before known under British rule. All attempts to stem the tide
have so far proved ineffectual. All efforts for finding a solution have
been fruitless. It cannot be denied that at the moment of writing, the
relations between the two communities are strained almost to the
breaking point. Communal riots and scuffles are of more frequent
occurrence than ever before. Mutual distrust and suspicion has reached
the Nth point. Even in Congress circles, in spite of much hugging and
cooing, the relations between the leaders of the two communities are
**\[\[171\]\]** not free from distrust and suspicion. Hindu-Muslim unity
is always put in the fore-front of the Congress programme, but so far
the leaders have failed to successfully grapple with the situation and
find out a suitable solution. The explanation is obvious. Either they
have lost influence with the masses, or they are not sincere. I cannot
accept the latter alternative, and thus it is only the former that is
left to us to adopt.

**\[B\]** Before Mahatma Gandhi was released,**[/2/](#n02)** the whole
country looked to the Yeravda jail for the cure of the disease that had
overtaken the body politic during his incarceration. All hopes were
concentrated on one person, and that person being in jail, it was
expected that his freedom would mean the freedom of the country from
Hindu­Muslim quarrels. Both parties had faith in him. His leadership was
acknowledged by all. There was not the least possible suspicion of his
motives. He was the very personification of love, forbearance, trust,
and goodness. So it was believed that the "key to the Yeravda jail" was
the key to Hindu-Muslim unity. Providence in its own wisdom supplied
that key, and the Mahatma was released. It is now more than six months
that he has been released. His health was very delicate when he was
released, so delicate that he could not leave the hospital for about six
weeks or so after his release. Yet with characteristic selflessness he
immediately set himself to study the situation, to probe into the causes
of this unhappy change. He left nothing unexplored. He met and heard the
stories of both sides, and also of those who professed to belong to no
side. He made independent enquiries, and thought and meditated.

Eventually he issued a statement**[/3/](#n03)** which, sweet,
reasonable, and highly conciliatory though it was, failed to satisfy
anyone. When I say anyone, I exclude that class (a fairly large and
influential body) for whom his word is law and who will.not question
anything he says. If any distinction were to be made between the amount
of satisfaction the statement gave to the Hindus and the Muslims, it
will not be wrong to say that it gave less satisfaction to the former
than to the latter. There is, indeed, a general impression among the
Hindus that in apportioning blame and responsibility he was not
impartial. There are classes of Hindus (most influential, energetic, and
active) whom his statement mortally offended, and who have not hesitated
to retaliate with words and resolutions of protest and anger. Whatever
one may think of its justifiability or otherwise, this represents a
frame of mind which no **\[\[172\]\]** one who is anxious to bring about
lasting peace between: the two communities can ignore.

The solution which the Mahatma suggested, and the cure he prescribed,
have, I am afraid, appealed to none. Even his diagnosis is not so
masterly as one had a right to expect from him. He has laid great stress
on mere symptoms and has not gone deep into the underlying and
predisposing causes. He had something to say about Mian Fazl-i-Husain
and Swami Shraddhanand,**[/4/](#n04)** but he did not go into the forces
that went to make the one and the other. No one doubts his honesty of
purpose, his deep love for all, his desire for peace, and his anxiety to
bring about such a complete unity among Hindus and Muslims as to make
their united demand for Swarajya irresistible and to make Swarajya
itself, when attained, durable and progressive. But with all this the
document is rather disappointing, and the solution suggested is on the
face of it superficial, though noble and magnanimous in appearance. The
events of the last six months are enough evidence of its utter failure
both as a palliative or \[=and\] as a curative remedy.

**\[C\]** Yet amidst all these disappointments and disconcerting events
and circumstances, and in the midst of \[the\] resulting chaos, there is
one fact which emerges boldly and which gives hope to all well-wishers
of India. However divided Hindus and Muslims may be, however bitter
their relations with each other, they are still united in their demand
for Swarajya, in their opposition to the Government, and in their hatred
of the subjugation imposed upon them from without. It will stand to the
eternal credit of Mahatma Gandhi that he has brought politics home to
the masses of India, that he has created a wonderful and never to be
effaced awakening in them, and that he has produced a consciousness
which marks the beginning of a real nationhood. With this solid and
permanent achievement to the Mahatma's credit, there is no reason to
despair of the future. His statement may not be as satisfying as one
would have wished it to be, but he is still at the wheel and is hopeful
as ever of being able to lead us through to the desired goal. But the
one essential condition of success is that there must be no ignoring of
facts, and no clinging to shibboleths blown away by the wind of
experience. If he will apply his mind to the removal of the real causes
of Hindu-Muslim disunity, and keep himself open as to methods and means,
he may yet succeed. Even if he does not, others may, given the right
attitude, the right mind, and the readiness to **\[\[173\]\]** apply the
right remedy.

**\[D\]** After the above was written on board the ship during my voyage
to India, I have had further corroboration of statements made in what I
have seen, read, and observed since my landing at Bombay on the 18th of
October, 1924. The two shocking \[pieces of\] news which I heard
immediately on landing were about the Kohat tragedy and Mahatma Gandhi's
fast.**[/5/](#n05)** The most disconcerting feature of the former was
the total emigration of the Hindus from Kohat, out of fear of further
Muslim attacks. I am not at present prepared to assert what the
respective liabilities of the communities were in regard to this
tragedy, but I have no doubt in my mind that the Government has
throughout shown such utter inefficiency and incompetency as stands
unique in the history of British rule in India. I am not very much
enamoured of British rule, or for the matter of that \[=for that
matter\] of any foreign rule, and in spite of my great admiration for
British character, I have been a life-long critic of the British
administration. Yet I always believed that the one justification for
British rule in India was its ability to protect the minorities, and to
guarantee peace and security to them under any circumstances.

The spectacle of a whole community of about 3,500 men, women, and
children marching away from their homes to distant places under
Government transport arrangements and with Government help, for fear of
being annihilated by an infuriated majority, is, however, a conclusive
proof of the falsity of this belief, because it can only mean one of the
two things–either the insincerity or the inefficiency of British
officials, at least in the North-West Frontier Province. I will assume
here for the purposes of this argument that the Hindus of Kohat were in
the first instance to blame, and that they had provoked the Muhammadans
for a fatal attack on them; still, it was the duty of the British
Government to keep the Hindus in Kohat, to protect them from further
molestation by the Muhammadans, at any cost, to restore order and peace,
and then to proceed to try and punish the guilty persons. Practically
what happened at Kohat was that the authorities considered themselves
overpowered and incapable of granting the necessary security to the
Hindus. We have often heard of lynch law. What is lynch law? It is
nothing else but the prevention of the ordinary course of justice and
the preventing of the authorities from proceeding according to law. Was
not the happening at Kohat an illustration of the same tendency?

The law demands that every accused person **\[\[174\]\]** should be
fully protected from molestation by the accusers, until a court had
found him guilty and sentenced him legally. Assuming that the Hindus of
Kohat were in the position of accused persons, it was the duty of the
government to arrest them, and keep them in safe custody until they
could be placed before a court of justice and regularly tried. The
British Government admittedly failed to do this at Kohat. Even assuming
that the Hindus wanted to go away for fear of their lives, it was the
duty of the Government to dissuade them, and provide sufficient military
security to enable them to stay in their homes. No one wants to leave
his home and property in the way the Kohat Hindus did, unless he felt
that his life was no longer safe. This particular incident has disclosed
a new phase of the communal strife, which should be particularly noted
by those who want to patch up and create an appearance of unity without
going to the root of the problem.

**\[E\]** As regards Mahatma Gandhi's fast, it is an open secret that
the desecration of Hindu temples, one after another, at Amethi,
Gulbarga, Kohat, and, other places, and the tragedy of Kohat, gave him
such a shock that he considered it his duty to undergo a penance for his
misunderstanding and mishandling the Hindu-Muslim situation during the
last three years. For the first time he felt miserable at the thought
that he, who had striven his best to obtain Hindu cooperation for the
saving of the Muhrnmadan "temple" Khilafat, had to see desecration of
Hindu temples by tens, in most cases without any provocation, at the
hands of Muhammadans. The sense of helplessness and disappointment
generated by this shock impelled him to impose a purificatory penance of
twenty-one days' fast on him\[self\], in the hope that whilst he
purified himself of any sin that he might have committed unconsciously,
he would be able to create an atmosphere which might give opportunities
of improving Hindu-Muslim relations.

My first feeling was one of disapproval. On reaching Delhi, however, I
felt that the impulse which forced him to take the vow could not perhap
be satisfied otherwise. Similar was my feeling about the Unity
Conference.**[/6/](#n06)** I don't think the Unity Conference has solved
the problem or could possibly solve it, but on the whole it has been
useful in paving the way for the right understanding of the problem with
its various complications and implications. Mahatma Gandhi is now
resolved to devote the best part of his energies, time, and attention to
the solution of this problem. From the bottom of my **\[\[175\]\]**
heart I wish him success, but he will not succeed unless he devotes
himself wholeheartedly to the understanding of the real causes that
underlie the present situation, and scrupulously avoids proceeding on
assumptions and presumptions engendered by affectionate relations with
friends, and well-meaning but ineffectual professions of devotion on
their part. He must adopt a scientific attitude towards this question,
and proceed by scientific methods to find out the root causes of trouble
and its possible solutions.

I have resigned my position of leadership in the Congress in order to be
free to express myself. I am going to speak the truth plainly, and
untrammelled by any delicate feeling about the responsibilities of
leadership, and unaffected by what anyone might think of me. Anybody may
criticise me, but I will not enter into controversies. I have considered
it necessary to say all this before I start giving expression to my
views on the subject.  


NOTES

**[/1/](#m01)** Swami Shraddhananda preached from the pulpit of the Jama
Masjid at Delhi during the Rowlatt Bills agitation.  
**[/2/](#m02)** Mahatma Gandhi was released unconditionally on 5
February 1924 on medical advice, and the unexpired portion of his
sentence was remitted by the Government.  
**[/3/](#m03)** Mahatma Gandhi's statement was issued on 29 May 1924. It
contained a detailed analysis of the Hindu-Muslim conflict in India.  
**[/4/](#m04)** Mian Fazl-i-Husain, a prominent Muslim leader of the
Punjab, was a Minister in the Punjab Government from 1921 to 1925, and
made an effort to give larger share to Muslims in the Punjab Government
services. This was resented by Hindus. Swami Shraddhanand (Mahatma
Munshi Ram), the leader of the Gurukula section of the Arya Samaj, was
leading in 1924 the movement for *Shuddhi* (conversion to Hinduism) and
Hindu *Sanghathan*, which was the cause of considerable Hindu-Muslim
tension.  
**[/5/](#m05)** Serious communal riots took place at Kohat on 9-10
September 1924. Hindus suffered heavily in these riots and virtually all
Hindu inhabitants of the town were removed to Rawalpindi for safety.
Mahatma Gandhi undertook a twenty-one days fast as a penance for the
communal riots, from 17 September 1924, at Delhi. The fast ended on 8
October.  
**[/6/](#m06)** The Unity Conference met at Delhi on 26 September 1924
under the presidentship of Pandit Motilal Nehru. The Conference passed
several resolutions on Hindu-Muslim relations. By one of the resolutions
the Conference set up a Central National Panchayat with powers to
organize local Panchayats.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [on to Part 2](02part.html) -- \*[Lala Lajpat Rai
index](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\* --
\*[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp)\* --

  
