+++
title = "85 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
  
\*[THE HINDU-MUSLIM PROBLEM (1924)](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\*  
by Lala Lajpat Rai

PART 2 -- \[The Unity Conference and the relativity of rights\]  


**\[A\]** In the discussions at tbe Unity Conference held at Delhi, one
thing struck me very forcibly. That was the fact that so many of the
ablest and most patriotic Muhammadan young men, as well as a few Hindus,
were obsessed with the idea of "absolute rights." Time after time it was
said that the Muhammadans had an inherent right to slaughter cows, and
that that right could only be curtailed by their own voluntary
sacrifice. It was on the basis of absolute right that draft resolutions
had actually been prepared by a number of young men who counted among
them some of the most brilliant and self-sacrificing workers in the
Congress organization. And yet, as I have pointed out more than once,
the idea of absolute rights is a fallacious one, and has really no
foundation in law. Pandit Motilal Nehru, the President, also took pains
to explain the same point of view. I am not quite sure, however, that
the explanations were quite satisfactory; and as the idea seems to me to
be shared by a large number of men, I would like to deal with it at some
length.

**\[B\]** I contend that there is no such thing as an absolute right
vested in any individual or in any community forming part of a nation;
that all rights are relative, that no society can remain intact even for
twenty-four hours an the basis of absolute rights, that the idea of
absolute rights was exploded long ago, because it was found to
**\[\[176\]\]** be not only wrong in theory but pernicious in practice.
I have no desire to encumber this paper with quotations from the
writings of great thinkers and legislators of the West. The point seems
to me to be so simple as not to require much labouring. All organic
relations depend upon the mutual obligations of the members composing
the organism. No part of the organism has any absolute right.

Firstly, all the rights of an individual. are subject to the equal
rights of others, which fact creates duties and obligations on the part
of the different members of a society towards each other. In a well
ordered social organism no one has a right to do anything which will
unreasonably clash with the legal interests of anyone else. Nay, in
order to secure goodwill and progress, the more advanced members of a
social organism have sometimes to go further and sacrifice their
interests for the commonweal; or for the benefit of the other members of
the community. The protection of the poor, solicitude for providing for
the necessities of those who cannot look after themselves, the widows,
the orphans, the blind, the lame, the aged, the minor, etc., all fall
under this category.

**\[C\]** There was a time in the history of Europe when great emphasis
was laid on the rights of man. That was the time of the French
Revolution. Thomas Paine's "Rights of Man" was a typical reflection of
the mentality of that generation. Within less than fifty years it was
found that the theory was entirely fallacious and pernicious. Mazzini's
"Duties of Man" was a complete and convincing reply to Paine's "Rights
of Man." The French Revolution was based on the Rights of Man, and the
constitution with the declaration of the rights of man. The American
constitution makes the same attempt. In actual practice, however, the
rights are subject to great limitations in both.

Take, for example, the liberty of speech and the liberty of the press
which are guaranteed by both the constitutions. Can anyone in his senses
contend that either the French or the American Government is in the
least deterred from curtailing these rights whenever it thinks it best
in the interest of the nation to do so? I happened to be in the United
States during the \[First World\] War, and I saw with my own eyes how
the so-called fundamental rights guaranteed to the people by the
constitution were taken away by them under one pretence or another,
either by Federal Legislation or by the action of the Government.
Everyone seems to have the right not to be forced to fight against his
will. Yet **\[\[177\]\]** during the Great War, this right was denied by
all the several governments concerned, and everywhere people were forced
into the army against their will. Everybody knows what a great fight the
conscientious objectors had to make against this curtailment of their
so-called rights, and the sufferings which they were made, in
consequence, to undergo. An individual may have an absolute right to
think what he wishes, but the moment it comes to the expression of the
thought in speech and action, his right is hedged round by conditions
and limitations. This is the legal and the constitutional aspect of the
question.

As regards its ethical aspect, it is absolutely clear that it is nobler
to emphasize duties rather than rights. People who insist on rights
rather than duties become selfish, proud, and self-centred. Those who
emphasise duties, are quite the reverse. The highest dovelopment of
humanity and of the spirit of service requires greater emphasis being
laid on duties than on rights. That is the teaching of almost all the
great religions of the world, if properly understood and rightly
interpreted. That is the teaching of Buddha, Christ, and Gandhi. It is
also the lesson of actual day to day experience. It is certainly
productive of infinitely greater good in a community if its members are
inspired by the ideal of doing nothing which may be painful to other
members, even if this means the denial to themselves of some of their
so-called rights. Anyway one thing is certain. No member of a society
can be allowed to exercise his rights in such a way as to clash with the
just rights of others. The two rights must be so adjusted and co-related
that they might be exercised without doing injury to each other.

**\[D\]** I was really astonished to find that some of these young men
who have been in the closest touch with Mahatma Gandhi, should have been
found harping on this doctrine of rights, because, as already stated and
as was pointed out at the Conference itself by Mr. Rajagopalachari, his
teaching is obviously based more on the doctrine of duties than on that
of rights. I would advise my young countrymen to think over this
question a little more deeply, to read the literature on the subject a
little more carefully, and to free themselves from the obsession of this
pernicious doctrine of rights. Unless this is done, there is no hope for
unity in India. We must always remember that we are a sort of polyglot
nation, much less homogeneous than any of those European or Western
nations who have had to fight for their freedom. Such a country can
never win its **\[\[178\]\]** freedom, or having won freedom, can never
maintain it, unless the various communities composing its people are
inspired more by the ideal of duties than of rights. No unity is
possible if everyone insists on his pound of flesh, and without unity
there is no freedom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [on to part 3](03part.html) -- \*[Lala Lajpat Rai
index](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\* --
\*[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp)\* --

  
