+++
title = "88 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
  
\*[THE HINDU-MUSLIM PROBLEM (1924)](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\*  
by Lala Lajpat Rai

PART 5 -- \["Untouchables" and "Kafirs"\]  


**\[A\]** The considerations urged in the last article are so important
.and relevant that I will not apologise for laying further emphasis upon
them. Every possible effort should be made (a) to integrate the
different religions as much as possible by emphasizing the points
**\[\[189\]\]** on which they agree, by eliminating non-essentials, and
by restricting essential differences within the narrowest limits; (b) to
remove all barriers to free social intercourse between the communities,
which do not go to the root of anyone's faith.

**\[B\]** Let us take the question of untouchability. I find no sanction
for it in the Hindu Shastras. I find no mention of it in history. As far
as the Hindu untouchables are concerned, most sensible Hindus are agreed
that in their case, at least, it is senseless, inhuman, and intolerable,
because of the fact of their being followers of the same religion and
members of the same community as the so-called higher castes. Some of
the advanced reformers like the Arya Samajists are prepared at once to
raise them high in the social scale by investing them with the sacred
thread and starting inter-dining and inter-marrying with them. Even the
most orthodox are in many cases prepared to let them \[walk?\] on their
floor, to admit them in common schools, and to remove all outward and
palpable signs of pollution by touch. In their case, at least,
untouchability is doomed, and will, I believe, disappear in a very short
time.

The ultra-orthodox will no doubt foam and fret, oppose and resist. Here
and there they will outcaste, and break social relations with, the
reformers. But the number of the latter is so large already, and is
growing so much larger and larger, as to reduce the orthodox to
impotence. Take the case of Mahatma Gandhi or of Seth Jamnalal Bajaj or
of Swami Shraddhanand or of Lala Hans Raj. Has the orthodox Hindu
community the will and the power to excommunicate them and throw them
out of the pale of Hinduism? I am not in favour of forcing \[the\] pace
and wounding the feelings and the susceptibilities of the orthodox, but
I know that in this respect at least orthodoxy is doomed. Its days are
literally numbered.

**\[C\]** In the case of non-Hindus, untouchability takes a different
shape. In their case, no pollution by touch is recognised. But it is not
allowed, to eat or drink food or water touched by them. This practice is
also doomed. As I have said, I can find no authority for it in the Hindu
Shastras. It was probably based on the idea of non-co-operation with
foreign rulers who happened to be beef-eaters. It was good and effective
as long as the Muslims in India **\[\[190\]\]** were the enemies of the
people or their conquerors, and the Hindus could hope to turn them out
by establishing a Hindu Raj. It is no longer possible. The enemies of
the 8th to 16th centuries form an important and intergal part of the
Indian population today. They are neither foreigners nor rulers.
Racially they are, in the vast majority of cases, the bone of our bone
and the flesh of our flesh.

Formerly, a Hindu who once drank water or ate food touched by a
Mussalman was immediately lost to Hinduism, never again to return to its
fold. Thanks to Guru Gobind Singh, Swami Dayanand, and other reformers,
that idea has been exploded and exploded for good. Even born Muhammadans
can now bc admitted into Hindu society. Under the circumstances there is
no excuse now for continuing or perpetuating this prejudice. But
prejudices like these take time to die. Die it must; why not then hasten
to destroy it by active efforts? I know that some distinguished Hindus
will take exception to my statement, and may even denounce me for it.
But I am out to speak what I believe to be the truth and the whole
truth.

It is absolutely necessary for producing an atmospbere of neighbourly
goodwill, and for creating a United India, that the existing prejudice
should be given up. You cannot make a united nation of communities
between whom such barriers in the matter of social intercourse are
recognised and enforced. Moreover, the abolition of the practice wil be
useful to Hinduism in another way. It will remove all fears of forced
conversion by making a Hindu drink water or eat food touched by a
Muslim. It may be noted that I am advocating the removal of the
restriction as a barrier and not the necessary introduction of
interdining.

**\[D\]** Take another case, an equally important matter. There was a
time when in the eyes of the Muslims all Hindus were *Kafirs*, and it
was implicitly believed that the property and the women of a *Kafir*
were legal prizes of war for a Muslim. The times are changed, and with
it the conception of a *Kafir* must be changed. No Hindu who believes in
and worships one God, can by any stretch of language be called a *Kafir*
unless the definition of a *Kafir* be that every nonÂ­Muslim is a
*Kafir*. In the eyes of a large number of Muslims the latter is the
right definition of a *Kafir*; and according to Ulemas, even those
Muslims are *Kafirs* who, although believing in Allah and His prophet,
do not follow other tenets of Islam as understood and interpreted by
them.

For example, they pronounced Sir Syed **\[\[191\]\]** Ahmed to be a
*Kafir*, and they denounce the followers of Mirza of Qadian also as
*Kafirs*. If they are right, then H. H. the Aga Khan is the biggest
*Kafir*, and so are Ghazi Mustafa Kamal Pasha and Zaghlul Pasha also. If
then their definition of a *Kafir* is right, there can be no peace
between them and the rest of the world. In that case all this talk of
Hindu-Muslim Unity is superficial, absurd, and hypocritical.. In the
course of the Non-co-operation campaign, some of the Ulemas cited
particular "ayats" (sections) of the Quran to prove that Muslims could
enter into lawful agreement with such non-Muslims as were friendly
towards them, against those who were inimically disposed towards them,
brought fire and sword into the home of the latter, and otherwise
injured them. Now to be frank, this kind of special pleading does not
appeal to my intellect. It is not a mechanical union of this kind that
will make a nation of us. What is needed is a chemical union. Are the
Hindus "*Kafirs*"? If they are, all talk of unity between Hindus and
Mussalmans is absurd.

**\[E\]** No Mussalman or body of Mussalmans in India or outside has any
legal right or authority to bind other Mussalmans. Leaders come and go;
there is no one in India who can speak in the name of the whole Muslim
community. The pact of Lucknow had no value or binding force unless it
was accepted by Government and embodied in law. No agreement made or
arrived at a meeting of the Congress or Khilafat has any binding legal
value. Anything agreed to by the present leaders or even the
Jamiat-ul-Ulema**[/11/](#n11)** can he questioned by any other Muslim,
and with even greater force by the succeeding generations. Even an
agreement embodied in law, or forming part of a declaration of rights,
is of no binding value on the future generations of Hindus and Muslims.
Laws change with the law-makers. A law made today may be of no value
fifty years hence. Under the circumstances, agreements or pacts won't
take us sufficiently far. What is needed is a "change of heart." All
efforts of the present generation of Muslim leaders should be directed
to rernoving thc idea that the Hindus are *Kafirs*.

**\[F\]** Ordinarily, the relations of Hindus and Mussalmans in
villages and small towns are most cordial. The present tension is the
development of the last fifty years. But what has happened during the
last three years has beaten all record. Some people are of opinion that
special efforts have been made to bring about the state of
**\[\[192\]\]** things to prove that India is unfit for Swaraj, and that
no further advance is safe in the matter of political reforms. In
certain quarters there is a tendency to throw the entire responsibility
on the officials of the foreign Government. While sharing the belief
that the latter have had a hand in it, I cannot help saying that Muslim
Maulavis, Maulanas and Associations have had a much larger, in fact a
lion's share, in it, though, of course, it is not meant that the Hindus
are quite innocent.

The fact that wherever there have been riots between Hindus and
Mussalmans, the latter have looted the former, desecrated their temples
and assaulted their women, betrays the widespread diffusion of the idea
that the Hindus are "*Kafirs*," that the Muslims are in a state of war
with them, and that in fighting them, their property and women are
"halal" for the Muslims. There are some persons who maintain that this
has been the work of *Goondas*. I say, no! The riots have been inspired
by cleverer brains than those of the *Goondas*, they have been
encouraged and supported by influential people. It is only the actual
outrages that have been committed by *Goondas*, fanatics, and poor
people.

**\[G\]** An esteemed Muslim leader has propounded the theory that the
fact that the Hindus are rich and Muslims are poor, explains these
riots. Assuming the explanation to be correct, how does he explain the
irrebuttable \[=irrefutable\] fact that poor Mussalmans do not loot
their rich fellow-religionists? The real explanation is that the latter
are Muslims and the Hindus are *Kafirs*. This notion has been rubbed
into the mind of the Muslim masses and Muslim middle classes, by clever
propagandists and influential leaders. It is the duty of the Muslim
nationalist leaders to inaugurate and carry on an extensive propaganda
to destroy this notion and to impress on the minds of their
co-religionists the truth that Hindus are not *Kafirs*, and that even on
the occasion of fights and quarrels, their temples, their women, and
their property are inviolable and unassailable.  


NOTES

**[/11/](#m11)** Jamait-ul-Ulema-i-Hind, \[a\] religio-political
association of Muslim divines (Ulemas), was founded in 1919 in the wake
of the Khilafat movement. It was set up with the object of safeguarding
the 'Shariah" and giving the Muslims religious and political guidance
according to the tenets of Islam. During the days of the
Non-co-operation movement the Jamait worked for Hindu-Muslim accord. See
Ziah-ul-Hasan Faruki, *The Deoband School and the Demand for Pakistan*
(Bombay, 1963), pp. 67-69.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [on to part 6](06part.html) -- \*[Lala Lajpat Rai
index](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\* --
\*[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp)\* --

  
