+++
title = "89 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
  
\*[THE HINDU-MUSLIM PROBLEM (1924)](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\*  
by Lala Lajpat Rai

PART 6 -- \[The history of communal representation\]  


**\[A\]** In this article I propose to trace the history of the
evolution of the idea of Communal Representation and separate communal
interests. It was in the seventies of the 19th century that the movement
for the establishment of the M. A. O. College at Aligarh **\[\[193\]\]**
was started, and it was about the same time that the Arya Samaj was
founded. The idea of a united India was present to the minds of the
founders of both when they met at Delhi on the occasion of the Imperial
Durbar of 1877. But they soon found out that it was impossible to unite
India on the basis of a common faith. The Indian National Congress had
not then come into existence, and the idea at back of Sir Syed's mind
was to found an institution which would enable Indian Muhammadans to
make up for lost time in the acquisition of that Western knowledge which
was, in his eyes, \[a\] *sine qua non* of worldly prosperity both under
the Government and otherwise.

**\[B\]** Sir Syed was materially helped and supported in the
developÂ­ment of his idea by influential Hindus. Rich Hindus and Hindu
princes liberally subscribed to the funds of the Aligarh M. A. O.
College. But the idea of a denominational college necessarily carries
with it emphasis on communal characteristics and communal glories. It
unavoidably increases communal consciousness. So it was here. Again, the
success and the popularity of Aligarh College depended largely on its
alumni finding high and lucrative posts under Government. At first the
great Syed's personal influence with the high officials sufficed for the
purpose, but it was soon found that it was necessary to supplement it by
insistence on communal claims. Thus comparative statistics of Hindus and
Muslims in Government services became a characteristic feature of the
deliberations of the Muhammadan Educational Conference even in its early
days.

Sir Syed was a great religious reformer. By his liberal expositions of
Islam and by his attempts to rationalise Islam, he drew upon himself the
wrath of the Muslim Ulemas, and they raised a storm of prejudice against
him. His strength lay in his alliance with the Government. Whether the
idea of this alliance had taken hold of his mind even before the Indian
National Congress was founded, cannot be definitely asserted. What is
certain is that after the foundation of the latter it became a definite
article of his political creed. Thus the Aligarh School of Muhammadans
became characteristically anti-Hindu and pro-Government.

**\[C\]** On the other hand, the Arya Samaj activities in the Punjab
brought into existence a community of Hindus who began to lay emphasis
on the glories of ancient India and also on the outrages commltted on
Hindus and Hindu temples, etc., by Muslim rulers. These **\[\[194\]\]**
Arya Samajists borrowed their ideas of political freedom from the
writings of Thomas Paine, Joseph Mazzini, George Washington, etc. They
attempted to unite Hindus against non-Hindus, both Christians and
Muslims. The D. A. V. College stood for Hindu unity, Hindu progress, and
Hindu consolidation.

Thus came into existence the two classes of Hindus and Muslims who stood
for sharply divided communal consciousness and communal consolidation,
with only this difference: that while one preached the cult of political
freedom, the other preached that of alliance with the ruling power. This
difference became the foundation of that fire of estrangement which has
since burst into flames, and now threatens to reduce to ashes all hopes
of a united India. The Aligarh-educated Muslims on the one hand, and the
Arya Samajists on the other, have since then been the doughty
standard-bearers of their respective faiths.

**\[D\]** The demand for communal representation and separate
electorates on the part of the Muslims was the next natural step in
their march towards exclusive communal progress. The Government, on its
side, found a natural and welcome ally in Sir Syed and his school of
Muslims, and began to encourage their demands for special representation
both in the Legislatures and the Services. The "political importance" of
the Muslims also assumed the rank of a war cry. Hindus all over India
resented this, but none more vehemently than those of the U. P. and the
Punjab. To those who want to trace the development and growth of this
idea, the early volumes of the "Comrade"**[/12/](#n12)** will furnish an
interesting and illuminating study.

**\[E\]** What was at the root of the claim about the political
importance of the Muslims? The fact that they had been the rulers of
India for centuries, and also the fact that there still existed several
independent Muslim states outside India. It is a well-known historical
fact that Sir Syed himself was opposed to the Muslims of India sending
any help to the Turks in the war with Russia in 1877-78. I don't know if
he was a Pan-Islamist. I am inclined to think that he was not. In any
case, he was strongly opposed to the idea of the Indian Muslims meddling
with the affairs of outside Muslim States.

Indian Muslims, however, soon found out that Great Britain, like other
European powers, was only as much interested in the independent Muslim
states as it suited its imperial interests. Suspicions began to be
entertained that perhaps the attitude of the Indian Government towards
Indian Muslims was only a narcotic to prevent them from **\[\[195\]\]**
taking any active interest in the affairs of Muslim states outside
India. The alliance of the educated Muslims with the Government had its
natural influence upon the masses. The classes and the masses were both
permeated with the idea that the Government was their friend, and
anti-Hindu. There were European officials who rubbed it into their
conscience \[=consciousness\] as much as they could.

**\[F\]** But the reaction was bound to come. It came in two ways.
Firstly, the Muslims began to raise their demands so high that even the
Government found it impossible to meet them. Secondly, the gradual fall
and dismemberment of the Muslim empires of Turkey and Egypt opened the
eyes of Indian Muslims as to the value of British friendship. First came
the occupation of Egypt; then came the rapid contraction of tbe Turkish
Empire by the loss of its Christian provinces; next came the Italian war
on Tripoli, which was a purely Muslim country. Finally came the war with
Turkey, with the dismemberment of the Turkish Empire by the treaty of
Severes. This brought about a complete change in the political views of
some of the Muslim leaders, and gave birth to the Non-co-operation idea.

It is not implied that during all this time there were no Muslim leaders
who stood for alliance with Hindus for the purposes of political
freedom, as against alliance with Goyernment and consequent political
dependence. It must be said to the honour of Messrs. Badruddin Tyabji,
Rahmatulla, and Rasul, among the dead, and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, M.A.
Jinnah, Hasan Imam, and Mazhar-ul-Haq, among the living, that they
always stood for political unity between Hindus and Muslims.

**\[G\]** It was left for Lord Morley, the great Liberal tbinker and
statesman of Great Britain, to finally sanction, at the instance of the
Indian bureaucracy, the canker of communal representation with separate
electorates into the Indian system;**[/13/](#n13)** and this arrangement
was subsequently sanctified by the pact of Lucknow arrived at by the
Liberal leaders of both the communities.**[/14/](#n14)**

**\[H\]** This, in brief, is the history of communal representation. I
have said nothing as to its necessity or otherwise, and before I do that
I want to comment briefly on the policy of the late Sir Syed Ahmed Khan,
and also trace the growth of Pan-Islamism in India.  


NOTES

**[/12/](#m12)** The *Comrade*, an English weekly, published by Maulana
Mohamed Ali, originally from Calcutta and later from Delhi. The first
issue of the paper was dated 4 January 1911.  
**[/13/](#m13)** Separate communal electorates for Muslims were first
introduced by the Indian Councils Act of 1939 when John Morley was the
Secretary of State for India.  
**[/14/](#m14)** The Congress-League Pact concluded in 1916 at Lucknow
conceded the principle of separate electorates for Muslims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [on to part 7](07part.html) -- \*[Lala Lajpat Rai
index](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\* --
\*[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp)\* --

  
