+++
title = "91 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
  
\*[THE HINDU-MUSLIM PROBLEM (1924)](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\*  
by Lala Lajpat Rai

PART 8 -- \[Pan-Islamism and its bankruptcy\]  


**\[A\]** Add to this the *Fatwa* of the Ulemas that India being a
"Dar­ul-Harab" (a place of war), every good Muslim ought to leave it and
migrate to a Muslim country. We know by this time how the *Hijrat*
movement ended; how much money was wasted over it and how much misery
was wrought thereby. The best commentary on it was witnessed by me at
Constantinople.**[/17/](#n17)** On the third or fourth day of my stay
there, I met two young Indian Muslims walking in the street. They
accosted me first. When I asked them how they fared in Constantinople,
one of them burst out almost in tears and said that if he ever returned
to India, he would give out a bit of his mind to tell his Muslim
countrymen how mischievous was the teaching that India was
"Dar-ul-Harab" (a place of war) and how false the idea that the whole
world was the home of the Muslims. That boy was one of the Mahajarins of
1921. He had travelled all over Muslim Asia from Afghanistan through
Turkistan to Russia, and then back to Angora and Constantinople. His
experience was so bitter, and his condition was so pitiable, that he
denounced Pan-Islamism in rather strong terms.

That was what I learned from other Indian Muslims also whom I met in
Turkey and Egypt, and this is natural enough. A Bengali Muslim in Egypt
denounced the Khilafat movement in such strong terms that I cannot
reproduce his language. Blood is thicker than water, as they say. No
part of the Muslim world except Egypt is excessively rich and
prosperous. Everywhere the governments have to look after their people,
and the latter have to eke out their means of subsistence. How can they
be expected to provide for foreigners, even though the latter are
Muslims? The Amir of Kabul was perfectly justified in asking the
Mahajarins to leave his **\[\[201\]\]** country. Later on he was forced,
perhaps, for diplomatic reasons, to ask some professedly anti-British
Muslims to leave his territories. Similarly it is idle to expect the
Turks to help the Indian Muslim Mahajarin when there is so much poverty
in their own land.

**\[B\]** The fact is that my visit to Turkey, Asia Minor, Syria,
Palestine, and Egypt, has completely disillusioned me about
pan-Islamism. I found it nowhere. Every country is busy with its own
home problems, and they are sufficiently complicated and troublesome to
keep them engaged all the time. Turkey is suffering from the
after­effects of a devastating war. The war has denuded the country of a
great number of its male working hands, and this is one of the reasons
that have forced their hands to abolish the Purdah system, and trust to
their womanhood to produce food for them. The problem of expatriating
Christians from Turkey and receiving the Muslims in exchange from Greece
is a huge problem on their hands. The problem of safeguarding against
internal enemies (Greeks, Armenians, and Jews, etc.) is sufficiently
serious. Internal and external fears compel them to keep an efficient
army equipped on up-to-date lines. All this means a great financial
strain. Over and above this, they are not quite united among themselves.
As in other countries, so in Turkey, there are parties who think
differently in politics. The abolition of the Khilafat and the expulsion
of the Khalifa and other members of the royal family was a desperate
step which they had to take in the interests of the present
constitution. They are making a most noble effort to consolidate their
power, to reform their administration, and to raise their country to a
first class position in the councils of Europe.

**\[C\]** Under the circumstances, even those who do not see eye to eye
with Mustafa Kamal and his party in matters religious and political, and
who resented the abolition of the Khilafat, are opposed, out of
patriotic motives to the reopening of the question, at least for some
time to come. From my study of the conditions in Turkey (short and
cursory as it was), I could only conclude that from first to last the
Turks were intense nationalists. At the present moment their only
concern is their country, which they want to preserve, manage and rule
in the interests of the Turks. The Turks seemed to me to be a noble
people, clean in their appearance and clean in their **\[\[202\]\]**
dealings with others. Their dress and their manner of living is almost
wholly European, except that the men wear the fez.

About their religion, indeed, I know nothing, but anyone who has his
eyes open can read the writing on the wall. There does not appear to be
much of religionism in Turkey. They have abolished Purdah. I saw lady
clerks working in the Post Office and other public offices without a
veil. I saw thousands \[of women\] dressed in European dress with a
Turkish over-mantle going about in public streets, and walking in public
gardens without any veil. To me their dress seemed perfectly decent,
which combined in a most appropriate manner the fashions of the East and
the West. The Turks have issued strict regulations which aim at
restricting polygamy to a very large extent, if not abolishing it
altogether. I saw most drastic regulations being enforced against the
use of any but the Turkish language. There are also very strict rules,
subject to exceptions, against enlisting non-Turks in the army. I
observed no prejudice against music, either vocal or instrumental. Even
dancing is indulged in higher circles. I was sorry to see rather a
general use of wine.

**\[D\]** In short I saw nothing, either in Constantinople or in other
towns of Asia Minor, which could show that the Turks were in any sense
of the term more religious than the rest of the natives of Europe.
Everywhere I saw signs of social and national distinctions and
preferments. My impressions were confirmed by the Indian Muslim
residents of Constantinople who met me. I was agreeably surprised to
find that in the Al-azhar University the quarters reserved for the
residence of Indian students were called *Rawaq.i-Hanud* (i.e. a
Boarding-House for Hindus). In Syria and. Palestine also, the problem
which absorbs the Muslim community is how to regain or maintain their
freedom.

In Palestine the Muslims are in an overwhelming majority over the Jews.
Christian Europe is creating a strong and well protected Ulster in
Palestine, which leaves almost no hope of the Muslims ever regaining
their lost position of supremacy. Everywhere one sees well-built and
well-equipped colonies of Jews springing up, with their own highly
efficient educational and philanthropic institutions, and with their
equally efficient industrial concerns. They are fast buying lands of
Muslims and Christians. Money is pouring in **\[\[203\]\]** from America
and Europe. The only "disconcerting" feature is that it is only the
poorer class of the Jews and the oppressed members of the race that are
emigrating to Palestine for permanent settlement. In Syria the
Christians form a very important part of the population. In neither \[of
these\] countries is there any communal rivalry or jealousy between the
Muslims and the Christians.

**\[E\]** I am afraid Indian Muslims are more Pan-Islamic and exclusive
than the Muslims of any other country on the face of the globe, and that
fact alone makes the creation of a united India more difficult than
would otherwise be the case. I am inclined to think that in this respect
at least, Sir Syed's policy was sounder than that of the Khilafatists.
He did not believe in a religious Khilafat. He did not accept the Sultan
of Turkey as a Khalifa, and he was opposed to the Muslims of India
devoting much attention to the affairs of Turkey or other Muslim
countries.  


NOTES

**[/17/](#m17)** Lala Lajpat Rai visited Constantinople on his return
from England in August 1924.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [on to part 9](09part.html) -- \*[Lala Lajpat Rai
index](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\* --
\*[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp)\* --

  
