+++
title = "94 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
  
\*[THE HINDU-MUSLIM PROBLEM (1924)](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\*  
by Lala Lajpat Rai

PART 11 -- \[Some suggestions for political improvements\]  


**\[A\]** I have so far touched \[on\] the past history of Hindu-Muslim
relations and given a picture of how matters stand at present. I will
now offer a few observations on how the present situation can be
improved, in the political field.

**\[B\]** It is suggested on behalf of Muslim leaders that–

\(a\) Communal representation with separate electorates in all the
legislatures, local bodies, Universities, and other official or
semi-official bodies should be provided.

Mr. M. A. Jinnah is the latest recruit to this party, and I really
cannot understand how he calls himself a nationalist
still.**[/25/](#n25)** The euphemism that this is only tentative, and
that a time will come when the Muslims will be ready to give up communal
representation, should deceive no one. Once you accept communal
representation with separate electorates, there is no chance of its
being ever abolished, without a civil war. A civil war will, again,
actually mean the supremacy of one of the communities over the other.
This lends weight to the fear entertained by some Hindus that some, at
least, of the Muslim leaders are counting on the help of foreign Muslim
states to establish Muslim rule throughout Hindustan. Whether this fear
is \[or is\] not well-founded, it is only natural that those who
entertain it should oppose communal representation with all the strength
they can command. Their opposition, however, cannot be effective,
**\[\[211\]\]** as the Government seems determined to adopt their
\[this?\] course. Therein they see the best guarantee of the permanence
of the present conditions.

Communal representation with separate electorate is the most effective
reply to the demand for Swaraj, and the surest way of India never
getting it. I have never been able to appreciate the mentality of those
who constantly talk of turning out the British, and at the same time
insist on communal representation with separate electorates. I really
don't understand what they mean. The second is the surest way of the
first being never realized. The experience of the last three years is
the most conclusive proof of it. The Muslim demand strengthens the
position of anti­Swarajists both among the Hindus and the Muslims, and
supplies an effective reply to the contention that India is ripe for
Swaraj. Communal representation by itself is a sufficiently bad
principle, destructive of, and antagonistic to, the idea of a common
nationhood, but separate electorates make this vicious principle
immeasurably worse. If our Muslim countrymen are really earnest in their
belief in nationalism and in their demand for Swaraj, the least they can
do is not to insist on separate electorates.

\(b\) Representation in provincial legislatures and local bodies should
be on the basis of population, in provinces and places where the
Mussalmans are in a majority. In other provinces and places, they should
have "effective" minority representation.

\(c\) Posts and offices under Govermnent should also be distributed on
the principle stated in clause (b).

\(d\) In the provinces where the Muslims are in a minority, as well as m
the All-India Departments, the Muslims ought to have 25 percent to 33
percent of the total posts.

**\[C\]** We will take these clauses one by one, in their serial order.

The principle of clause (a) is both theoretically and practically a
negation of the united nationhood. It provides for a complete division
of India, as it is, into two sections: a Muslim India and a non-Muslim
India. I say deliberately non-Muslim India, because all that the Muslims
are anxious for, is a guarantee of their own rights. All the other
communities they lump into one as non-Mushms. Let those who demand
communal representation with separate electorates in all the
representative institutions of **\[\[212\]\]** the land, honestly
confess that they do not believe in nationalism or in a united India.
The two things are absolutely irreconcilable.

\(b\) The demand for proportionate representation in the Legislatures is
perfectly reasonable, provided the principle is accepted through and
through. The plea for "effective" minority representation is, however,
untenable. Mr. Jinnah has placed a special interpretation of his own on
this term. Let us examine it in the light of facts. In Bengal and the
Punjab, the Mussalmans are in a majority, and if this principle is
accepted, they will rule over these Provinces. The Hindus in these
Provinces, according to the interpretation of Mr. Jinnah are an
effective minority already, so they are not entitled to any special
representation. But what about the Sikhs? Are they or are not entitled
to special representation? And from whose share are they to get it? From
the share of the Hindus or that of the Muslims? Under no principle can
they get it from the share of the Hindus. They must get it, if they
must, from the Muslims' share, on the same principle on which the
Muslims themselves claim it in the U. P., or the other Provinces where
they are in a minority. This will interfere with the absolute majority
which Muslims demand over the Hindus and Sikhs combined.

Some Mussalmans realize this, and contend that they will be content with
a bare majority of one or two. But it is obvious that they cannot have
everything in their own way. Assuming, however, that they are allowed
their own way, do they imagine that they will be able to make their rule
effective in the Punjab? The Punjab occupies a unique position among the
Provinces of India. It is the home of a community who were the rulers of
the Province when the British took possession of it. That community is
virile, strong, and united. Will this community readily consent to
occupy the entirely subservient position which this arrangement
involves? If nothing else helps them, they may oppose Swaraj, as they
did not long ago.

Under the circumstances, I would suggest that a remedy should be sought
by which the Muslims might get a decisive majority without trampling on
the sensitiveness of the Hindus and the Sikhs. My suggestion is that the
Punjab should be partitioned. into two provinces, the Western Punjab
with a large Muslim majority, to be a Muslim-governed Province; and the
Eastern Punjab, with a large Hindu-Sikhs majority, to be a
non-Muslim-**\[\[213\]\]**governed Province. I do not discuss Bengal. To
me it is unimaginable that the rich and highly progressive and alive
Hindus of Bengal will ever work out the Pact agreed to by Mr.
Das.**[/26/](#n26)** I will make the same suggestion in their case, but
if Bengal is prepared to accept Mr. Das's Pact, I have nothing to say.
It is its own look-out.

Maulana Hasrat Mohani**[/27/](#n27)** has recently said that the Muslims
will never agree to India's having Dominion status under the British.
What they aim at are separate Muslim States in India, united with Hiudu
States under a National Federal Government. He is also in favour of
smaller States containing compact Hindu and Muslim populations. If
communal representation with separate electorates is to be the rule,
then Maulana Hasrat's scheme as to smaller provinces seems to be the
only workable proposition. Under my scheme the Muslims will have four
Muslim States: (1) The Pathan Province or the North-West Frontier, (2)
Western Punjab, (3) Sindh, and (4) Eastern Bengal. If there are compact
Muslim communities in any other part of India, sufficiently large to
form a Province, they should be similarly constituted. But it should be
distinctly understood that this is not a united India. It means a clear
partition of India into a Muslim India and a non-Muslim India.

\(c\) From a national point of view, I strongly object to any communal
distinction being adopted for Government service or in the Universities.
Yet it cannot be denied that Muslim dissatisfaction at the present
condition of things is well-founded and genuine. Hindus must make up
their mind to concede to the Muslims their fair share of the loaves and
fishes obtainable from Government. They must put themselves into the
position of the Muslims and see the things from their point of view.
Mian Fazl-i-Husain embodies in his person a real grievance. Only he has
been hopelessly wrong in his method of removing this grievance. He ought
to have appreciated the Hindu point of view, and proceeded in a way to
make the seemingly bitter pill easily swallowable by the Hindus. The
thing ought to have been done gradually.

Mian Fazl-i-Husain's rule in the Punjab,**[/28/](#n28)** and that of
Chaudhri Shahabud­din in Lahore, have given the Hindus a sample of what
they are likely to have under Muslim rule. To provide them with the
sample was perhaps a moving spring of Sir E. Maclagan's and Sir John
**\[\[214\]\]** Maynard's**[/29/](#n29)** policy during the last five
years. They have gained their object. But is that a fact of which Mian
Fazl-i-Husain, as an Indian patriot, can be proud? If I had been in Mian
Fazl-i Husain's position, I would have tried to gain the same object in
a different way, and only resorted to open attacks in the last resort.
What the Muslims of the Punjab (I say Muslims as distinguished from
Muslim landlords, Muslim lawyers, and Muslim graduates) stand in the
greatest need of, is educational and economic openings. There are Muslim
districts where illiteracy is more widespread than anywhere else in the
Province.

There are millions of Muslims who are exclusively at the mercy of their
Muslim and Hindu landlords. What have the Muslim leaders done to improve
their educational and economic position? Providing posts under the
Government for a few educated Muslims is no remedy for the present
condition. Safeguarding the interests of the few, and neglecting the
interests of the many, is hardly a laudable thing, but that is exactly
what Mian Fazl-i-Husain has achieved, and at such tremendous cost!

The Muslims all over the world have yet to learn that there are other
ways of making money and thriving economically than through and by
Muslim rule. Those who are doing nothing to place modern progressive
ideals before the Muslims, and simply emphasize ingenious dogmas,
hair-splitting doctrines, and reliance on Government, can hardly be
called good friends of the Muslims. If the Muslims of India were to link
their fate indissolubly with that of the Hindus, it would be the
religious duty of the Hindus to help them towards progress in all
spheres of life, but if the present communal ideals are to prevail, then
they can scarcely complain of Hindu apathy towards their alleged
backwardness. The present communal struggle, with the atmosphere of
violence and coercion that has been created throughout Upper India, can
only produce a reaction in the minds of the Hindus.  


NOTES

**[/25/](#m25)** M. A. Jinnah demanded in 1924 separate electorates for
Muslims with a fixed number of seats in every legislature in the
country. Speaking under the auspices of the Bombay Provincial Muslim
League in October 1924 on Hindu-Muslim Unity, M. A. Jinnah urged the
extension of communal representation to Municipalities, Local Boards,
and Public Services.  
**[/26/](#m26)** A Hindu-Muslim pact in respect of Bengal was made in
1923 by C. R. Das and Muslim Leaders. Its main provisions were:  
1. Representation in the Legislative Council on the population basis
with separate electorates.  
2. Representation to local bodies to be in proportion of 60 to 40 in
every district–60 to the community which was in majority and 40 to the
minority.  
3. Fifty-five percent of the Government posts to be reserved for
Muslims.  
4. No music to be allowed before mosques.  
5. No interference with cow killing for religious sacrifices but cows to
be killed in such a manner as not to wound the religious feelings of the
Hindus.  
There was strong opposition to the Pact even in the Congress.  
**[/27/](#m27)** Maulana Hasrat Mohani was an extremist leader of the
Khilafat party. He presided over the annual session of the Muslim League
held at Ahmedabad in December 1921.  
**[/28/](#m28)** Fazl-i-Husain as Education Minister in the Punjab
Government, 1921-25, adopted various measures to advance specially
education of Muslims and provide posts in the public services
irrespective of merit. This caused resentment among the educated Hindu
community of the Punjab, as its members suffered a good deal.  
**[/29/](#m29)** Sir Edward D. Maclagan was the Governor of the Punjab
from 27 May 1919 to 30 May 1924. Sir John Maynard was a member of the
Executive Council of the Governor, Punjab, from 1921 to 1926. He was the
Financial Commissioner, Punjab, prior to his appointment as a member of
the Council.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [on to part 12](12part.html) -- \*[Lala Lajpat Rai
index](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\* --
\*[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp)\* --

  
