+++
title = "95 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
  
\*[THE HINDU-MUSLIM PROBLEM (1924)](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\*  
by Lala Lajpat Rai

PART 12 -- \[A summary of my conclusions and advice\]  


**\[A\]** In the last article I observed that Mian Fazl-i-Husain
embodied, in his person, a real grievance. But a grievance against whom?
Certainly not against the Hindu community. If the Hindus occupy a larger
number of posts under the Government than they would be entitled to on a
purely numerical basis, they are not to be blamed for it. The Muslim
community ought to recognise that the fault is principally their own.
They did not take sufficient advantage of **\[\[215\]\]** the
educational facilities provided by the Government in the early days of
the British rule, and it is that fact which is responsible for the
present condition of things. For the last fifty years the Government
have been giving them special facilities for making up for lost time,
with the gratifying result that they are now in a position to hold their
own against every other community.

They are perfectly justified in claiming that in future they should
receive their due share of Government posts. But are they justified in
holding that until their proper proportion has been secured to them, no
one from the other community should be employed? The contention is
absurd on the face of it. The claim that the number of Government posts
allotted to each community should be in proportion to its strength in
the population, is equally absurd. How are the figures to be made up? Is
the proportion to be fixed according to the number of posts, or
according to the amount of salaries? Are promotions, *sub protem*
appointments, and retirements also to be regulated by the same standard?
If so, why not say that all the Departments of the Government should be
divided into "Muslim" and '"Non-Muslim" sections, entirely separate and
independent of one another? Even these would then have to be subdivided
into "Urban" and "Rural," and agricultural and non­agricultural. The
whole thing is so ridiculous that one wonders how such a claim could be
seriously put forward by men of intelligence and common-sense.

**\[B\]** Again, are the Muslims quite sure that, taking all-India
figures, they will gain much by these principles being enforced? On what
principle will the Ministerships be divided? Is it not a fact that in
some Provinces, and within the Provinces in some Departments, they have
got a larger number of posts than the ratio of population would justify?

**\[C\]** I would beg of my countrymen to consider the matter in the
light of practical difficulties, and then suggest a scheme by which
their reasonable demands may be satisfied. I am free to confess that in
the present state of communal feeling no Department should be
monopolised by anyone community or class. All reasonable safeguards
against this contingency should be provided. Precautions must also be
taken against communal intrigues or machinations. I think the
appointment of a properly representative Public Services Commission will
be a sufficient guarantee that no **\[\[216\]\]** community shall, in
future, be improperly deprived of its due share of Government posts. I
can think of no other solution which would meet the needs of the
situation. When, however, Swarajya is attained, the solution will
probably be simple. The Provincial Governments will have full powers to
appoint their servants, and the Provinces having Muslim majorities will,
if the present state of feelings continue, automatically have a majority
of Muslim Government servants. In the All-India Services, a Services
Commission will continue to make appointments.

**\[D\]** In the meantime, may I make a respectful appeal to the Hindus
not to make much fuss about Government appointments? No community can
economically prosper which relies too much on Government patronage. What
percentage of the population earn their living that way? It is true that
Government servants influence communal life otherwise than through their
salaries. The amount of such influences can easily be exaggerated. As
long as the present conditions last, I would leave the Government free
to distribute the loaves and fishes at their disposal as they choose.
The cream is, in any case, reserved for Europeans; then come
Anglo-Indians; Indians come last of all. To me this fight over crumbs
seems to be the most insensible \[=senseless\] thing for any patriotic
person to indulge in. Under Swarajya, the Government of every Province
will determine the complexion and the character of its administrative
agency. It is perfectly futile to enter into any pact about this matter
now or to quarrel over it.

**\[E\]** From Government Services we descend to Local bodies. I think
the constitution of Local bodies must be settled on lines different from
those of the Legislatures. The population rule will not be sound in
their case. The Local bodies do not legislate. They only manage local
affairs. Local affairs are local, after all, and must be managed
according to the special &lt;::ircumstances of each locality. But if the
Muslims insist on the population basis, I will let them have it that
way. While they will  
be the gainers in some Provinces, they will be the losers in others.

**\[F\]** As for Universities and other educational institutions, they
are the last places where any communal distinction should be allowed.
That will be poisoning the whole intellectual life of the
**\[\[217\]\]** nation. I can understand and appreciate special
facilities being asked for classes considered backward. Give them
special scholarships, open educational centres in areas largely occupied
by such classes; even assign larger or special grants from public
revenues for their benefit, without dislocating or injuring existing
institutions.

In this connection I will say at once that I did not like or approve of
the opposition offered by some Hindu members of the Punjab Legislative
Council to the opening of Intermediate Colleges at Campbellpur,
Lyallpur, and Gujrat. If they objected to more money being spent on Arts
Colleges, the best thing for them was to suggest the transfer of one or
two Colleges from the East to the West. I am afraid an analysis of the
conduct of some Hindu members of the Punjab Legislative Council, both in
the last Council and in the present one, will not convince any
fair-minded person that the whole blame for the present communal tension
in the Punjab can be laid at the door of Mian Fazl-i­Husain.

The responsibility for much of what the Mian has done, or is doing,
rests with the bureaucratic Government. Perhaps he has been its ready
and willing tool, as his own views coincided with that of the
Government. Hindu critics should have seen into the game, and should not
have allowed themselves to be made the unconscious instruments of the
bureaucracy in creating more bad blood between the communities. In any
case, the future generation will not acquit them of all share in
helping, however unconsciously, to bring about the crisis through which
we are passing. In my judgment the Non-co-operation movement is also
partly responsible for it. Personally, I do not care at all about posts
or about admissions into the Government Arts Colleges. The case is,
however, different with the Professional Colleges. In their case the
allocation of numbers to different communities, regardless of merit,
would lower the standard of education and the subsequent efficiency of
the successful units. These are, however, minor matters to which undue
importance should not be attached.

**\[G\]** Now to summarise the suggestions I have made:

\(1\) Free your minds from the pernicious doctrine of absolute nghts.

\(2\) Purge your politics of "religion" (dogmatic religion).

**\[\[218\]\]** (3) Rationalise religion as much as possible, and lay
emphasis only on essentials.

\(4\) Remove social barriers which separate and estrange one community
from another.

\(5\) Love India above any other country in the world, and be Indians
first and last.

\(6\) Concentrate all efforts on improving conditions at home. That does
not debar you froni sympathising with your fellow-religionists abroad
and helping them occasionally, provided that your duty to your own
countrymen permits of it. In this respect follow Turkey and Egypt.

\(7\) Don't fret at *Shuddhi*. It has come to stay.

\(8\) You can try *Sanghathan* and *Tanzim*, if you can purge them of
anti-Muslim and anti-Hindu feelings, which, in my opinion, is very
difficult.

\(9\) Have proportional representation in Legislature if you.may, but do
not insist on separate e!ectorates.

\(10\) Divide the Punjab into two Provinces to make majority rule
effective.

\(11\) Don't insist on population being the rule of representation in
local bodies. But if you must, do not insist on separate electorates.

\(12\) Have Public Service Commissions to regulate the filling of
Government posts on certain general broad principles.

\(13\) No communal representation in Universities and educational
institutions. But special facilities for backward classes may be
provided, with special grants from public revenues for their benefit.  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [on to part 13](13part.html) -- \*[Lala Lajpat Rai
index](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\* --
\*[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp)\* --

  
