+++
title = "10"

+++

"Virtuous Clientelism": The Southern Question Resolved?

*Simona Piattoni *

Much has changed in Italy in recent times, but the "Southern Question" still remains central to Italian political and economic life. Even though the institutions that had been created after the war to promote southern development have been dismantled and the parties that championed state intervention in the South have disappeared, it is commonly believed that an economic, political, and possibly cultural gap between North and South still exists. Such a gap today finds its expression in new concerns and a new language. 

The economic debate on "dualism," the economic catchword of the postwar period, has been mostly replaced by a debate on "globalization," but the underlying idea that some parts of the country do worse, and are likely to keep doing worse, than others in the context of the world economy is still widespread. At the political level, too, the North—South gap persists in a new guise. It once took the form of a different modality of vote: the relative prevalence of an "opinion" and "membership" vote in the North and of an "exchange" vote in the South \(Parisi and Pasquino 1977\). Today the political gap is arguably expressed by the electoral successes of the Lombard League in the North and the revival of Alleanza Nazionale \(the former Movimento Sociale Italiano, or neo-fascist party\) in the South. That these parties, which on many social and economic issues take opposite stands, had to accept an uneasy cohabitation in the Berlusconi government of 1994 is a sign, at the same time, of the existence of the gap and of the difficulty of closing it. 

While the "Southern Question" remains unresolved, the scholarly debate on it has somewhat subsided, perhaps for want of new ideas as well as a widespread sense of disillusionment. For many years, the debate has centered around a few unchallenged propositions that, I believe, have pushed scholarly reflection into an intellectual cul-de-sac: that the economic gap is a reflection of a deeper sociocultural gap, and that a clientelistic form of politics has been instrumental in preserving this gap despite state efforts to engineer an economic catch-up. Underlying these common contentions are the equally unchallenged assumptions that, despite its evident internal differentiation, the South can be treated as one relatively homogeneous area and that the North—South disparity is still more significant than any intra-South \(or intra-North\) difference. 

This chapter reviews these assumptions as they have appeared in the work of political scientists, particularly in the United States, who, it might be said, have played a significant role in shaping the postwar construction of the Italian South as uniformly backward and irredeemably clientelistic. Intra-South differences, on the contrary, are significant and, if studied in detail, may direct our attention to the factors that can explain the economic success of some southern regions and the disappointing, if not utterly dismaying, situation of others. Insistence on the supposedly deep-seated social and cultural differences between North and South fossilizes the debate around the wrong conceptual categories and, given the structural and slow-changing nature of these traits, fosters a sense of false impotence. 

In highlighting the political dimension of the "Southern Question," which resulted from the failure of both national and local political elites to unify the country over and above the diplomatic and administrative levels, I will argue that, far from being an intractable problem that owes its resilience to structural and cultural causes, the "Southern Question" can be resolved through politics. Politics, rather than being deleterious for southern development, has played a fundamental role in ensuring the development of some southern regions.1 Indeed, I will argue that the "Southern Question" as it has been traditionally understood — as the existence of a sizeable economic gap between North and South, much greater than any difference internal to these two areas — is already on its way to resolution, as is suggested by data demonstrating that some southern regions have made so much progress as to be able to \(symbolically\) "pull themselves out of the South."2 

The key to the success of these regions, this chapter contends, is to be found in their local political classes.3 This is a fairly contentious statement in the case of the Italian South, where politics is commonly depicted in very negative terms. In what follows, I first review the depiction of southern politics in the hegemonic literature of American political science, concentrating on the all-important concept of clientelism. I then reinterpret this concept as strategic behavior on the part of both patrons and clients rather than as a syndrome that epitomizes all the evils of the South. Finally, I sketch out a typology of clientelistic politics that shows how similar practices can be used to rather different ends, producing different results. While the evidence that supports the contention that clientelism can be instrumental to economic development is available elsewhere \(Piattoni 1996, 1997\), I will develop here the same argument in theoretical terms. I will conclude by speculating on the possibility that the feedback effect of economic development on local politics could lead to the replacement of clientelism with a more "civic" style of politics. 



## Political Institutions and Economic Development

It is commonly believed that underlying the "Southern Question" are structural and cultural factors that, although having their roots in historical events and human choices, have proved surprisingly resilient and self-reinforcing. Although crucial in the past, historical contingency and human agency seem to have lost their power in current times. Politics has either been seen as a reflection of these cultural and structural factors, and therefore devoid of any explanatory power, or as a mere intervening variable or reinforcing factor. Such an understanding actually gained new popularity in 1992 as the state abandoned its forty-plus-year commitment to reducing the North—South economic gap. 

After the war, the "Southern Question" had been tackled with unprecedented energy and optimism. A vast program of state subsidies and direct public action, known as the "Extraordinary Intervention," was set in motion in order to help the South industrialize. Traditional obstacles to agricultural progress were, meanwhile, being removed through the Agrarian Reform. These policies were met by disappointing \(if not counterproductive\) results, and were therefore interpreted as either naive in their expectation that deep-seated discrepancies could be reversed in the space of few years, or flawed by bad design and implementation, or again as thwarted by perverse political interests.4 Economic statistics on per capita income, degree of industrialization, worker productivity, per capita savings, and so on, were regularly released throughout the postwar period, almost as "war bulletins" on the "southern development front." While their official goal was to document progress and guide future policies, they often lent themselves to being interpreted as indicators of the cultural differences between North and South \(for example, the lower productivity of southern workers was said to index "laziness," the lower rate of saving to be a sign of "profligacy"\). 

In 1992, the intractability of the problem and its cultural character were supposedly exposed \(once again\) by the declared failure of the development effort, and the Extraordinary Intervention was terminated. Politically, this new \(indeed, old\) interpretation went hand in hand with the new political resolution of the North to rid itself of the southern "ballast." Because the "Southern Question" was presented as a structural problem that could not be addressed through public intervention, the option of resolving it by severing the political union that kept the two halves of the country together suddenly became politically feasible. The northern secessionist project acquired increased legitimacy by adding on to the structural reading of the "Southern Question" the aggravating factor of the inefficiency and corruptness of the southern political class.5 In other words, efforts at closing the North—South gap were considered not only meaningless, since the gap had deep structural causes that could not be reversed, but also harmful, because these very efforts had become a breeding ground for greater corruption. 

Of course, this more "cultural" reading of the "Southern Question" was hardly new. One of the most influential postwar attempts at a cultural explanation for southern underdevelopment was the 1958 publication of American political scientist Edward Banfield's *The Moral Basis of a Backward Society*. This work was nothing less than a theoretical treatise on the external and internal conditions for the existence of diffuse distrust in Southern Italy. External circumstances — the extreme uncertainty of the economic context — and mental attitudes — the generalized assumption that each individual will act to maximize the material, short-run advantage of the nuclear family — explained why the inhabitants of Montegrano, the town he selected as prototypical of the entire South, did not engage in collaborative enterprises. Lacking the social capital of trust, they forfeited the opportunity to learn the virtues of collective action, that is to enter into a self-reinforcng "virtuous circle" of shared values and economic progress. 

The same "amoral familist" ethos that characterized Montegrano's peasants in their economic and social dealings also affected the way in which they saw politics and acted in their political capacity. The Montegranesi, Banfield argued, were politically passive, unstable in their partisan preferences, and incapable of working through their representatives to improve their material lot. Their mistrust of public authorities and their belief in the corruptness of all public officials induced them to avoid involvement in politics as much as possible and, at most, to use their vote as a token in exchange for personal favors. Thus was it explained how clientelism could grow even in the most politically barren environment of Montegrano. 

Thirty-five years later, another American political scientist, Robert Putnam, preferred a similar analysis, in the form of a broadly researched comparative study of regional government performance called *Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modem Italy* \(1993\). According to Putnam, southerners' lack of trust in one another, and their incapacity for engaging in collective enterprises — and conversely the mutual trust of the Northerners and their capacity for such enterprises — can be traced back to the solutions that were devised in the twelth century to the endemic problem of securing external borders and ensuring law and order within them. While in the South the Norman kings took care of external and internal enemies, but also imposed their centralized control on all forms of social and economic activity, in the North the citizens themselves provided for their external and internal security and regulated their social and economic interactions. Consequently, while southerners learned the importance of tending to the solidity of their ties to power in order to secure their physical and economic survival, northerners accumulated collaborative enterprises and a stock of mutual trust that characterizes the way they interact with power to this day. Clientelism is thus contrasted to civicness as the hallmarks of politics in the two halves of the country. 

That distrust and cynicism inhibit collective action both in the economic and in the political spheres is a widely accepted contention. Healthy and dynamic societies are assumed to develop collective structures to regulate social and political interactions. The diffusion of collective structures of interaction, alongside the dyadic structures that prevail in the private sphere, ensures that, in their public dealings, individuals learn to base their behavior on deferred rewards and general principles rather than on immediate rewards. Political scientists Luigi Graziano \(1974\) and Sidney Tarrow \(1967\) have further developed this point. 

But how exactly do social and political structures of exchange influence economic development? The paradox of the market is that, in order to function, it needs something that it cannot generate. That something is trust. Market exchanges, says Graziano, are typically dyadic, for goods and services are exchanged immediately and personally. As such, they contain in themselves all the incentives for their successful execution and do not need — nor do they tend to generate — more general and impersonal principles than the satisfaction of the actors' preferences. Yet, although each exchange taken in isolation may be so regulated, in the aggregate the market needs structures and principles that it cannot generate and that it must borrow from the social and the political spheres. These structures and principles, according to "transaction cost" economists, are meant to avoid those opportunistic behaviors that would eventually jeopardize the good functioning of market relations. 

From the political institutions the market borrows the solution of its "capital" problem: the effective enforcement of property rights and the law of contracts. The state, by socializing the costs of the credible enforcement of contracts, makes transactions among economic actors possible \(North 1990\). While this is a primary requirement for the functioning of the market, it is often not enough. High levels of economic development can be reached only by those societies in which economic actors succeed in establishing trust relations among themselves and in engaging in collaborative enterprises, whose boundaries are flexible and subject to continuous renegotiation \(Sabel 1993\). In this second task, political institutions are flanked by social and cultural institutions, which facilitate communication among economic actors and often provide a first test-case for future economic interactions. Hence, political and social institutions "square the market's circle" and allow it to bring about economic development. 

Given this frame of reference, it is a short step to conclude that the different natures of social and political institutions in the North and the South of Italy explain the different economic development of the two halves of the country. The cynicism and disaffection that characterize State—citizen relations in the South, and the clientelistic mode of interaction between voters and politicians there, are traced back to the fragmented nature of the southern social structure. As Tarrow wrote in 1967, 

Clientelismo is a pattern of political integration that is linked directly to the inflexibility, disjunctiveness and fragmentation of the stratification system of the Mezzogiorno; it is characteristic of fragmented systems passing from a traditional to a modern organization of social roles. Hence politics is nonideological, broad functional interests cannot be expressed and access to authority can expand only through the further vertical extension of clientele links. One reaches the structure of authority not by merging one's demands with parallel demands of others, but by linking oneself to a hierarchical chain of personal acquaintance that reaches power holders at the higher level \(Tarrow 1967: 74—5\). 

For both Tarrow and Graziano, the incomplete transition of the South to capitalism is cause as well as consequence of the persistence of particularistic relationships in all spheres of social life. The incapacity of the southerners to form categorical associations to further their common interests and, even more, their cynical rejection of secondary associations as "illegitimate and corrupt" resulted in what Graziano called a "totalitarian conception and practice of power" \(Graziano 1974: 358\). This amounts to conceiving social conflict as a struggle amongst factions and demanding from the State private protection and selective access to the spoils of government. No one in the South seems to know what the "common good" is. Rather, joining in a clientele remains the sole antidote against the exclusive and discriminatory use of authority. As the provision of collective goods is unproductive from the point of view of gaining political influence, so the argument goes, all state functions — including justice, taxation, and defense — are performed in a discriminatory way. 

Clientelism is thus the way in which southerners are integrated into the political system. Even after the Second World War, when universal suffrage was introduced and veritable mass political parties emerged, clientelist politics did not give way to principled politics in the South. Rather, clientelism was reinterpreted and updated. As the new political leaders enjoyed no personal or social prestige independently of the party, they had to engage in "mass patronage." "Clientelism of the notables" became "clientelism of the bureaucracy." 

\[A\]s political power shifts from prestigious individuals to party organizations without a corresponding rise in political ideology, patronage must take the place of personal loyalty as a basis of affiliation. But it is patronage channeled through an organization rather than through a chain of individuals. It is the mass patronage of the modern state and mass party, distributed within the framework of a progressive program for economic development \(Tarrow 1967: 325—7\). 

According to these authors, then, just as they do according to Banfield and later Putnam, social structures and cultural values determine politics. The socially fragmented and ideologically totalitarian environment of the South managed to stifle southern economic development in the postwar period. Clientelism caused underdevelopment by preserving and strengthening vertical links at the expense of horizontal ones, by stifling the formation of an organized opposition to power, by encouraging instead its cooptation through patronage, and by inhibiting the accumulation of trust and breeding cynicism \(see also Gambetta 1988\). Moreover, clientelism also negatively affected policy-making. Decisions guided by clientelistic criteria normally failed to meet economic rationality standards and thus led to sub-optimal results. Additionally, as policies were decided and implemented in order to gain electoral support, they were not just sub-optimal, but outright wasteful. Indeed, since the power base of the political leaders lay in their mediating role between the State and the citizenry, policy decisions could even be harmful, as they were aimed at reproducing the objective conditions for the mediating role of the politicians \(Gribaudi 1980\). 

It is my argument that at the heart of the political science literature on the Italian South are two assumptions that render these studies unable to explain the recent economic success of some southern areas. The first is that, although the importance of political institutions for economic development is widely acknowledged, the performance of these institutions is explained by structural and cultural factors that are basically unaffected by human action. Thus any real independent effect of politics on development is in practice negated. The second common assumption is that the initially somewhat different structural and cultural features of Northern and Southern Italy managed to perpetuate themselves by igniting self-reinforcing processes that put the two regions on increasingly divergent paths. Consequently, the possibility that they might start to converge again or might simply tread different \(and internally differentiated\) paths is ruled out. 

In the following section, an alternative argument regarding the role of local political classes in economic development will be proposed.6 I will argue that, by looking at clientelism on its own terms, that is, as a political strategy for gaining and maintaining power, it becomes possible to identify a variety of "styles of clientelistic government" that, although superficially similar, nevertheless operate according to rather different logics and produce widely different results in terms of economic development. I will ground my proposal in the political equilibria that characterized the "first Italian republic." 



## Styles of Clientelistic Politics

Why do regions characterized by similar cultural values, social structures, and political institutions achieve different levels of development? Why do their political classes express different styles of government? These questions cannot be posed, let alone answered, if one believes, as Banfield and Putnam do, that the causes of the "Southern Question" are cultural and that the South is, all in all, fairly homogeneous. It is only by focusing on intra-South differences and their evolution through time that one begins to appreciate the political origins of the "Southern Question."7 The larger study on which this chapter is based shows that the different degrees of success with which different southern regions managed to weather the crisis of the 1980s and early 1990s, sustaining the growth spurt of the 1970s, depended on the ability of their respective local political classes to help the local economy tackle the necessary restructuring \(Piattoni 1996\). This differential ability, in turn, resulted from the different strategies implemented by these classes in order to maintain their power. In other words, superficially similar clientelistic systems may in reality generate different types of politics, with important consequences for economic processes. 

Patronage can be defined as an "informal contractual relationship between persons of unequal status and power, which imposes reciprocal obligations of a different kind on each of the parties" \(Silverman 1965: 296\). The contract is never formally drawn and the obligations never fully specified. Generally speaking, these relationships aim at a large and unspecified series of performances of mutual assistance. The patron-client relationship presupposes the availability of alternative, fully legitimate channels of access to desired resources, for example, markets. By entering patron-client relations, the clients give up access to markets except through the mediation of the patrons, because of the supposedly lower benefits or higher costs that direct access would entail. 

The client 'buys' protection against the exigencies of the markets or of nature or of the arbitrariness or weakness of the center or against the demands of other powerful groups or individuals. The price he pays for it is not just a specific service, but the acceptance of the patron's control of the client's access to markets and public goods, as well as of his ability to convert fully some of his resources \(Eisenstadt and Roniger 1981: 281\). 

Historically, the clients had little actual choice, as the patrons stood "guard over the critical junctures or synapses of relationships which connect the system to the larger whole" \(Wolf 1956 quoted by Silverman 1965: 294\). Nowadays, this is less true. Today, in so far as they are willing to accept the mediation of the patrons to obtain resources that they could otherwise access through more legal and legitimate channels, the clients freely underwrite the "clientelist contract." 

The literature on clientelism claims that the main goal of the patrons \(the local politicians\) is to preserve their uneven power position *vis-à-vis* their clients \(the citizens\) by mediating between the center and the periphery in such a way as to reproduce the dependence of the periphery on the center and, therefore, perpetuate their mediating role \(Gribaudi 1980; Chubb 1982\), From this assumption derive a number of behavioral consequences. First, the patrons will seek to avoid any real economic integration of the areas under their control into the national and international economy, because the introduction of market channels of access to desired resources could weaken their power. Second, the patrons will seek to prevent the formation of secondary associations among clients, as these would represent a potential threat to the personalistic and vertical relationship that links each client to his patron. The vertical and atomizing way in which the clientele system integrates each citizen into the political system through a chain of personal relationships with powerful individuals should already prevent the aggregation of political demands, defuse conflicts, and preempt the formation of an organized opposition. However, the patrons might also deploy additional tactics - most probably a mix of threat and persuasion, fear and affection — in order to keep their clients individually tied to them. 

If, in order to retain their power, the patrons wilfully try to preserve the economic backwardness of the areas under their control, does this not constitute a breach of the patron-client contract? Or, in Chubb's formulation, "Given the undisputed failure of Palermo's local government not only to provide essential public services but even to guarantee the functioning of normal administrative activities, how can the unbroken electoral success of the DC in the past 30 years be explained?" \(Chubb 1982: 3\). Scholars of clientelism believe that, far from being contradictory, clientelist politics and economic backwardness imply one another. Given the general scarcity of resources in a situation of economic backwardness, what clients ask from their patrons is not economic development — a public good that benefits all if it benefits some — but personal material advantages. However, material advantages are also in short supply and patrons may be unable at any given moment to satisfy all the clients' requests. Moreover, as limited resources are allocated according to clientelistic criteria —that is, criteria that do not command legitimacy and are, therefore, incapable of providing an accepted justification for the existing distribution of resources - there will be no self-enforced upper limit to the demands of the clients, and inflation will ensue. As a consequence, clientelism should collapse under the weight of its own contradictions or, paraphrasing a famous expression, it will cause the "fiscal crisis of the polity." Refuting this conclusion, Chubb showed that clientelism entails not just the exchange of material favors for votes, but also the exchange of those products of the public administration \(permits, licenses, authorizations, and so on\) that do not cost the patrons money, but have a significant economic impact on the clients. "The essence of clientelism lies ... in the skillful manipulation of scarcity . . . \[T\]he patron-client bond ... is dependent not on a continuous stream of benefits, but rather on sustaining the expectation of rewards in the maximum number of people with the minimum payoff in concrete benefits" \(Chubb 1982: 5\). In this way, patrons are able to preserve their power even in the face of systematic breaches of the patron-client contract. 

Given this picture of clientelism, why should a patron bother to attract investment to the area under his control? Why should he use his power to provide collective goods rather than limit himself to satisfying the clients' individual demands or manipulating resources so as to create the expectation of reward? Why should he try to create a community where individual interests once dominated? And, finally, why should he try to reinforce market mechanisms where clientelistic methods of distribution can be used? True enough, private and public investment, even of an apparent public nature, can be used for clientelistic purposes. Thus, highways may be built not because of their potential effect on economic growth, but because their construction creates numerous occasions for clientelistic exchanges. Similarly, firms may be attracted to an area not because of their impact on the local economy, but because the jobs that they create can be distributed among loyal clients. When such investments are realized in clientelism-ridden areas, it is almost automatically assumed that their justification lies not so much in their effective utility, but in their political fallout. As a consequence, it is also expected that these investments will be scarcely profitable and will soon fail. Any actual economic progress that might result from such investments should then be considered as unexpected and uncalled-for, as it would have the undesired consequence of weakening the dependence of the clients upon their patron. 

Even more puzzling is the behavior of those patrons who actually seem to care for the area and people that they control, so much so as to make great efforts to build and maintain relationships of personal acquaintanceship, if not affection, with their clients. Students of clientelism have argued that an affective component is inherent in the patron-client relationship, but that the rituals through which this component is created and maintained \(for example rituals of godfatherhood\) are largely symbolic. Attending a handful of weddings and baptisms is a small cost if it ensures faithful electoral support from scores of relatives and friends for years to come. Similarly, attendance at village fairs, inaugural events, and local celebrations may be interpreted as skillful and inexpensive promotional activity. Again, the creation and strengthening of community ties that might derive from these activities are considered unexpected and undesired consequences, as they could give rise to collective identities and sustain collective actions that might challenge the power position of the patron. 

This interpretation of clientelism is clearly too restrictive. In what follows, I propose a different approach, capable of accommodating a variety of patrons' behaviors. The model of clientelism that I will develop makes sense of the above sketched behaviors without resorting to the notion of unforeseen consequences; rather it fully integrates them into the range of strategies available to the patrons. Patron-client networks are interpreted as "strategies for the maintenance and aggrandizement of power on the part of patrons and of coping and survival on the pail of the clients. They are probably never the sole strategies available . . . \[O\]ne may often find individuals employing a number of seemingly incompatible strategies simultaneously *ox seriatim"* \(Waterbury 1977: 332—3\). 

As already seen, it is usually held that the patrons will try to avoid the emergence of similar relations among clients and, in so far as these do emerge, they will consider them as unforeseen and undesired consequences. Yet the patrons might pursue the economic development of the area that they control, wagering that this might be the best way to preserve or increase their electoral support and, consequently, preserve or increase their power *vis-à-vis* the center. Moreover, as has been argued by Silverman \(1977\), it is possible that patrons, far from trying to prevent the formation of horizontal links among clients, may indeed foster the formation of a community in the name of which they can subsequently claim resources from the center. "Public patronage," that is patronage exerted with respect to groups or entire communities with the aim of providing public goods, rather than political nonsense, could in fact constitute a highly sophisticated political strategy. Similarly, it is also conceivable that the clients might create secondary associations not in order to oust the patrons and replace the clientelist system, but in order to tilt in their favor the patron-client relationship. Again Silverman \(1977\) suggests that clients may be interested in perpetuating the "myth" of patronage, irrespective of the real or symbolic nature of its content, as a way of drawing potential new patrons into local commitment. 

Borrowing from the game-theoretical vocabulary, we might say that patron and clients are engaged in a two-level game. At the first level, patron and clients bargain over the terms of the contract that binds them. At this level, the relative power of the players is skewed in the patron's favor: it is he who decides who will have access to the resources that he controls. The clients are weak and divided as they compete against one another over access to the desired resources. At the second level of the game, however, the patron competes with similarly positioned patrons over access to those centrally managed resources that determine his political status, which he then has to allocate among his clients. At this level, the relative power of the players is skewed in the opposite direction, as the clients decide with their vote the amount of resources that each patron will obtain.8 At this second level, the clients have the opportunity not just of choosing amongst different patrons, but of choosing between the patronage, or clientele, system and alternative systems of resource allocation. In choosing alternative systems, the clients may act in concert, and thus be particularly effective, but they may also simply express their distaste for clientelism by voting against the patrons \(or not voting\). 

What factors determine the respective power of patrons and clients? The existence of few competing patrons will enhance the power of each one of them *vis-à-vis* the clients, while also making their claim for centrally distributed resources more likely to succeed. On the other hand, the existence of a strong opposition will give the clients greater leverage in their power game with the patrons, as well as enabling them to choose among patrons. Four main situations can be thus singled 

**Table I**. Types of Clientelist Government    **Strength of Opposition** **Number/Cohesion of Patrons**    **Few/Cohesive** **Many/Divided**      
* * *
    Strong Virtuous clientelism Challenged clientelism    Collective goods Mixed goods    Growing legitimacy Fluctuating legitimacy    Sustained development \(Abruzzo\) Intermittent development \(Campania\)   Weak Vicious clientelism Ineffective clientelism    No output Individual goods    No legitimacy Fading legitimacy    Economic involution \(Sicily\) Economic stagnation \(Puglia\)    

out by plotting the number \(or cohesiveness\) of the patrons against the strength/weakness of the opposition. 

To each situation correspond specific incentives that will induce the patrons to play one or another type of "clientelistic game." So, for instance, cohesive patrons will have no incentive to sustain economic development, nor to provide material goods to the individual clients, so long as they can count on the absence of available alternatives, and probably on the existence of fear, to keep clients' dissatisfaction in check \(vicious clientelism\). To the contrary, cohesive patrons facing strong opposition might well foster economic development and deliver actual goods in order to maintain their position \(virtuous clientelism\). In both cases patrons are powerful; but in the first they can afford to disregard the clients' demands and resort to symbolic tactics, whereas in the second they are induced by the opposition to use their power to attract resources from the center and to allocate them effectively in the periphery. Divided patrons, meanwhile, will lack the power *vis-à-vis* the center to attract resources and the power *vis-à-vis* the periphery to enforce any given distribution. Their actions will probably cross-check one another, leading to insignificant or contradictory results. Either they will be engaged in petty squabbling among themselves, when faced by a weak opposition \(ineffective clientelism\), or challenged and eventually overthrown, when faced by a strong one \(challenged clientelism\). 

The incentives entailed by any given situation, however, are not all. External shocks may propel clientelist systems from box to box, just as patrons may adopt strategies and clients create pressures capable of forcing such movement. The latest patron of the Abruzzo, the Christian Democrat Remo Gaspari, succeeded in eliminating competing patrons and achieved full leadership within the local party and control over the entire region, thus becoming hegemonic. Conversely, after an external shock deprived Puglia of its charismatic leader, the Christian Democrat Aldo Moro, the remaining patrons failed to recompose their internal quarrels and regain cohesiveness, thus allowing prospective patrons to gain some power and complicate the regional political landscape. 

Moreover, the Abruzzo's leader used his hegemonic power to support the opposition — the Communist Party — against the up-and-coming patrons — members of the Socialist Party. Although this meant that he could not dominate the opposition uncontested, it also weakened his potential competitors. In contrast, the low-equilibrium point reached by Puglia's political system induced ¡ocal leaders to act simply in order to maintain the status quo. However, if one patron had gained hegemonic power over his competitors, or if the opposition had gained sudden strength, this region would have looked quite different. 

Clientelist systems, then, are determined by the incentives inherent in each situation, by the creative choices of the patrons but also by the reactions of the clients. The Abruzzo's citizens seemed uninterested in simply changing the identity of the patrons and, contrary to what has happened in other regions, kept voting either for the existing patrons or for the opposition, thus helping maintain the system of incentives associated with "virtuous clientelism." Even when at the central level an alliance between the Christian Democratic Party and the Socialist Party suggested an overture to competing patrons, Abruzzo's voters either reconfirmed their trust in the traditional patrons by voting for representatives from the hegemonic faction of the DC, or signalled their wish to change the system altogether by voting PCI. Puglia's voters, on the other hand, expressed their dissatisfaction with their traditional patrons by supporting competing patrons even before centrally agreed-upon formulas granted greater power to the PSI. Their behavior thus resulted in governmental stalemate and decision-making gridlock, two typical elements of "ineffective clientelism." 

That different styles of clientelism have profoundly different effects on economic development is empirically demonstrated elsewhere \(Piattoni 1996, 1997\). Here I would like to offer a theoretical argument in line with the discussion produced above about the role of politics in economic development. It was argued above that economic development can thrive only where exchanges of a complex kind can be safely carried out and are indeed encouraged. For that to be possible, political institutions must provide a framework in which economic cooperation is feasible and rewarding. In more technical terms, political institutions must secure the credible enforcement of contracts. The qualification "credible" is crucial and has a double meaning. On the one hand, enforcement must be credible in the sense that each party must be sure that the enforcing agency will not, at some point, side with the other party. The punishment of opportunistic behavior must be impartially administered. On the other hand, the enforcer himself must be credible in the sense that he will not take advantage of his superior position to extract undue resources from the contracting parties \(Weingast 1995\). 

In the light of this discussion it is clear why conventional clientelism cannot be the hotbed of development. The conventional patron cannot fulfill the function of enforcer of contracts precisely because he is not credible in either sense. The clients cannot be sure at all times that their patron may not be indeed favoring some clients over others, and will therefore avoid being trapped in contractual relations in which they might end up losing. At the same time, the clients cannot be sure that the patron is not taking advantage of his position of power to keep for himself too large a share of the resources that he should be channeling to the clients or that he is not exacting too high a price for his services as enforcer. There is one exception to this rule: the "virtuous patron." 

Only a "virtuous patron" will be interested in, and will be capable of, credibly enforcing contracts and promoting economic development. Precisely because he is trying to build a reputation for himself that will allow him to be hegemonic at the local level, the "virtuous patron" will have an interest in enforcing contracts impartially. If he did not, he would be shown to be the patron of only some of the clients, and leave room to other patrons to compete for the protection of the neglected clients. He will also be capable of enforcing contracts because, being hegemonic, he will control the local political system and administrative apparatus and will thus ensure the coordinated effort of all levels of the representative government and public administration. Secondly, because the opposition is strong and vocal, he will also eschew using his hegemonic power to appropriate too large a portion of the resources attracted from the center or to exact too high a price for his intermediation. The same incentives that prompt him to produce public instead of selective goods will also restrain him from exploiting his power position. 

These highly abstract concepts acquire an extraordinary realism when one looks at the developmental needs of southern regional economies. Both big and small firms in the South ail under the chronic undersupply of material and immaterial public goods - infrastructures and cooperation. Large firms often produce at lower levels of productivity than those of which they are technically capable because the surrounding economic and social infrastructures cannot provide them with what they need to function at top levels. The infrastructures that were built in the South to promote the investment of large firms served in some instances more the selective interests of the southern contractors than the interests of the investing firm and the community at large. Also, the conflicts that inevitably surrounded the crisis-induced restructuring of many large firms in the South were sometimes effectively intermediated and other times aggravated by the local political classes. The fate of the southern "growth poles" depended in large part on how effectively the local authorities mediated these conflicts \(Piattoni 1996: 161—237\). 

The small southern firms, too, need both material and immaterial public goods to grow and prosper. Physical and informational infrastructures are crucial if small southern firms are to emancipate themselves from the condition of subcontractors of northern firms. These infrastructures must be accessible to all the potentially competing firms if they are to be effective. Lack of coordination and trust, which inevitably afflicts the relations among firms constantly struggling to keep their heads above the water, will easily wreck such common projects except in the event of the presence of an external and impartial actor — of an elected or administrative nature — that acts as arbiter and coordinator. Also, the fate of the southern "areas of specialized production" during the crisis of the late 1980s depended on the effective intermediation of inter-firm conflicts \(Piattoni 1996: 238—303\). 



## Conclusions

This chapter has argued that as the "Southern Question" has its roots in politics, so it can be resolved through politics. To "solve" the "Southern Question" would mean, in the light of the most common interpretation, to narrow the economic differentials between the northern and southern regions to the point where no area could be assumed to be more backward simply because it was southern. Only then would economic differentials lose their political load and cease to constitute the basis for secessionist political projects. 

That the "Southern Question" is not only solvable but indeed already on its way to resolution was argued on the basis of a comparison between the economic performance of Abruzzo and Puglia in the 1970s and 1980s \(the analysis itself was not presented in this essay\). The chapter also proposed that different economic performances can ultimately be attributed to the different political strategies of local élites. A typology was presented to show that different clientelistic styles of government yield profoundly different economic and political results. In this concluding section I would like to suggest the possibility that economic development can feed back to politics, contributing to the replacement of clientelism by a more "civic" style of politics. 

What can start as a particularly sophisticated strategy for keeping and expanding personal political power at the local level may in fact generate material and immaterial conditions for its supersession. If through "virtuous clientelism" a backward region does indeed develop, the generalized welfare that it produces will make the clients more independent from their patrons and therefore freer to choose between clientelism and civic politics. Moreover, because development is a public good \(that potentially benefits all if it is to benefit some\), it will send the powerful message that the economic advancement of each individual must not necessarily occur at the expense of someone else \(which is the logical premiss on which clientelism is based\), but that advancement can be collectively enjoyed. Past choices, both on the part of the patrons and on the part of the clients who supported the "virtuous" patrons, will thus be validated and will probably be confirmed. The process, initially set in motion by a free choice of the local patrons, could therefore feed on itself and lead to the waning of the clientelistic mode altogether \(or to emptying it of its substance while leaving in place its rituals\).9 Although once isolated and atomized clients demanded selective goods for their exclusive individual benefit, now a community would demand a share of the national resources \(which it increasingly contributes to producing\) to be used for the public good.10 

Historical contingency and human action do not cease to exert their effect at any given time. The creative choices of political agents can change what, at any given time, may appear as structural and cultural features. To argue otherwise, especially in relation to the Italian "Southern Question", runs the risk of unknowingly serving particular political projects.11 




## Notes

1. This paper is based on a larger research project that studied the pattern of industrialization of four provinces in two southern regions in order to capture the internal differentiation of the South and highlight the fundamental link between politics and economics \(Piattoni 1996, 1997\). The second and third sections have appeared in similar form in Piattoni 1997. The shift to a lower unit of analysis — the province instead of the whole South — is instrumental to the change in focus. It is only by blurring the intra-South differences that sweeping socially or culturally deterministic arguments can be advanced. And once the North -South gap is emphasized over and above equally deep intra-South \(and intra-North\) differences, the solution of the "Southern Question" cannot but appear exceedingly difficult and distant. By changing the unit of analysis, we not merely throw into due relief the independent, and often positive role, of politics for economic development, but also see successful cases next to disappointing or dismal ones. 

2. That is the case, for example, with the Abruzzo, which, in the 1970s and 1980s, experienced a sustained rate of economic growth, thus achieving, at the end of this period, levels of per capita income and industrialization not far from the national average. The case of Puglia makes for a telling contrast. Although similarly positioned at the beginning of the 1970s, this region ended up with a stagnant level of income and a much lower level of industrialization. Such divergent behavior emerges even more clearly when selected provinces within these regions are compared \(Piattoni 1996\). 

3. For a similar argument, see Mutti \(1994\). 

4. Many harbor doubts as to the real objectives of the Agrarian Reform and the Extraordinary Intervention, seeing them rather as carefully designed instruments of partisan penetration in the South through clientelistic exchanges. While it is undeniable that they largely turned out to be precisely that, I prefer to consider this aspect as a partially unplanned outcome that ran against the best intentions of many publicly spirited personalities. 

5. Ironically, the unveiling of diffused corruption in the North of the country was interpreted as a sign of how deeply the North had been "infected" by southern ills. The South was either directly blamed for exporting to the North its corrupt style of politics or, at the very least, for encouraging under-the-table bargains in order to keep together two politically incompatible areas. 

6. By "political class" I mean both the national representatives elected from the provinces under examination and the regional and local representatives. 

7. In his review of Putnam's book, Tarrow draws attention to the "the effect of the pattern of state-building on indigenous civic capacities" \(Tarrow 1996: 394\) and, consequently, on the mode of political integration of the South's citizenry into the national political system. He also underscores how "Every regime that governed southern Italy from the Norman establishment of a centralized monarchy in the twelfth century to the unified government which took over there in 1861 was foreign and governed with a logic of colonial exploitation" \(Tarrow 1996: 394\). Political clientelism as well as economic backwardness were, therefore, politically created. For a similar interpretaion see also Piattoni \(1995\). 

8. Assuming, as was certainly the case in Italy at least until 1994, that resources are allocated among patrons according to the size of their clientele. This point, which will not be developed further here, is a well-documented feature of the political equilibria that characterized the "first Italian republic." Between 1948 and 1994, government posts and administrative jobs were allocated among the governing parties according to the size of their internal factions. The local leaders of the governing factions are the "patrons" to whom this chapter refers. For a full development of this point, see Piattoni \(1996: 129—60\). 

9. I would like to emphasize that there is nothing automatic about this self-reinforcing process. At any moment contextual circumstances and the free choice of the political actors could stop it or reverse it. 

10. Is it far-fetched to suggest that the "commonwealth" on which civic politics is allegedly based could emerge in precisely this way? And does not often public-spiritedness at the local level coexist with parochialism and selfishness at the national level? 

11. As Tarrow remarks, Putnam's book became enormously popular with the Italian media, and its author was unknowingly enlisted as "an ally in the game of trashing the South, a game which became fashionable with the rise of the separatist Northern League in the early 1990s" \(Tarrow 1996: 389\). 




## References

+ Banfield, Edward \(1958\) *The Moral Basis of A Backward Society*. New York: The Free Press. 
+ Chubb, Judith \(1982\) *Patronage, Power and Poverty in Southern Italy. A Tale of Two Cities*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
+ Eisenstadt, Shmuel and Roniger, Luis \(1981\) "The Study of Patron-Client Relations and Recent Developments in Sociological Theory." In *Political Clientelism, Patronage and Development*, ed. S. Ν. Eisenstadt and René Lemarchand. Beverly Hills: Sage. 
+ Gambetta, Diego, ed. \(1988\) *Trust. Making and Breaking Cooperative Relations.* Oxford: Blackwell. 
+ Graziano, Luigi, ed. \(1974\) *Clientelismo e mutamento politico*. Milan: Angeli. 
+ Gribaudi, Gabriella \(1980\) *Mediatori. Antropologia del potere democristiano nel Mezzogiorno*. Turin: Rosenberg and Sellier. 
+ Mutti, Antonio \(1994\) "Il particolarismo come risorsa. Politica ed economia nello sviluppo abruzzese." *Rassegna Italiana di Sociologia* **35** \(4\), December. 
+ North, Douglass \( 1990\) *Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance.* Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
+ Parisi, Arturo and Pasquino, Gianfranco \(1977\) "Relazioni partiti-elettori e tipi di voto." In *Continuità e mutamento elettorale in Italia*, ed. A. Parisi and G. Pasquino. Bologna: Il Mulino. 
+ Piattoni, Simona \(1995\) "Review of *Making Democracy Work. Civic Traditions in Modern Italy Γ Journal of Modern Italian Studies* **1**: 160—5. 
+ —\(1996\) "Local Political Classes and Economic Development. The Cases of Abruzzo and Puglia in the 1970s and 1980s." Ph.D. dissertation, MIT. 
+ —\(1997\) "Local Political Classes and Economic Development. The Cases of Abruzzo and Puglia in the 1970s and 1980s." In *The Political Economy of Regionalism*, ed. Michael Keating and Sean Loughlin. London: Frank Cass 
+ Putnam, Robert \(1993\) *Making Democracy Work. Civic Traditions in Modern Italy.* Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
+ Sabel, Charles \(1993\) "Constitutional Ordering in Historical Context." In *Games in Hierarchies and Networks*, ed. Fritz Scharpf. Frankfurt: Campus. 
+ Silverman, Sydel \(1965\) "Patronage and Community-National Relationships in Central Italy." *Ethnology* **4**\(2\), April. \(Reprinted in Steffen Schmidt *et al*, eds, *Friends, Followers and Factions. A Reader in Political Clientelism*, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977.\) 
+ —\(1977\) "Patronage as Myth." In *Patrons and Clients in Mediterranean Societies*, ed. Ernest Gellner and John Waterbury, London: Duckworth. 
+ Tarrow, Sidney \(1967\) *Peasant Communism in Southern Italy*. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
+ —\(1996\) "Making Social Science Work across Space and Time: A Critical Reflection on Robert Putnam's *Making Democracy Work." American Political Science Review* **90**\(2\). 
+ Waterbury, John \(1977\) "An Attempt to Put Patrons and Clients in their Place." In *Patrons and Clients in Mediterranean Societies*, ed. Ernest Gellner and John Waterbury. London: Duckworth. 
+ Weingast, Barry \(1995\) "The Economic Role of Political Institutions: Market-Preserving Federalism and Economic Development." *Journal of Law, Economics and Organization***,** **11**, Spring. 
+ Wolf, Eric R. \(1956\) "Aspects of Group Relations in a Complex Society: Mexico," *American Anthropologist* **58**: 1065—78. 




