+++
title = "11"

+++

Il Caso Sciascia: Dilemmas of the Antimafia Movement in Sicily

*Peter Schneider and Jane Schneider *

Among the ways that the "Southern Question" discourse in Italy stigmatizes the regions south of Rome is by drawing attention to their reputation for organized crime and political clientelism. The recent anti-crime and anti-corruption efforts of the Italian judiciary, however, demonstrate unequivocally what has long been suspected: that leaders of the national political regime that governed Italy from the end of the Second World War until the fall of the Berlin Wall not only tolerated mafia, *camorra*, and '*ndranghetta*; but, largely as a clientelistic trade-off for safe electoral majorities, these leaders were also in various ways complicitous with organized crime. Thanks in no small part to this complicity, by the late 1970s criminal organizations had vastly expanded both their role in the global narcotics traffic and their presence in Northern Italy. 

By the same token, if organized crime is not an exclusive property of the Mezzogiorno, opposition to mafia, *camorra*, and *'ndranghetta* is hardly unique to the North. Taking what is perhaps the most stigmatized case, that of Sicily, we can discover local and regional antimafia traditions that are as old as the mafia itself. These traditions, however, are not of a piece. In part because the national discourse on Southern Italy tends to criminalize the whole of Sicily for having been the original home of the mafia, it is hard for Sicilians to sustain a thorough and consistent antimafia stance without turning their backs on, or appearing to reject, their own roots. Diverse strands of antimafia activism reflect changing approaches to this problem. 

This chapter focuses on a particularly revealing polemical exchange of the 1980s between the Sicilian writer, Leonardo Sciascia, and several representatives of a new social movement, the *Movimento Antimafia*, that emerged then, in response to the dramatic increase in mafia violence associated with narcotics trafficking, and to mafia political hubris. This polemic illustrates the complexities involved in seeking liberation from the mafia without embracing the almost racialized categorization of Sicilians that permeates the national discourse on the South. 



## The Chronology

On 3 September 1982, Carabiniere General Carlo Alberto dalla Chiesa and his wife Emmanuela Setti Carrara were ambushed on the streets of Palermo and killed. After leading a successful effort on the part of the State to suppress ultra-left terrorism in mainland Italy in the 1970s, dalla Chiesa had been sent to Palermo to act as a "super-prefect," charged with organizing and coordinating the government's campaign against the mafia. Before his death he had begun to complain, first privately to the competent authorities, and then publicly, that he had in fact received little of the support from either the State or the Palermo authorities that he needed to accomplish his mission. A little over three months after the assassination, Nando dalla Chiesa, the General's son, writing in *la Repubblica* \(19 December 1982\), accused his fellow intellectuals, especially Sicilian intellectuals, of promoting a *pax mafiosa* by failing to attend to the political, legal, economic, and moral implications of a system that could tolerate the monstrous crimes of which his father was only the most recent victim. \(Nando dalla Chiesa is professor of Sociology at the Boccone of Milan, and was already then the author of a book on the mafia, published in 1976.\) 

The Sicilian novelist, literary critic, and political essayist Leonardo Sciascia surprised many by entering the polemic with an attack on dalla Chiesa - father and son — in an article in *l'Espresso* \(20 February 1983\) headlined "Even generals make mistakes; and even the dead can be wrong." General dalla Chiesa was ingenuous, he said, for failing to understand that the mafia, having been transformed into a criminal multinational similar to terrorism, had entered a new relationship with state power and with local customs \(traditions, ways of being Sicilian\). The old rules for *convivenza* \(convenient coexistence\) no longer applied, and state power had to be understood as shadowy, occult, Pirandellian. Attempting to confront the mafia with direct action, imagining it could quickly be reined in, would only lead to an abuse of power by the State. In his earlier campaign against terrorism, Sciascia argued, General dalla Chiesa had already acquired too much power. The special laws he sought guaranteeing protection to *mafiosi* who collaborated with the authorities could violate the spirit of the constitution, undermining in particular its commitment to civil liberties. The allocation of extraordinary powers and special measures in order to meet the mafia emergency put the shadow of a "police state" on the horizon \(see also Ambroise 1989\). 

In response, Nando dalla Chiesa accused Sciascia of "playing the mafia's game" \(*fare il gioco della mafia*\), by making his father out to be an aspiring dictator. Sciascia, he argued, held a view of the mafia that was "psychological" and "quasiracist" for implying that only Sicilians can understand \(and, perhaps, combat\) the phenomenon. According to dalla Chiesa, Sciascia had reduced his \(Nando's\) accusations against the silence of the intellectuals to "the fruit of anti-sicilianism." It was no surprise, therefore, to learn that members of the corrupt political class in Palermo — the Christian Democratic leader Salvo Lima, for example — had cited Sciascia with approval. These comments appeared in an interview with Giovanni Valentini, *la Repubblica*, 20-21 February 1983, entitled, *Sciascia, perchè tanto veleno*? \("Why so much venom?"\). In 1984, Nando published a book about his father's career and assassination, *Delitto Imperfetto*. An appendix reprints most of the articles that constitute the exchange of polemics, including Valentini's interview and Sciascia's vitriolic response in *l'Espresso* \(6 March 1983\), which he titled *Un dalla Chiesa piccolo piccolo*. 

Between the time of the dalla Chiesa assassination in 1982 and 1986, nearly 15,000 men were denounced throughout Italy for "association of a mafia type," with some 707 investigated by the instructional magistrates and 460 being brought to a trial in Palermo that lasted from February 1986 to December 1987. The dramatic trial, known as the *maxi-processo*, took place in a specially constructed high-security bunker courthouse built inside the walls of the nineteenth-century Ucciardone Prison, to which over three thousand police, military, and judicial personnel were assigned. In all, the State's hand was strengthened by evidence from *mafiosi* who had turned "State's witness" — a virtually unprecedented breakthrough, for which the Sicilian magistrate Giovanni Falcone received much credit. Accompanying these developments were the election, in Palermo, of a militantly antimafia mayor, Leoluca Orlando, and the emergence of the *Coordinamento Antimafia*, an umbrella organization of social movement activists whose mobilization in the regional capital produced a new expression: "the Palermo Spring." 

Then, in January 1987, Sciascia fired another salvo. Invited by *Corriere della Sera* to review Christopher Duggan's book on Cesare Mori, the fascist prefect whom Mussolini had assigned to "clean up the mafia" in Sicily \(see Duggan 1986\), he used the occasion to mount an attack on what he labeled the "antimafia professionals" \(*professionisti dell'antimafia*\). Establishing his own antimafia credentials, Sciascia began by quoting extensively from his early "mafia novels," *Il Giorno della Civetta* \(1961a\) and *Al Ciascuno il Suo* \(1966\). In those days, he noted, it was blessed to ignore the mafia; today it is blessed to talk about it all the time. The current "flood of rhetoric" is an improvement over past indifference, but it contains a confused "racial resentment" regarding Sicily and Sicilians, as if Sicily could not be pardoned for its sins, even though it also produced such luminaries as Verga, Pirandello, the painter Gattuso . . . \(and, by implication, Sciascia himself\). 

The review also referred to the vastness and pain of the mafia problem, and the complicated ways that ordinary people are caught up in it. This is not mystification, claimed Sciascia. One can understand the mafia, but it would take more time, and a more nuanced analysis, than the antimafia *professionisti* seem prepared to give. Most important, they are naive about the clear risks to democracy inherent in such a project. Sciascia sounded offended that others would believe that the mafia could be subdued — that they would not allow for doubts or dissent, almost as if it were the eve of the dictatorship in 1927\! 

In Sicily, the review went on, the mafia had earlier "played the role of fascism" by impeding the diffusion of socialist organization. Nevertheless, Mussolini had been able to mobilize the island's landowners and mineowners around the idea of eliminating the criminal element. Mori set about this in an authoritarian way; his strong sense of duty and belief in the legitimacy of the State seemed to justify his assumption of draconian powers. Sciascia noted that few people objected, because of the involvement of the dominant class. Antimafia in that context was an instrument of conservative forces seeking to achieve superior power and restore public order. Anyone who dissented was labeled *mafioso*. 

Now, Sciascia wrote, we already have a warning that this could happen again. Take, for example, "a mayor" who begins to exhibit himself on TV, and to make appearances in the schools, as a crusader against the mafia. He spends so much time in self-display that he neglects the city's problems: water, sanitation, road-maintenance, and so forth. People outside his administration may criticize him, but insiders who question or challenge his policies can expect to be smeared as *mafioso*, and possibly removed from office. Although Sciascia insisted this was just a hypothetical example, his words were clearly aimed at the mayor of Palermo, Orlando. Making matters worse, he attacked the Sicilian magistrate, Paolo Borsellino, who, he said, was promoted out of the line of seniority because he dealt with mafia crimes. Nothing better enhanced a magistrate's career than bringing a *mafioso* to trial; others were held back because they lacked this opportunity. 

Sciascia's attack on Borsellino created a storm of shocked protest, as Borsellino was second only to Falcone in public esteem among the judges of the antimafia pool. On 14 January, the author retracted his accusation in part, telling reporters that he did not mean to impugn judge Borsellino's qualifications, only the modality of his promotion. But he added that the antimafia activists' reaction had proved his earlier point. He recalled again Mori's suppressions - Mussolini's "quick solution" to the problem of public order in Sicily. It is surely significant that he was also at the time publishing *Porte Aperte* \(1986b\), a novel about a Palermo magistrate under fascism who refused to bend to political pressure and inflict the death penalty in the case of a convicted wife-murderer, because the accused had in fact been aggrieved by his wife in collusion with officials of the fascist hierarchy. Joseph Farrell perceptively comments that the Borsellino affair "... disconcerted those who had expected of Sciascia opposition to the mafia by any means, but had a certain logic and even predictability for those who had also been attentive to his own rigorous cult of pure principle in matters of law" \(1995: 11\). 

By 1987, several developments were conspiring to bring about a waning of activists' commitment to the new antimafia movement — a return to "normalcy" that would endure until the terrible killings of both Falcone and Borsellino in the summer of 1992. Among these were the heating up of a national campaign for civil liberties \(the *garantista* campaign\), supported by Sciascia, which portrayed indicted and imprisoned *mafiosi* as victims of an outmoded criminal justice system; the virtual abandonment of local antimafia priests by the archbishop of Palermo, who retreated from his earlier outspokenly courageous stand against the mafia; and a reversal in the editorial stance of the only viable Palermo daily, *Il Giornale di Sicilia*, which even went so far as to re-publish *I Beati Paoli* — the popular novel that many consider an ideological charter myth for the mafia — in full-color comic strip form. In Palermo during the summer of 1987 we encountered many persons of antimafia persuasion for whom Sciascia's January review was a betrayal that both contributed to, and symbolized, this shift of ground. According to his critics, among them Eugenio Scalfari, the editor of *La Repubblica*, Sciascia bore some responsibility for the new level of tension. The author himself never publicly acknowledged this accusation, however. Ill and living in northern Italy, he died on 20 November 1989. 

A few years later, on 11 December 1993, "il caso Sciascia" reappeared in the "Culture" section of *La Repubblica*, embedded in a review by Pino Arlacchi, the renowned antimafia sociologist, of Sebastiano Vassali's novel, *IlCigno*. In the review, Arlacchi praised the novel for representing a late-nineteenth-century crime of politics and mafia in a way that "does not indulge in a magnification of the power of mafia," and for treating the theme of *sicilianismo* as an ideology in defense of mafia interests. This, he suggests, is liberating - an improvement on the Sicilian skepticism that renders mafia as "destiny." By contrast, Arlacchi tells us that he was disillusioned by a recent re-reading of Sciascia's *Il Giorno della Civetta* and *A Ciascuno il Suo* when compared to his memory of their effect on him when he was younger. On re-reading, the writer's "commitment to the antimafia cause" \(*impegno antimafia*\), as expressed in those works, seemed less clear. 

The reverberations continued. Ten days later, on 21 December, Nicola Tranfaglia, also a social scientist, defended Sciascia for having spoken out about the mafia in the 1950s and 1960s when others were silent, when the commonplace definition of the phenomenon was folkloric. Certainly, in those days no one else had the courage to explore the mafia's political and financial support system in print. Nevertheless, Tranfaglia conceded, Sciascia had erred in his response to the killing of dalla Chiesa. And his *Corriere della Sera* attack on Borsellino was a grave error indeed. It revealed in him residues of *sicilianismo —* an intellectual "mentality" linked to Pirandello and the Sicilian literary tradition. Arlacchi responded along similar lines on 23 December. 



## Antimafia, Sciascia-style

There were many reasons to be unsettled by Sciascia's growing animosity toward the leading exponents of the antimafia movement after 1982. Prime among them was his reputation as a courageous and committed critic of the mafia during his younger years, and his identification with the regional Communist Party — then considered almost unique among Sicily's institutions for its rhetoric of resistance to mafia power. Born in 1921, Sciascia grew up in Racalmuto, in the sulfur-mining zone of south central Sicily, where the exploitation of mineworkers, and their unjust treatment by domineering bosses, were notorious. Although of humble origins, his parents were not the poorest of the poor, his grandfather having risen from a low-skill hauler of sulfur to become a mine supervisor. Yet Sciascia, who was for a while an elementary school teacher, and who held a degree from a teacher training institute *\{scuola magistrale\)*, attended but did not complete a university course, and retained a keen sense of empathy for those who struggled to revindicate their rights to decent, humane treatment and to a livelihood. In his 1961 book, *Pirandello e la Sicilia*, he went out of his way to emphasize the connections between the mafia and power — the power of Sicily's baronial class of mineowners and *latifundisti*, and of their offshoots and allies who served as parliamentary deputies and high officials of the national state. 

The early mystery novels developed this understanding. Revolving around unsolved crimes, their villains are not so much *mafiosi* as the *onorevoli* and *manutengoli* \(notables\) who use the mafia for their own ends. Sciascia's descriptions of their machinations display his keen interest in the conspiratorial habits of the politically powerful. Unlikely to plan their projects in open meetings or corporate boardrooms, these élites indulge in face-to-face, collusory conversations in the informal settings of the café, the hunting expedition, the club. Some of the plots were modeled on, or were likely to evoke, real instances of criminal conspiracy, and took much courage to publish. The assassination in *Il Giorno delia Civetta*, for example, had an analog in the killing of Accursio Miraglia, a trade union leader, in the town of Sciacca, after the war. The epilogue of this book alludes to the political pressures that prevented the author from ending it as he had wished. 

Both *Pirandello e la Sicilia* and the early novels broke new ground in writing about the mafia, for as Sciascia himself noted, it was then much more common to evade questions of power. Some observers, like Giuseppe Alessi, president of the Sicilian Region, reduced the phenomenon to a litany of "sporadic, delinquent facts," claiming that it was an offense to Sicily to admit the existence of an "*associazione per delinquere* with precise links to public institutions." According to Sciascia, Alessi, who was a penal lawyer living between Caltanissetta and Palermo, must have known the proportions of the mafia and the collusion between it and the ruling class, but he chose to minimize these aspects before northern journalists \(1961b: 163—4\). Equally egregious, Giuseppe Longo, writing in the *Osservatore politico letterario*, had masked the problem of conspiratorial power by using the word "atmosphere," as if the mafia were a down-home aspect of Sicilian life, as quotidian as the unrelenting summer sun \(1961b: 164\). 

Perhaps needless to say, Sciascia rejected out of hand the nineteenth-century racial theory of "southern" criminality, which, he flatly said, enlightened nothing. In *Pirandello e la Sicilia* he reminded his readers of Colajanni's restatement of what the problems of the South really were: a centuries-long history of abuse by landlords and bad government \(1961b: 167\). Given these problems, the mafia made them worse. One could call it an "atmosphere" if one wanted, but only with the qualification that its guns were pointed in a particular direction - at sindicalists or peasant union organizers. "Tell me against whom you shoot," Sciascia offered, "and I will tell you who you are" \(1961b: 165\). Although there were exceptions, for the most part the Sicilian mafia "defended the property of the *latifondo* from peasant hunger." One could, indeed, define the mafia as "an association for crime with the aim of illegally enriching its members and posing itself as an element of mediation between property and labor." Parasitic, imposed by means of violence, the mediation benefited the *padroni*; it was only "accepted" by the laborers \(in America\) and "endured" by them in Sicily \(1961b: 168\). 

Echoing the position of left intellectuals, above all Communist Party leaders, Sciascia further proposed an inverse relation between workers' consciousness and mafia presence. Where no class consciousness existed, the mafia substituted for the *sindicato*. Where there was a *sindicato*, the mafia fought it as a "*sotto* \[underground\] police force". Moreover, wherever the mafia held sway, electoral practices could not be immune to crime or the corruption of public power \(1961b: 169\). 

But Sciascia's relationship to the Communist Party was not without eompiexity. Elected to the Palermo City Council as an "independent on the Party ticket" in the mid-1970s, he became disillusioned by the regional leaders' acceptance of the national pursuit of a "historic compromise" with the Christian Democrats. And, accusing his Communist colleagues on the Council of ignoring drastic problems of water and sewage, transportation and housing, he soon resigned. Then, after the March 1978 kidnapping of the Christian Democratic Prime Minister Aldo Moro, Sciascia disputed the national Communist Party position that the State should refuse to negotiate with Moro's Red Brigade captors \(see Sciascia 1987a\). Nevertheless, his position on the mafia was close enough to the official pronouncements of the Party that his challenge to Nando dalla Chiesa \(a PCI member at the time of his father's assassination\) seemed altogether unlikely, and shocking to many. 



## Intellectual Generations

If Sciascia's credentials as an "opponent" of the mafia seemed well enough grounded in the context of the 1960s and 1970s — we remember him well for contributing to our own understanding of mafia's "political shield" in those years \(Schneider and Schneider 1976\) — the intellectual cohort to which he belonged was giving way to a new generation by the time of dalla Chiesa's murder in 1982. In the mix of antimafia leaders who emerged during the Palermo Spring, hardly any were without a university education. More than this, most had earned their degrees during the heady days of the late 1960s and early 1970s when Italian universities, the University of Palermo among them, participated in a Europe-wide movement of students and workers confronting old structures of power. Not only were they products of higher education during a remarkably transformative moment; some of the most outspoken leaders had pursued their studies outside Italy — for example, the antimafia mayor Orlando had studied in Heidelberg. Priests in the forefront of the movement traced their intellectual formation to the relatively progressive atmosphere of the Gregorian Institute in Rome, following Vatican Il. Nando dalla Chiesa, of course, was not a southerner but a Milanese, although he had lived in Sicily during his father's earlier tenure there, from 1966 to 1973, attending Palermo's best-known middle-class *liceo*, the Garibaldi, and meeting there the person he later married. 

Many differences separated the antimafia leaders of the Palermo Spring from Sciascia. Not only were they, for the most part, university-educated magistrates, politicians, teachers, professionals — Sciascia once glossed them as "sociologists of assault" and he a former high-school teacher and self-trained intellectual; they thought and wrote at a time when many of the older verities were falling away. In an interview with us in 1988, dalla Chiesa put it this way: the "old" antimafia was part of the struggle of classes whose locus was agrarian and whose combative arm consisted of the Left parties and unions; the "new" one is urban and has a predominantly "moral and cultural" agenda that is furthered through the activities of "pure citizens" — ideologically disinterested members of civil society. Exponents of the old version such as Sciascia were "anti-State": from their perspective, the State and the *Carabinieri* \(in which dalla Chiesa's father was a General\) were too much involved in the exploitation of Sicily to ever be a part of the solution. The new antimafia, by contrast, viewed *pezzi dello stato* \(elements of the state\), above all its reformed or reforming police, *Carabinieri*, and judiciary, as spearheading changes with which society had to keep up. A first step in keeping up would be to defeat the fatalist outlook of pessimists like Sciascia \(see also Arlacchi and dalla Chiesa 1987: 109-41\). 

There was as well a difference in outlook regarding the collusive "pieces" of the State. Feeling empowered, the "young Turks" of the 1980s antimafia movement were prepared to go beyond Sciascia's literary mode of exposing what they began to call the "third level" of power - the level of conspiracy and accommodation between mafia and public officials that the novelist had brilliantly outlined without ever naming names. Sciascia, in fact, was highly skeptical of such naming; the heroes of the early novels who attempted to get to the bottom \(or, as it were, the top\) of things were drawn as rather naive characters, almost asking to be made the victims they became. Tellingly, the new generation of investigating magistrates and police were considerably more determined than comparable figures in these novels. 

Like Renato Candida, a police officer in the province of Agrigento during the 1960s, Sciascia was convinced of the impossibility of "turning" a *mafioso* into a witness for the State \(see Candida 1956\). The reverse was more likely: a poorly equipped, pre-modern police force, according to Candida, was too easily drawn into the mafia ambience. In *Pirandello e la Sicilia*, Sciascia elaborated on the duplicitous role of the informer or confidant by describing the dynamic of mafia extortion in reverse. First a *mafioso*, sucked in by the police, begins to betray his companions; but they, finding out, supply disinformation carefully prepared by the mafia. In the end, the police become participants in a factional dispute. Even the fascist system of exiling *mafiosi* worked only to help certain factions get rid of their enemies, *assisted* by the police \(1961b: 175-8\). Deeply cynical on this point, Sciascia hardly anticipated the singular success of Falcone and Borsellino in exploiting the phenomenon of the *mafioso pentito*. 

Sciascia had actually criticized Candida for naming names, for his political denunciations. Electoral collusion is an old story, he chided in *Pirandello e la Sicilia;* we have known about it ever since the Franchetti report of the 1870s \(1961 b: 178—9\). Unfortunately for the reformer, the mechanisms of collusion are indirect. Members of the dominant class rarely need to directly order a murder or a *minaccia.* They need only be allied to *mafiosi* for violent acts to materialize. Nor are the alliances easy to impede. Articulated through networks of friends of friends, they seemed to most to pose no moral problem. In this sense, the mafia was truly a *force —* an enormous problem not only on the *latifundium*, but throughout society. 

In part, Sciascia believed that there would be less violence if things were left alone. Indeed, he saw *mafiosi* as shunning acts of violence when they could \(1961b: 46-4\). His discussion of *La Nana*, the nineteenth-century novel by the Sicilian writer, Emmanuele Navarro della Miraglia, reveals this point of view. As Sciascia notes, critics had long been puzzled that this book, whose descriptive passages seemed so authentic, ended in an "un-Sicilian" way, without a pistol or knife. Rosolino Cacioppo, the protagonist, was, after all, a *borgese -* a member of the "middle peasant" stratum so imbued with mafia culture. Given that his bride-to-be had been violated by the son of a landowner, was it not imperative for him to draw blood in return? On the contrary, Sciascia argued, in Sicily there was a historical condition of sexual vassalage *vis-à-vis* the feudal lord, the *rentier*, the overseer, leading to a certain "moral and sentimental situation, a social comportment, in which sexual violation was accepted in order to save appearances ...". It seems paradoxical, he noted, "but bloody crimes of honor are rarely verified in the *ambito mafioso"* \(1961: 47—9\). Nor is such violence a major theme in Sciascia's novels. 

This is not to suggest that Sciascia harbored a romantic view of the mafia; quite the contrary. He gave no credence to its mythologized claim of Robin Hoodlike beginnings. Yet he, through some of his leading characters, wants us to understand how a *mafioso* could be respected, as in the discourses on masculinity in *Il Giorno della Civetta*. There, it will be recalled, a *mafioso* is described \(albeit with an overtone of irony\) as "a good man, an exemplary father, an untiring worker. He's got rich, certainly he has, but by his own efforts ... Certain men inspire respect: for their qualities, their *savoir-faire*, their frankness, their flair for cordial relations, for friendship ... \[they have above all\] a sense of justice . .. naturally, instinctively . . . which makes them inspire respect" \(1964 \[1961\]: 62-3\). 

In the same novel, Sciascia has the *mafioso* divide humanity into five categories: "men, half-men, pigmies, arse-crawlers — if you'll excuse the expression — and quackers," and then flatter his listener, a police captain, by calling him "a man" \(1964 \[1961\]: 102—3\). Interviewed in 1979, the novelist drew attention to the 1961 eulogy for a small-town *mafioso*, Francesco Di Cristina, in which his family extolled him as a "true man" — imposing, respectful, an "enemy of all injustices" \(Sciascia 1979: 27-8\). Such intimations of respect for individual *mafiosi* are anathema to the new antimafia leaders, among whom only a few, most notably the magistrate Falcone, engage *mafiosi* in their everyday language, the Sicilian dialect, in his case shunning the criticism that anything short of correct Italian in taking depositions is an invitation to collusion and a "procedural error." 

Far from respecting *mafiosi* or their families, the new antimafia activists advocate a policy of *spaccatura*: decisively breaking with anyone whose social network includes *mafiosi*, their friends, or their protectors, or who, for whatever reason, seems disinclined to abandon "compromising" social or political connections. Outside the corral are people who owe their employment to a patron's favor, who seek such a favor on behalf of someone else, or whose former involvements with the governing parties, or party factions, taint them in some way. Restructuring is not a "question of ideology", one activist leader told us in 1987, adopting the polarizing language of inclusion and exclusion: it is a question of "acceptable and unacceptable people". Many citizens, including not a few of antimafia persuasion, have found these criminalizing formulae unnecessarily rigid, though on the surface they are beyond reproach. Particularly for people of limited means — the unpropertied classes of town and country whom Sciascia presumed to speak for — disrupting clientelistic arrangements and promoting *spaccatura* can threaten, or be perceived to threaten, everyday ways of getting by. 

Contrary to Sciascia's "fatalism" or caution, the antimafia leaders of the 1980s believed their struggle would be efficacious. A thoroughgoing break with compromises of the past could, for example, result in Palermo's becoming a premier city of Europe, attractive to foreign and North Italian investors as well as to tourists. Moreover, although the earliest *pentiti* such as Tommasso Buscetta were reluctant to expose a "third level" of political complicity, activists imagined prosecutions reaching deep into the Italian government - a projection that has already been realized with the spectacular indictment of the former prime minister, Giulio Andreotti. Some of the new antimafia leaders, looking ahead in this way, condemned Sciascia's caution as a cover for mafia crimes. His retorts were equally disparaging: by labeling all manner of powerful persons *mafioso* and "unacceptable," he argued, the new leaders hoped to have them removed so as to take their place; or, by not allowing for doubts, dissent, and criticism, these leaders were evoking fascism, an end to liberty. Sciascia's goal, he said, was to interpret the nuances. The "sociologists," by contrast, assigned people to categories of good and bad. 



## Sciascia, the 1980s Antimafia, and the Southern Question

Optimistic about the strategy of *spaccatura*, antimafia activists of the 1980s foresaw a future in which the public sphere of "civil society" would be much enlarged. Concepts like "equal rights before the law," transparency, and democracy appeared repeatedly in their discourse. These concepts are universalistic; they harken back to the Liberal nationalisms of France and England, and ultimately to the Enlightenment. Their European frame of reference is evident in the movement's quest for, and anticipation of, European Community investment. One sees it too in Palermo's monument to the victims of the mafia, erected by friends and colleagues of Nando dalla Chiesa after his father's murder. Starkly abstract, it is surrounded by a lawn \(a *prato inglese*\) that remains green through Sicily's arid summers only by dint of constant watering. 

Sciascia was also cognizant of the modular nationalism of the liberal state that Italian statemakers had borrowed from France and England in the nineteenth century, and into which the southern regions, as "internal colonies," were, with difficulty, inserted. Far from steeping himself in archaic Sicilian, he made splendid use of the Italian language to render Sicilian ideas. He also loved Paris, and proclaimed himself a "Child of the Enlightenment." As such he followed in the footsteps of other Sicilian writers who had this dual footing — Navarro della Miraglia, author of *La Nana*, for example. Like Pirandello and Verga, the better-known writers who had lived as expatriates in Northern Italy, he saw himself mediating between the mystery or non-reason of Sicily and the reason of cosmopolitan Europe. Also like them, he harbored deep reservations about the extent to which a culture of reason could be imposed on Sicily from without. As he himself put it, one had to go to Paris to breathe this different air \(see Padovani 1979: viii—ix\). 

If anything, when applied to Sicily, Sciascia's commitment to a model of Enlightenment rationality only nurtured his Pirandellian suspicion of appearances, so evident in the detective novels \(see Farrell 1995: 60-100\). This is because he believed that reason can prevail over passion only if we are able to suspend our initial gut-reaction to events. Appearances are always deceptive, and people are always capable of betraying their own apparent political identities and allegiances. Little wonder that Sciascia was chronically suspicious of the "professional activists" and "assault sociologists" of the antimafia movement. These activists, meanwhile, see Enlightenment culture growing and flourishing not only among urban, middleclass Sicilians like themselves, but in a broader arena. Enthusiastically promoting programs of cultural re-education in Sicily's schools and parishes, they hope to reach the popular classes as well. It is ironic that the same deep-rooted skepticism of appearances that so troubled Sciascia, the chronic doubt about the intentions of allies and potential allies in the struggle for reform, has accompanied these activists' practice of *spaccatura -* the complicated triage made necessary by their project of separating the good from the bad \(see Schneider and Schneider 1994, 1997\). 

Another distinction we might explore concerns women, who have played a decisive role in antimafia activism - as participants, as leaders, as a majority presence at many demonstrations and events. Sciascia was no doubt uncomfortable with their public presence, as he may have been with the messages of gender equality and feminist legitimation that often accompany the discourse about civil society and democracy. His position on women appears to have been traditionally misogynist, prompting Nando dalla Chiesa to describe him as *molto maschio Siciliano*. According to the 1979 interview, life experience had taught Sciascia that Sicilian women "judge men according to their ability to make money," applying a pressure that even the most honest have difficulty resisting. "Many disgraceful events, many tragedies of the South, come to us through women," he proposed. "How many crimes of honor were provoked, instigated or encouraged by women \[who\] are at one blow capable of the worst nefariousness in order to repair the oppressions they themselves suffered in their youth." The recourse had by southern women to a "frightening social conformity" was "an element of the violence, of the dishonesty, and of the abuse of power in southern society" \(1979: 13-14\). By contrast, the 1980s antimafia movement is marked by images of gender balance, and well articulated with Sicilian feminism. If it has fallen short of its goal of reaching out to "mafia women" — the wives, daughters, and mothers of *mafiosi -* this is because most such women are themselves suspected of being active participants in mafia power \(see Schneider and Schneider 1994; Siebert 1994\). 

While contemporary antimafia activists see emergent social groups — women, the middle classes — as carriers of Enlightenment culture in Sicily, Sciascia's analyses betray, instead, an essentialist understanding of culture as pervading all classes and groups, permitting of no alternative formulation. *Pirandello e la Sicilia* represents an early attempt to outline what he called "the inner world" of Sicilians, or the *realtà Siciliana*, Américo Castro, in his history of Spain, presented Spain as more than a nation — as a *modo di essere*, a way of being. So too, for Sicily. And this *modo* is very close to the *essere spagnolo*. As in Spain, it began with an Arab conquest. This almost mythic past was superseded by conquering Normans, whose Court plunged Sicily into "history." There followed five centuries during which the island was the center of encounters between the dynamic forces of the times: papacy and empire, Christianity and Islam, Latin and Germanic cultures, city-states and nation-states \(1961b: 9-11\). In Sciascia's view, the period of the Normans was creative; a benign state emerged, there was an interior unity. It matters, he argued, failing to connect culture with power, whether state institutions coincide or not with the *vita stessa dei popoli —* that is, if they express the interior lives of a people. "A people, like an individual, carries with it its own \(undifferentiated\) manner of being" \( 1961 b: 11\). 

Sciascia's interpretation of peasant struggle is strikingly consistent with this essentialization of Sicily. Citing Gramsci, he proposed that the Sicilian popular masses were more \(politically\) advanced than in the rest of the Mezzogiorno; but their progress had assumed a typically Sicilian form. Socialism in Sicily has a whole tradition of its own, a "particular development," he wrote \(1961b: 13\). For example the *Fasci* uprising of the 1890s resembled anarchism more than socialism, anarchism being equated with an "individual revolution, an end in itself." According to Sciascia, not only the *fasci* but their rebel forerunners in 1848 and 1860 articulated class solidarity with personal instincts and sentiments, producing the vengeful cry of "death to the *galantuomini*, down with the upper classes." All too often the result was a bloody repression, as in Verga's tragic and stupendous example of the revolt against the Brontes in *Libertà* \(1961b: 13—14\). 

Sciascia interpreted this litany as an effort to vindicate the misery caused by the propertied classes. "Sicily was a bomb prepared over centuries, which the *fasci* and the socialist agitators ignited." At the same time, he understood Sicilian brigandage as a "savage and brutal protest of misery against ancient and secular injustice" \(1961b: 14\). The mafia had its origins in protest and the *vendetta di classe —* origins which, however, became remote and vague with later organizational development. Overall, Sciascia argued, in Sicily it is hard to separate the elements of political or civil unrest from the acts of particular individuals or groups who behave like the mafia - possibly an Arab-derived word that he translated as "hidden," or "meeting in a hidden place." Garibaldi's success in bringing Sicily into the new Italy during the Risorgimento was owed to *consorterie mafiose*, and to the private, individual resentments of particular notables. The revolt for Sicilian autonomy following the Second World War was similar, being driven at once by a social force and by private "brigandage" \(1961b: 15\). 

For Sciascia, the "essential character" of Sicilians is an "exasperated form of individualism." Both Pirandello and Gramsci had grasped this "ideology," which fed on the twin sentiments of *amicizia* \(friendship\) and *invidia* \(envy\), leading to the generic form of political-electoral behavior known as *clientelismo*. The same was true of Spain and Southern Italy. In Naples, the heads of the *clientele* were lawyers; in Sicily they were the princes of the land and the sulfur mines. Although clientelism served private interests, it did not do so in the manner of the *Confindustria*, Northern Italy's association of manufacturers. Private interests in Sicily were oriented toward preserving the *roba* of the individual, not for investment, but as a patrimony to leave behind. The rhythm of accumulation was the rhythm of death. Death, then, was the definitive *contrasegno* — the synthesis of the way of being Sicilian \(1961b: 22-6\). 

A history of extraordinary insecurity was the fundamental process underlying the attachment to *roba*. One's effects were never safe; and this became an obsession for Sicilians. Little *questioni rurali* having to do with property lines and rights of access easily passed from the *perito catastale* to the *perito balistico* \(from administrative to violent solutions\) as people sought to defend their turf on their own \(1961b: 24\). The reason was "not for avarice but for apprehension" — a sentiment that was also projected on to family members. Just as the boundaries of a plot of land could be invaded by a neighbor and its produce robbed, family members might be violated by an outsider. In *Il Giorno della Civetta*, Sciascia has the police captain muse that for Sicilians the family is more "a dramatic juridical contract or bond than ... a natural association based on affection. The family is the Sicilian's State", which makes the political State "extraneous to them, merely a *de facto* entity based on force . . .". Within the family, moreover, "the Sicilian can cross the frontier of his own natural tragic solitude and fit into a communal life where relationships are governed by hair-splitting contractual ties ... In imagination he may be carried away by the idea of the State and may even rise to being Prime Minister; but the precise and definite code of his rights and duties will remain within the family, whence the step towards victorious solitude \(that is, ultimate security\) is shorter" \(1964 \[1961\]: 95\). 

Whatever the gaps around gender issues separating Sciascia from the leadership of the antimafia struggle of the 1980s, there was a wide, perhaps unbridgeable distance between his appreciation of, and their contempt for, the "ways of being Sicilian" that he identified. Intensified, perhaps, among *mafiosi*, these ways were, for him, also present in society at large, influencing the inner domains of family, kinship, community, reciprocal obligation, and, through these, the structures of a clientelistic public life. Sciascia lamented that while Menendez Pidal had theorized these sentiments in his "Introduction to the History of Spain," referring to them as an element of *remora* or "delay" in Spanish civilization, an analogous treatment had yet to be developed for Sicily \(1961: 177—8\). Instead there was only the outsider's view of rampant and vile corruption — a history of lack. Consistent with such a view, the pursuit of *spaccatura* on the part of the new antimafia, well-meaning as it appeared on the surface, was to Sciascia a noxious and alien solvent of sentiments and social relations that were a source of good, however much they also nourished evil. Sciascia might have predicted that, as the policy of *spaccatura* unfolded, some at least of its proponents would risk stigmatizing Sicily's rural and urban lower classes for, precisely, their Sicilian ways \(Schneider and Schneider 1994; 1997\). 

Sciascia grew up under Fascism, but did not have to participate in the obligatory fascist youth training program because an uncle, who was a *fascist* official, was able to arrange his exemption. To an interviewer in 1979, he said, "in Sicily the family, in its vast ramifications, has this function: to protect, to privilege its members respecting the duties that society and the state impose on everyone. It is the taproot of the mafia, I well know. But for once I also profited by it" \(1979: 7\). A committed anti-fascist \(if an ambivalent anti-modernist\), Sciascia's comment was intended in the moral sense. We heard it again, in a slightly altered form, from a lawyer-friend, in 1996. "In Germany," he said, "you would send your mother to Auschwitz but here you would keep her hidden, and tell the authorities that you never had a mother." In addition to Sciascia's immobilizing Sicilianism, this tendency to elide the difference between fascism or Nazism and antimafia is deeply troubling to the present-day martyrs and followers of the cause. A few of them, indeed, would draw a parallel between the escalated mafia violence of the 1970s and 1980s and the Nazi regime. 



## References

+ Ambroise, Claude \(1989\) "Cronologia." In *A Futura Memoria*, ed. L. Sciascia, pp. 165—88. Milan: Bompiani. 
+ Arlacchi, Pino and dalla Chiesa, Nando \(1987\) *La Palude e la Città: Si Puo Sconfiggere La Mafia*. Milan: Arnaldo Mondadori Editore. 
+ Candida, Renato \(1956\) *Questa Mafia*. Caltanisetta: Salvatore Sciascia. 
+ Dalla Chiesa, Nando \(1976\) *Il Potere Mafioso. Economia e Ideologia*. Milan: Mazzotta. 
+ —\(1984\) *Delitto Imperfetto: il Generale, la Mafia, la Società Italiana*. Milan: Amoldo Mondadori Editore. 
+ Duggan, Christopher \(1986\) *La Mafia durante il Fascismo*. Soveria Mannelli: Rubbettino. 
+ Farrell, Joseph \(1995*\) Leonardo Sciascia*. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
+ Padovani, Marcelle \(1979\) "Presentazione." In *La Sicilia come Metafora; Intervista di Marcelle Padovani*, ed. L. Sciascia, pp. vii—xiv. Milan: Mondadori. 
+ Schneider, Jane and Schneider, Peter, \(1976\) *Culture and Politicai Economy in Western Sicily*. New York: Academic Press. 
+ —\(1994\) "Mafia, Antimafia, and the Question of Sicilian Culture", *Politics and Society* **22**, 237—58. 
+ —\(1997\) "From Peasant Wars to Urban Wars: The Antimafia Movement in Palermo." In *Between History and Histories; Making Silences and Commemorations*, ed. Gerald Sider and Gavin Smith. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
+ Sciascia, Leonardo \(1961a\) *Il Giorno della Civetta*. Milan: Einaudi. 
+ —\(1961b\) *Pirandello e la Sicilia*. Caltanissetta: Salvatore Sciascia Editore. 
+ —\(1964\) *Mafia Vendetta*. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. Trans. Archibald Colquhoun and Arthur Oliver from *Il Giorno della Civetta*. Milan: Einaudi, 1961. 
+ —\(1966\) *Al Ciascuno il Suo*. Milan: Einaudi. 
+ —\(1979\) *La Sicilia come Metafora; Intervista di Marcelle Padovani*. Milan: Mondadori. 
+ —\(1987a\) *The Moro Affair*, and *The Mystery of Majorana*. Manchester: Carcanet Press. 
+ —\(1987b\) *Porte Aperte*. Milan: Adelphi Edizioni. 
+ —\(1989\) *A Futura Memoria \(se la memoria ha un futuro\)*. Milan: Bompiani. 
+ Siebert, Renate \(1994\) *Le Donne, La Mafia*. Milan: il Saggiatore. 




