+++
title = "12"

+++

Re-writing Sicily: Postmodern Perspectives

*Robert Dombroski *

In December 1983, a literary conference devoted to the theme of "Writing Sicily" was held in the Sicilian city of Syracuse \(Siracusa\). Its purpose was to examine the different ways contemporary Sicilian writers conceived of and represented their native homeland as a locus of social and existential meaning. The choice of Sicily as theme was not accidental, for among all the regions of Italy the island is believed to possess a unique cultural landscape, defined and sustained by the numerous civilizations and ethnicities it has hosted throughout the centuries. 

While Sicily possesses also a varied physical landscape, it is the barren, arid interior that has summoned the greatest attention in literature, because it best conveys the sense of destruction and petrification associated with the notion of chaos often evoked to describe the essence of the region, its intangible reality, so to speak, that affects the way Sicilians feel and think.1 "Io sono ... figlio del Caos," Pirandello remarks in reference to his birthplace, Càvasu \(Sicilian dialect form of Χάοδ, a wooded area of the Girgenti \[Agrigento\] countryside \(Pirandello 1965: 1281\). But in strict etymological conformity with the original Greek word, "chaos" for Pirandello does not mean only physical disorder, but also a negative, existential state of living in, or on the edge of, an abyss.2 

Vincenzo Consolo, considered to be Sicily's most prominent contemporary novelist, also believes that Sicilians are the children of "chaos," for the simple reason that they have been born into a mixture of mixed things, into a history that has imitated the island's variegated landscape in producing a large assortment of races and civilizations that have never blended into a unified whole, each leaving distinct traces of itself. Sicily's malaise, the discontent, solitude, and estrangement of its inhabitants, derive in large measure, according to Consolo, from this age-old heterogeneity. Pirandello's concern with the problem of identity and the negative value he assigns to disorder are rooted in what Consolo sees as the objective condition of Sicilian life. Yet the meanings these writers invest in the concept of chaos are actually quite different, just as different as the cultural milieux in which they wrote. In Pirandello we have a *fin-de-siècle*, modernist awareness of the breakdown of order: the world shattered into a multitude of fragments, incommensurable private languages \("A me la coscienza moderna dà l'imagine d'un sogno angoscioso attraversato da rapide larve or tristi or minacciose, d'una battaglia notturna, d'una mischia disperata, in cui si agitino per un momento e subito scompajano, per riapparirne delle altre, mille bandiere, in cui le parti avversarie si sian confuse e mischiate". \[ Modem consciousness gives me the impression of a tormented dream full of fast moving shadows which seems at times threatening, at times melancholic; a nocturnal battle, a violent riot, in which thousands of banners are momentarily waved and then disappear, only to give way to other banners in which the adversarial factions are mixed together.\] - Pirandello, *Arte e coscienza d'oggi*, 1965: 906\); while in Consolo we find the attitude, characteristic of what is called postmodernism, that disorder and fragmentation play a constructive role in the shaping of a national identity or consciousness. In other words Pirandello's negative position implies that there was once order and invites the question of how chaos can be overcome \(given "fönn"\), while in Consolo, chaos, since it is an integral part of being Sicilian, demands that we search for a way to represent its complexity of practices and material conditions without subsuming them to some overarching concept of totality. 

Pirandello's and Consolo's notions of chaos are extremely useful in showing how the image of Sicily and its history has passed from one that privileges ideal abstraction \("chaos" as opposed to "order" and "reason"\) and that is essentially linear and univocal, to one that foregrounds empirical variation, randomness, and ambiguity as the deep structures of a cultural system.3 The transition I shall attempt to describe constitutes by analogy what is often referred to as a "paradigm shift" from global to local theorizing, from modernity to postmodernity. 

It was not by accident that the literary conference referred to above was held in Syracuse, the birthplace of Elio Vittorini, one of Sicily's best-known twentieth-century novelists, and that, accordingly, it was subtitled "Vittorini ed oltre," marking at once a point of arrival and departure. For it is with Vittorini \(not Pirandello\) that Sicily takes on fully the characteristics of a sacred essence, of myth and memory, that underlies a sort of territorial identity that modernity in the form of fascism has sought to erase. A modernist of the political left, Vittorini was a committed Marxist strongly attached to the eighteenth-century Enlightenment myth of progress, exhibited in the story of Robinson Crusoe who, having embarked on a long journey in search of knowledge, re-creates *his* civilization on a desert island. Like Defoe's Crusoe, Vittorini too believed that it was possible to build a better world over the ruins of the past by returning to a kind of origin and starting over from scratch. Sicily was a homeland to be re-conquered; it existed in the anthropological and cultural dimension of "otherness": the same "otherness" we find at the conclusion of Silvestro's journey in *Conversazione in Sicilia*, Both end and origin, it was the place where Vittorini 's protagonist could find his roots and where he could reflect on the causes of a world devastated by war, poverty, and disease. Like Crusoe, Silvestro undertook his journey in search of knowledge, authenticity, fecundity, and plenitude - all typically modernist objectives — that would guide him from political and existential chaos to a new, abundantly more humane order. Equally as important as the goal itself is the way Vittorini expresses his process of re-discovery. Silvestro's coming-of-age, which initiates his movement toward Sicily, manifests itself with a clear purpose, positing itself as a natural and ordinary event, commonsensical and familiar. The form of the text \(its allusive lyrical style, modulated harmony, counterpoint, refrain, indeterminate grammatical forms, formulaic syntax, and sometimes biblical language\) constitutes a technique intended to suspend the reality of everyday events within a deeper poetic dimension; as a consequence, the ideology of the text is circumscribed within a purely aesthetic realm. Vittorini makes no attempt to acknowledge his narrator's ideological positioning; he has no desire to reflect back on and question Silvestro's own experience and interpretations. As a result, the subject, or position of the subject, is solidly grounded in authorial consciousness to the extent that the voices of Vittorini-the-ideologue and Silvestro-the-traveler are thoroughly conflated. With regard to Sicily as the thematic subject of Silvestro's journey, the emphasis falls on realities that lie beneath the surface of daily life and knowledge in some unfathomable dimension: Sicily is myth and mystery, a repository of the sacred. 

From this genuinely modernist station in the world, referred to as Sicily, but which - as Vittorini admits - could be Persia or Venezuela, many different itineraries are possible. Vittorini believed that literature could prefigure development and progress; he saw its function as prophetic; its hopes and desires were Utopian. The Sicilian literature that develops from the late 1950s to the mid-1990s,4 with perhaps the only major exception being Stefano D'Arrigo's *Horcynus Orca*, moves largely against the grain of Vittorinian modernism. Even such writers as Sciascia and Bonaviri, whose first novels were published by Vittorini in the prestigious Gettoni series, veered quickly away from the visions of narrative fostered by him, adopting perspectives on Sicilian life regulated by the grotesque, irony, and the fantastic. Characters and plots no longer retain the explanatory significance they once had. The protagonist in *Conversazione in Sicilia* is the novel's locus of consciousness, and thus he occupies a position of extreme cognitive and epist-emological importance as the bearer of meaning; the plot, which is Silvestro's journey, is the vehicle by which the author subjects the reader to meaning, and thus controls his consciousness. Rather, in the new literature, meaning consists much less in what is presented as fact and reality than in the ways fact and reality are understood or interpreted, as the emphasis shifts from an already given reality to one that is constructed and modified through language, or better, through languages. Sciascia's later novels are a good example of what by definition can be regarded as "postmodern": that is, a perspective in which the character and the event lose their certainty as objective truths and give way to the play of interpretation. In *Todo modo* \(1974\), for example, interpretation and synthesis are engaged and encouraged only in the end to disappoint: what appears most reliable takes on a disturbing plural aspect. The text presents a possible world open to radically different interpretations that neither character nor reader are in a good position to choose among. Objective realities and institutionalized reason offer no guarantee whatsoever of truth. Writing takes as its subject obscurity and fantasy; while the maximum of historical exactitude coincides with the maximum of invention. 

The late 1950s in Italy signal the beginning of a radical transformation in the economic and social structures of Italian society. Industrial production is intensified and geared toward mass consumption and the creation of a cultural market-place. Intellectuals become more and more aware of belonging to a workforce recruited by the culture industry to produce goods and services that are bought and sold for profit. From the standpoint of the Sicilian writer, namely from a subordinate social perspective in which capitalism is manifest not in extensive industrial and technological structures but rather in traditionally based individual initiatives, the products of Italy's industrial boom are alien phenomena, ushered in to destroy the myth of a superior Mediterranean intellectual and emotional homeland cultivated by the island's middle classes to compensate for their peripheral existence. The allegorization of such a condition may be seen in the early works of Antonio Pizzuto, Sicily's best-known experimentalist novelist, who, like Gesualdo Bufalino, flowered late in life, having published his first novel, *Signorina Rosina*, in 1956, at the age of 63. Pizzuto's work constitutes an important link between Vittorini and such writers as Consolo and Bufalino, whom we shall discuss in a moment, because it thematizes the disappearance of Sicily as essence and origin. *Signorina Rosina* is noteworthy is this regard. Its title refers to a person, met early on in the narrative, who is the old, spinster aunt of the main character, Bibi. When the reader meets her, however, she is dying, and, in fact, as soon as she is introduced, she expires. Her corpse is dispatched to a burial destination 951 kilometers away. Signorina Rosina reappears at the end of the novel in the cemetery where she is buried, as an image of a good that can only be retrieved nostalgically through memory. In the space that separates the two brief experiences the reader has of Rosina, Pizzuto refers to at least six other Rosinas whom Bibi encounters in his travels. The extension of Rosina's name to different textual referents is the most important aspect of the novel's structure. It results in the reader's being unable to locate and define the person intended to serve as a focal point for meaning and understanding. Rosina, in other words, is nothing else than a desire for referentiality. The images we have of her do not coincide with a particular substance, but refer back to other signs. She is a trace of what was once a center of consciousness, but is now regarded as an arbitrary construct. As the subject of Pizzuto's narrative is decentered, so is the Sicilian landscape in which it is supposedly set. The nineteenth-century veristic ethnographic perspective, with its emphasis on the region's unique customs and language, is thoroughly eclipsed, as is the sense of homeland or maternal womb or stage of existence, conveyed so emblematically by Vittorini. Instead, Pizzuto's Sicily, like Signorina Rosina, is gone, and with it the sense of human community, symbolic practices, and ways of affirming social unity through ritual. 

Some twenty-five years later, Vincenzo Consolo would write that traditional Sicilian culture no longer exists as a narratable reality. The changes brought about by Italy's postwar industrial boom have deprived local cultures of their distinct individuality and, therefore, of their history. Earlier, in 1977, Consolo had written a short narrative entitled "Paesaggio metafisico di una folla pietrificata"5 \[The Metaphysical Landscape of a Petrified Crowd\], in which he allegorizes this demise: 


Un urlo bestiale rompeva il silenzio nella notte di luna piena. Ed era uno svegliarsi, un origliare dietro le porte serrate, uno spiare dietro le finestre socchiuse, un porsi in salvo al centro dei crocicchi o impugnare la lama per ferire alla fronte e far sgorgare gocce di nero sangue. Il licantropo s'aggirava per l'abitato, a quattro zampe, ululando, grattando le porte, con le sue unghie adunche. Il lupo mannaro era l'incubo, lo spavento notturno, nella vecchia cultura contadina, carico di male e malefizio, contro il quale si opponevano crudeli gesti esoreistici. 

\[A wild cry broke the silence of a moon-lit night. It was a wakening, a listening behind locked doors, a looking out of partly opened windows, a searching for a safe place to hide, or the grabbing of a knife to stab and make drops of black blood gush forth. The werewolf stalked the village on all fours, howling, scratching the doors with his sharp claws. It was the nightmare, the nocturnal fright, of the old agrarian cultures, bearer of evil and black magic, against which cruel rites of exorcism were leveled.\] 


In the modem world of industrial and technological progress all the werewolves have left Sicily. But in their place has come the more terrifying beast of consumer culture: 


Traversare la Sicilia interna, visitare quelle città e quei paesi un tempo vitali per umanità e cultura, carichi dunque, ancora fino a pochi anni addietro, di volontà e di speranza, luoghi che il moderno feticcio dell'accelerazione spasmodica, l'autostrada, ha tagliato fuori dallo spazio e ribattuto ancora più fuori dalla storia; visitare oggi Enna, Caltanissetta o Ragusa, visitare Caltagirone, Riesi, Palazzolo Acreide o Racalmuto più che attenderti furori, inutili ormai, ti infonde sconsolazione e pena. Sono paesi che si sono vuotati d'uomini e di significato. 

\[When traveling across Sicily's interior and visiting those cities and towns once so vital for humanity and civilization \(Enna, Caltanissetta or Ragusa, Caltagirone, Riesi, Palazzolo Acreide or Racalmuto\), instead of by now useless furies, you are fdled with grief and hopelessness. Up to a few years ago, these places were full of hopes and desires. Now the super highway, that modern fetish of spasmodic acceleration, has cut them off from space, casting them even further outside of history. They are towns emptied of men and meaning.\] 


Consolo's *Il sorriso dell 'ignoto marinaio \[The smile of the Unknown Mariner*\] \(1987\) was published in 1976 and immediately heralded as a monumental literary event. The novel is applauded for its extraordinary linguistic pastiche and varied intertextuality. For the practical purposes of definition it is a historical novel, but one devoid of foundation in either collective or individual memory. At the same time, it has little in common with the historical metafiction of such writers as Umberto Eco, Sebastiano Vassalli, or Roberto Pazzi. Paradoxically, it is a historical narrative without a center of consciousness or controlling perspective, whether it be the omniscience of a Manzoni, the scientific pretense of a De Roberto, the total vision of a Tornasi di Lampedusa, or the postmodern irony of the three authors just mentioned. Instead, the narrator is part of the fragments that constitute his historical account, a fragment among fragments — fragments exhibited, however, in well-calibrated sequences. Consolo believes in "history": *his* history of a Sicily deprived of history and culture, as a consequence of which he believes all the more in *his* myth, position, ideology. 

The novel's protagonist is a real historical figure, Baron Enrico Pirajno di Mandralisca \(1809-1864\), archeologist, naturalist, philanthropist, and collector of art and rare coins. The Museo Mandralisca of Cefalù holds his collection, which includes Antonello da Messina's *Ritratto di ignoto*. He was active in government: deputy in the Camera dei Comuni in 1848, and, after the Unification, in the first parliament of the Kingdom of Italy. Mandralisca's interlocutor in the novel, Giovanni Interdonato, is also a historical figure who held numerous political appointments, culminating in 1865 in his nomination as Senator of the Kingdom of Italy. Mandralisca was an exponent of the enlightened bourgeoisie and aristocracy; Interdonato, a left democrat who was instrumental in granting amnesty to the peasants and *braccianti* who took part in a bloody revolt at Alcàra Li Fusi in May of 1860, mentioned in the novel. The novel's historical referent are the attempts, in northern Sicily in the area between Cefalù and Sant' Agata, to incite revolt after Garibaldi's landing on the Island. The history recounted is a history of libertarian dreams and desires; but it is at the same time a history that can never be known, because it is entangled in ideology and in the bad faith of intellectuals; it is the history written by those in power who tell the story in their own language. Enrico Pirajno, *barone* di Mandralisca, conscious as he is of this history, can only escape from it through his hobby, the suidy of mollusks, and he is forced to confess to Interdonato \(the "ignoto marinaio"\) his incapacity to reconstruct and rewrite that history, even though he has witnessed the repression and slaughter of the Sicilian proletariat. 

The specifically "postmodern turn" that historical narrative takes in *Il sorriso dell 'ignoto marinaio* consists in the following: the author constructs a plotless picture of a character of whom he is neither historian nor ideologue, but only narrator, that is inventor or re-creator. The regressive nature of things that speak for themselves \(epic memory\) is the diametrical opposite of rationalist and scientific historiography. The narrator can only invent history in fragments that take the form of the voices silenced by official historiography. These fragments compose the work's collective, epic memory; they are uttered in a host of registers \(lyrical, documentary, dialectal, diaristic, comic, erudite\) so varied that the reader can not in any way reduce them \(this history\) to a controlling idea \(for instance, the dialectic of oppressed and oppressors \[Manzoni\] or the story of offended humanity \[Vittorini\]\). Put differently, the reader is denied access to a totalizing narrative with which he /she may identify. With the multiplicity of different local narratives, we become imbricated in the same historical predicament as the narrator and character. All we learn is the existence of otherness in its myriad of forms. We also know that there is no single position which would eventually absorb all the others, although the moral and political signal underlying the narrative strategy cannot escape us. 

The lesson learned from *Il sorriso dell 'ignoto marinaio* is not that we cannot understand social reality, but that we are just part of it, subject to all its languages, possibilities, uncertainties. Consolo calls his novel a "romanzo chiocciola" \[seashell novel\]: 


Subito un murmure di onde, continuo e cavallante, una voce di mare veniva dal profondo, eco di eco che moltiplicandosi nel cammino tortuoso e ascendente per la bocca si sperdea sulla terra e per l'aere della corte, come la voce creduta prigioniera nelle chiocciole, quelle vaghissime di forma e di colore della classe Univalvi Turbinati e specie Orecchiuto o Bucina o Galeriforme, Flauto o Corno, Umbilicato o Scaragol, Nicchio, d'un di quelle in somma *vulgo* Brogna, Tritone perticato d'in sull'apice, che i pescatori suonano per allettare i pesci o richiarmarsi nel vasto della notte mare . . . \(Consolo 1987: 110\). 

\[At once, the sounds of the sea, the low murmur and constant lapping of the waves rose from the depths, echo upon echo which, multiplying in their ascending tortuous way up the shaft, dispersed on the ground and in the air of the courtyard, like the voice supposedly held captive in sea-shells. Those shells, splendid in form and color, of the univalve or turbinate genus, and of the auriculae, buccina, galeiform, fluted or horned, umbilicus or scaragol and mytilus species, are all, when holed in the top, capable of use as triton or shell-trumpet \(as it is commonly called\), and employed by fishermen to attract fish or to call to each other in the vast sea of night.\]6 


Like a sea-shell, the novel echoes all the voices of Sicily in a pastiche of ancient, medieval, baroque, and peasant languages. The social and cultural effect we get from this multilingualism is a surface effect. These voices are events rather than signs or symbols of an absent origin, or an effaced ideal. Sicily returns to the literary imagination in all its complexity, but without affect; an orchestra of discordant voices, harmonized by the author in writing. The result is the balanced anarchy Consolo describes in his discussion of the baroque aesthetic: "\[un\] connubio di costruzione e di immagine, di struttura e ornamento, di ritmo e melodia, di ragione e fantasia, di logico e di magico, di prosa e di poesia" \[a blend of form and image, structure and ornament, rhythm and melody, reason and fantasy, logic and magic, prose and poetry\] \(Consolo 1990: xxv\). 

Consolo's most recent novel, *L'olivo e l'olivastro* \(1994\), takes us to the heart of his baroque imagination, exemplifying both the creative potential of the fiction text and its indeterminacy. The text here is Sicily itself in all of its finite, materialized space: Sicily as intersection of dream, myth, legend, desire; a world of memories and traces; most of all, a cultural subject existing somewhere between chaos and textualization. *L'olivo e l'olivastro* are respectively the symbols of culture and nature. A battered and humiliated Ulysses, at the outer limit of his impotence and vulnerability, finds refuge between them, in a dichotomy between order and disorder. But this is literature or myth, the convention out of which Consolo ultimately guides us by introducing us to the chaos, or "balanced anarchy," it serves to replace. The layers and layers of Sicilian reality come forth to re-constitute the historical memory and identity that technology has effaced. On the one hand, the text posits a return to myth as a more authentic form of knowledge, in that it harbors a profound mistrust of Western techno-scientific culture, of a way of life bound to capitalist exploitation and its imperialistic tendencies. At the same time, Consolo's return to mythical knowledge makes no attempt to restore the "traditional" culture that modernization has effaced. Myth for Consolo means narration and, as such, it contains a dimension that is not only historical but also, in so far at it records unconscious drives, psychoanalytical. History in *L'olivo e l'olivastro* abides by the narrative model: it is a collection of stories — stories, however, that are fundamental in that they are linked to the interior life of the narrator. They form a "history" that cannot be reduced to a structural model. They are not, in other words, an allegory of one or another historical force or norm of reality. Within myth, the proof of history is borne by traces or fragments. Messina, the narrator remarks, does not exist. Only myths and legends exist. But perhaps there was a city called Messina because drawings and maps indicate the semicircle of a port, 


con dentro galee che si dondolano, e mura, colli scanditi da torrenti, coronati da castelli, e case palazzi chiese porte ... Del luogo dove si dice sia Messina non rimangono che pietre, meno di quelle d'Ilio o di Micene, rimane un prato, in direzione della contrada Paradiso su cui giacciono sparsi marmi, calcinati e rugginosi come ossa di Golgota . . . Trace, prove d'una storia frantumata, d'una civiltà distrutta, d'uno stile umano cancellato. Deve essere dunque successo qualche cosa, sacco d'orde barbare o furia di natura \(Consolo 1994: 11\). 

\[with galleys dancing on the waves, and city walls, hills lined with streams and crowned with castles and houses villas churches gates ... In the place where Messina is supposed to be remain only stones, fewer than those of Ilium and Mycenae, there remains a field in the direction of Paradiso on which lie scattered pieces of marble, calcified and corroded like the bones of Golgotha . . . Traces, proof of a fragmented history, of a civilization that has been destroyed, of a style of life deleted. Something therefore must have happened, a plundering by barbarian hordes or some fury of nature.\] 


The fury of nature is the earthquakes that leveled the city twice, in 1783 and in 1908, and that summoned visits from Goethe in 1787 and D. H. Lawrence in the 1930s. Sicily for Consolo is a landscape marked by such apocalyptic events, one that gives rise to the baroque manner that characterizes as much the island's architecture as it does Consolo's style: 


Quello stile fantasioso e affollato, tortuoso e abbondante è, nella Sicilia dei continui terremoti della natura, degli infiniti rivolgimenti storici, del rischio quotidiano della perdita d'identità, come un'esigenza dell'anima contro lo smarrimento della solitudine, dell'indistinto, del deserto, contro la vertigine del nulla \(Consolo 1990, xviii\). 

\[In a Sicily, plagued by continuous earthquakes, infinite revolutions, where one runs daily the risk of losing his identity, that imaginative, mixed, tortuous, abundant style is the mind's defense against solitude, the indistinct, the desert, against the vertigo of nothingness.\] 


Consolo's writing is very much like the activity of the seismographic needle at the onset of the tremor he describes at the end of *L'olivo e l'olivastro:* sudden vibrations, jumps, dips, vertical leaps, zigzags, acute entanglements. It moves on different registers in an attempt to restore what has vanished from the human scene. As the needle signals the impending destruction of the Arab quarter of Mazara, the narrator begins its process of reconstruction, imagining the daily life of the Tunisians who had settled there and in other areas of Sicily in the late 1960s to undertake the back-breaking labor left behind by immigrants who left. Quoting from ancient chronicles, Consolo remembers the first landings of Arab settlers in Sicily in the year 827, evoking the beauty of Mazara, a city that in Norman times, according to al-Idrîsî, an Arab geographer at the king's court, was a model of prosperity. From then on, Mazara and all of Sicily declined into silent misery, until the 1960s, when the forces of multinational capitalism, deciding that the area was ripe for exploitation, turned it over to enterprising shipbuilders. At this point the narrative quickens, in imitation of the speed with which an entire culture was transformed: 


Mazara s'arricchì d'improviso, il denaro circolò impetuoso, cascò a valanghe, s'apirono banche, botteghe, si risvegliò la campagna, s'abbandonò la casbah, la vecchia città di tufo e di malta, se ne costruì intorno, sulla piana, una nuova di cemento e di marmo. Gli emigrati dalla costa dell'Africa occuparono le case vuote e cadenti di via del Bagno, del Turco, del Serraglio, del Serpe, s'imbarcarono sui pescherecci che razziavano il pesce nel golfo di Gabès o nel Gran Sirte, vennero usati e sfruttati, furono oggetto, nei momenti di crisi, di speculazione politica, nel montare della xenofobia, di persecuzione, di caccia, di obbligatorio rimpatrio \(p. 140\). 

\[Mazara became suddenly rich, an avalanche of money, circulating impulsively, banks and stores opened, the rural areas awakened, the Casbah and ancient city, made out of tufa and maltha, abandoned; around it, on the flatland, arose a new city built in cement and marble. The immigrants from the coast of Africa occupied the empty and broken-down houses in via del Bagno, del Turco, del Serraglio, del Serpe; they took out to sea in the fishing boats that sacked the waters in the gulf of Gabès or the Gran Sirte; they were used and exploited, and, in times of social crisis and political dealing, when xenophobia heightened, persecuted, hunted down and deported.\] 


With its newly acquired wealth, Mazara becomes a violent city. Into its slums flow immigrants from Africa in search of a better life; from here derives the racism, the beatings, the "demented fury" of contemporary Italian fascism. At this point, the narrative leaps on to a higher plane. The information it has produced has reoriented the reader to the author's mind, but there is one last bit of news that destroys the previous system of reportage: in a storm in which a fishing boat is lost: "Annegano i cinque mazaresi e i due tunisini che erano a bordo. Di questi solo dopo giorni si scopre l'identità, il nome. Sono due giovani di ventotto e venti anni, si chiamano Mounir Ben Lohbidi Mohamed e Bugawi Kemais" \(p. 140\) \[Five boys from Mazara and two Tunisians who were aboard drowned. The names of the latter were known only after several days. They were two youths of 28 and 20, Mounir Ben Lohbidi Mohamed and Bugawi Kemais.\] Adding information to information, the narration is transformed into epiphany. The drowning of the two Arab boys crystallizes first into poetry: Bugawi's body lies at the bottom of the sea, as in T. S. Eliot's *Death By Water*. "Phlebas the Phoenician, a fortnight dead,/' Forgot the cry of gulls, and the deep sea swell/and the profit and loss./ A current under sea/Picked his bones in whispers" \(Eliot 1952: 46\) — and then into myth: into the Ulysses of old who roams the island that was once his Ithaca, who visits his friends and family, who, guided by his son Marco, interviews Arab immigrants in the casbah, who attends the procession of San Vito. With Marco as his guide, Ulysses visits the deserted, polluted beaches, off-limits like the Montpipeau of Villon's *A us enfants perdus*, a malaria-ridden, Caravaggesque landscape on which they meet their death. The intuitive leap into a mythified present again reorganizes into chronicle as Ulysses and Marco fade into two young Sicilian painters, Luca and Giancarlo, who are slaughtered "da ragazzi d'inganno e ferocia, di malavita e di droga, di questa Mazara di oggi, di questa Sicilia barbarica" \(p. 141\) \[by boys bred in the deceit and violence, in the crime and drugs of today's Mazara\]. 

In this journey of Ulysses \(the author\) in search of his lost homeland \(Sicily\), Consolo underlines the power of literature to revive a lost culture by creating meaning out of a variegated stream of information. Acting on history from the margins of power, literature transforms multiple historical facts into myth. Homer, Aeschylus, Empedocles, Virgil, Verga, D'Annunzio, Pirandello, Vittorini, Goethe, Maupassant are all points on Consolo's map of knowledge. They give balance to the anarchy that history has spawned; force, totalization, and mastery over generalized communication. But the book for Consolo, his book, as it is primarily concerned with mortality, posits a foundation at the very same time it oscillates and disorients. 

A civilization constructed from the wisdom, imagination, poetry, and hopes of a varied constituency of peoples \(Greeks, Arabs, Catalans, and native Sicilians\) is also the primary subject-matter of the fiction of Gesualdo Bufalino. The point of contact is somewhere between the extremes of overexposure to light \(*solarità*\) and darkness, between European rationalism and African magic. Bufalino's Sicily is a land formed by an excess of identities, of innumerable micro histories. Sicilians have been commanded by fate to mediate between discordant continents and cultures: 


condannati da sempre a subire sul viso, come eroi pirandelliani, il sopruso di molte maschere, tutte attendibili e tutte false, veramente noi siciliani scoraggiamo chiunque voglia racchiudere in una formula univoca la nostra franta, ricca, contraddittoria pluralità \(Bufalino 1992: 1137\). 

\[condemned forever to wear on our faces, like Pirandellian heros, the outrage of multiple masks, all both authentic and false, we Sicilians discourage anyone who would attempt to enclose our rich, fragmented and contradictory plurality in one simple formula.\] 


Such reflections address the tendency, present in the greater part of writings on Sicily and Sicilians, to homogenize the island and its inhabitants into one of a number of essences \("Sicilia mafiosa," "Sicilia terra dell'onore," "Sicilia solare," etc.\). Bufalino's position, like that of Consolo, is that there is no one foundation or transcendent objective order to which we can refer, but rather many, and that these entities or modes of existence are without metaphysical legitimation; instead they are created by human beings and are realized in a play of forces. Once we have understood that everyone lies, then, as Vattimo put it well, "lying becomes useless and impossible" \(Vattimo 1992: 98\). 

Unlike Pirandello, for whom words carry a heavy metaphysical burden, Bufalino does not believe in the power of verbal art to transform reality. Peter Hainsworth has pointed out that Bufalino purposefully undermines the status of his own fiction, reveling, as he does, in dissonance and excess: "Bufalino often uses several formulations where a more sober writer would prefer one, or manufactures elaborate, sometime deliberately tasteless metaphors which seem to announce their artificiality and their emptiness rather than the power of illumination, or suddenly and wilfully switches from exalted matters and perspectives to ones that are vulgarly comic and trivial" \(Hainsworth 1994: 22\). Narrative itself in Bufalino's prose selfconsciously succumbs to the lure of artifice, artifice that, in the tradition of *A Thousand and One Nights*, is meant to forestall death. But Bufalino has the postmodern presence of mind not to surrender to his own inventions. He is aware of the interaction between the reality of death and the lies of story-telling. Such an awareness is thematized in his most recent novel *Le mensogne delia notte* \(1988, in Bufalino 1992\). 

In the prisoners' fate of impending death, Bufalino has allegorized the writing process: a signal in the head of the watchful author that reminds him that death is near. It is a realization that is constantly reawakening amid dreams and fear; the writer is like his own prisoners who at "il primo riverbero d'umido sole" \["The first damp glimmer of sunlight"\] are intent on tracing among the overhead beams of their cells the "linee di forza e di fuga, un intreccio di svincoli, botole e crepe, alla fine dei quali li attenda una felice assenza di peso, un'area dissennatezza, un sentimento di volo che nel loro idioma mentale, non scritto né detto, corrisponde all'idea, cosi virginea e sorgiva, di libertà" \(Bufalino 1992: 567\) \[ "lines of force and dispersion ... a network of escape routes, hatchways, loopholes, through which they achieve a joyous weightlessness, an aerial insanity, a sensation of flight which in their unwritten, unspoken idiom corresponds, so virginal and pure, to the idea of freedom"\].7 *Le mensogne della notte* is the story of playing \(writing\) in the face of death. The setting is a Bourbon prison fortress situated on a remote island in a stormy sea. Four prisoners are scheduled for execution by guillotine the following day. We learn from the prison warden or governor as he peruses their dossiers that they are all political revolutionaries \(Corrado Ingafù, Baron of Letojanni, Saglim-beni, a poet, Agesilaos degli Incerti, a soldier, and Narcissus Lucifora, a student\). Another political prisoner, also scheduled to die, is a bandit priest called Cirillo. Although not one of their company, he orchestrates their final game, suggesting that they, following the example of the *Decameron* \(a text he says he snatched from the flames\) pass the night away by telling stories. At which point Bufalino, pastiching an entire tradition of foundational narratives, has the baron state his hope that from their literature might emerge some reason for their destiny; that they might deduce why they are dying and find some reason for excusing either God or themselves. That the stories would prove otherwise was certainly to be expected given the total absence of theological meaning from Bufalino 's perspective and his distinctly postmodern tendency to valorize a surface or constructed reality. Bufalino's story and the stories it encompasses are preeminently metafictional, having made the reader follow the most artful and devious of courses \("vie più oblique e più scaltre" \[p. 679\]\) to end up face to face with nothing more than unresolved tensions and dialogic oppositions, that is, to reflect on the materials of narrative themselves. At the story's end the four prisoners meet their fate, choosing death over life as informers. Every ruse was employed to get them to divulge the name of the head conspirator, the External Father, but to no avail. Deceit is played back against the deceivers, the incessant movement of "signification" can only be arrested, thematically, by death. 

*Le mensogne della notte* contains a variety of texts that, in their appearance as "reality" or as constituitive of the world, leave the reader with little certainty of the \(fictional\) truth. Moreover, within these narrative emplotments that activate the cultural *mise-en-abyme* or narrative chaos so typical of Bufalino's work, we find an even more powerful and, if it were possible, more disquieting structure that stands as the novel's epilogue. It bears the heading "Carte trovate su un piccione da un cacciatore" in which we learn that Brother Cirillo, the bandit priest, presumed to have been executed, who managed the entire story-telling diversion, was an imposter and actually Consalvo De Ritis, Knight of Putigliano. The papers, written by Consalvo, include his will, naming the King as beneficiary, and a letter in which he confesses he had invented the story that behind the subversive activity of the prisoners there was a plot to overthrow the King and that the Count of Syracuse was the traitor. But more importantly, Consalvo tells the King that he became aware that the baron and his men learned of the deception and that their stories and conversations were designed purposefully to trick him: "Ne ho tratto coscienza che i quattro m'abbiano non solo raggirato ma irriso: proponendomi in ogni loro novella sciarade e subdole cifre, il cui ritornello batteva sempre sull'ambage dell'essere e dell'apparirre, secondo che in terra si svolga e squaderni l'infinita festa in costume dove balliamo ..." \(p. 684\) \["This showed me that the four of them had not only tricked me, but laughed me to scorn, all their tales being offered me in the form of charades or cryptic ciphers, the ritornello of which was always based on the ambiguity of what is and what seems to be, just as the infinite fancy-dress ball of our life on earth unrolls and unravels" — p. 159\]. The theme is Pirandellian, but what is not Pirandellian is Bufalino's indictment of the author's creative authority: "Apocrifi noi tutti, ma anche chi ci dirige o raffrena, chi ci accozza o divide" \(p. 685\) \[ "Apocryphal, all of us, but apocryphal also is he who urges or restrains us, who throws us together or tears us apart" pp.160—1\]. 

The loop of interpretation has reached its outermost limit. Consalvo's mind is operating within its own *mise-en-abyme*; he is at the end of allegory and therefore of his own writing; only silence will follow after he releases the hammer of the musket positioned between his knees. His letter to the King is Bufalino's final commentary on and a most fitting end to his own fictional operation. Through this extraordinary *fiction* and bizarre linguistic polyphony runs an ultimate nihilism that defeats the *jouissance* and closes the text with a reflection on the end of fiction. We have come a full circle from the meaning of lying to its meaninglessness. The postmodern route has been taken to its dead-end. 

It is tempting to take the island fortress on which the novel's action takes place as Bufalino's Sicilian homeland, the rock on which the author is ultimately a prisoner and from which he calls forth his special resources. The prison is his own labyrinth of discordant voices, deception, and spiritual darkness; it is a Sicily devoid of all foundations; an abyss into which he not only as author stares, but is certain to plummet. 

In conclusion, this postmodern vision of Sicily, deprived of essential beliefs and values, age-old customs, superstitions, primitive ritual, fierce passions and the indomitable will to both survival and destruction, which was the subject of "Sicilian" literature from Verga to Vittorini, offers neither refuge nor solace, as it once did, for the Northern reader caught in the grip of rapid industrialization. With Consolo and Bufalino, Sicily becomes a multiple reality strongly resistant to the fantasies of totality. Their works defeat the desire to be at home, to occupy a center and to be rooted in a place that expresses our identity. Their Sicilies, like any structure of thought or language, contain a perpetual deconstructive movement. As a result, the reader is frustrated because, instead of entering into a familiar and comforting place, he/she is forced to wander on the margins of a place that could be. Such a homelessness is not exile, but rather the prime condition of a new creative freedom. The traces of civilization, the otherness of the past and its unfulfilled possibilities, lurk in the postmodern consciousness as our only means of survival. 




## Notes

1. Vincenzo Consolo, one of the authors discussed in this essay, describes Sicily as follows: "Twenty-five thousand, four hundred and sixty square kilometers of land, one thousand nine hundred kilometers of coastline, Sicily, this triangle, this island in the middle of the Mediterranean, possesses the most varied physical geography possible in a land so small. A vast assortment of rivers, clay, lava, tufa, rocks, chalk, minerals ... And mountains, volcanoes, wooded highlands, burrows, caves, plains, valleys. And then a variety of woods, gardens, olive groves, grapevines, grain fields, pastures, sands, deserted expanses. In this land, nature seems to have stopped evolving and appears crystallized in the landscape from primordial chaos to amalgamation, uniformity, serene recomposition, benign peace. Yes, we believe that all of Sicily has remained for ever that physical chaos like the Girgenti countryside where Prandello saw the light of day" \(Consolo 1985: 11\). 

2. Pirandello describes this abyss as a void that arises from introspection in his essay on humor: "In certain moments of interior silence, when our mind divests itself of all of its habitual fictions and our eyes become sharper and more penetrating, we see ourselves in life, and life in itself, as ifin an arid, disquieting nakedness. We feel assailed by a strong impression, as if, in a flash, a reality different from what we normally perceive became manifest, a reality beyond the human horizon, outside the forms of human reason. Then, the entire context of human existence, as if suspended in the emptiness of our interior silence, appears to us, most plainly, devoid of meaning and purpose, and that different reality seems horrific in its impassable and mysterious crudeness, since all of our habitual fictitious emotional relations and what we imagine to be true collapse into it. The internal void is enlarged, exceeds the limits of our body to become an emptiness surrounding us, a strange emptiness, as if time and life had come to a stop, as if our interior silence became lost in the abyss of mystery" \(Pirandello 1965: 152-3\). 

3. On the concept of "chaos" as it is used in this chapter, see Hayles 1991. 

4. Published in 1975, *Horcynus Orca* is the story of a sailor whose return home at the end of the war assumes the dimensions of a Homeric epic. Back in Sicily, his experiences culminate in a life-and-death battle with a killer whale. 

5. Both passages are cited by Fernando Giovale \(1985: 125\). 

6. *The Smile of the Unknown Mariner*, translated by Joseph Farrell, Manchester: Carcanet, 1994, p. 105. 

7. *Lies of the Night* translated by Patrick Creagh, New York: Atheneum, 1991, p. 8. 




## References

+ Bufalino, Gesualdo \(1991\) *Lies of the Night*, trans. Patrick Creagh. New York: Atheneum. 1992 "Le mensogne della notte" and "La luce e il lutto." In *Opere di Gesualdo Bufalino*, ed. Maria Corti and Francesca Caputo. Milan: Bompiani 
+ Consolo, Vincenzo \(1977\) "Paesaggio meto-fisico di una folla pietrificata." *Corriere della sera*. October 17. 
+ —\(1987\) *Il sorriso dell 'ignoto marinaio*. Milan: Mondadori. 
+ —\(1990\) "Introduction" to *II barocco in Sicilia: la rinascita di Val di Noto*, ed. Vincenzo Consolo. Milan: Bompiani. 
+ —\(1994\) *L'olivo e l'olivastro*. Milan: Mondadori. 
+ D'Arrigo, Stefano \(1975\) *Horcynus Orca*. Milan: Mondadori. 
+ Eliot, T. S. \(1952\) *The Complete Poems and Plays*. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co. 
+ Giovale, Fernando \(1985\) "L'isola senza licantropi: 'regressione' e 'illuminazione' nella scrittura di Vincenzo Consolo." In *Scrivere la Sicilia*. Elio Vittorini *et al.* Syracuse: Ediprint. 
+ Hainsworth, Peter \(1994\) "Gesualdo Bufalino." In *The New Italian Novel*, ed. Zygmunt G. Barànski and Lino Fertile. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
+ Hay les, Ν. Katherine \(1991\) *Chaos and Order: Complex Dynamics in Literature and Science*. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press. 
+ Pirandello, Luigi \(1965\) *Saggi, poesie, scritti varii*, ed. Manlio Lo Vecchio-Musti. Milan: Mondadori. 
+ Pizzuto, Antonio \(1959\) *Signorina Rosina*. Milan: Lerici. 
+ Sciascia, Leonardo \(1974\) *Todo modo*. Turin: Einaudi. 
+ Vattimo, Gianni \(1992\) *The Transparent Society*. Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press. 



