+++
title = "15 11 Recapitulation"

+++
**11**  
**Recapitulation**

In summing up the contents of this book one must remember that its aim
is the exposition of the theoretical aspects of *jihãd*, and as such its
subject is Islamic tenets rather than Islamic history. This remark
applies with equal force to the brief historical accounts of the
Prophet’s own *jihãds* which this book mentions. These are intended as
accounts of the Prophet’s Sunnah or practice which is part and parcel of
theoretical Islam as distinct from the Islam of history. The distinction
is fundamental if only because not everything in the Prophet’s own
history is considered his Sunnah. His bloodless conquest of Mecca, for
example, does not constitute a body of Sunnah, whereas his destruction
of the Jewish clan of Kuraizah very much does so. This is because the
latter act conforms to the Koranic injunction of “making slaughter in
the land” while the former has no such scriptural backing. To put the
whole matter in a nutshell: the Koran as the word of Allah supplies the
injunction; the Hadis in the language of the Prophet confirms it; and
the Sunnah gives a practical demonstration of the same and thereby acts
as an exemplar to future performers of the hallowed exercise called
*jihãd*.

One thing regarding the present discussion requires particular emphasis.
The reader must not suppose that my citations from the Koran are by any
means full or exhaustive. I have discussed only those verses which
seemed relevant to the subject. And as regards the Hadis, my citations
have been fewer still. It is not even true that I have selected the most
sanguinary verses in order to bring out the true nature of *jihãd*. All
through, my aim has  
been to highlight as many aspects of the subject as possible, and for
this reason I have not confined my attention to any single aspect, nor
overburdened my analysis with innumerable citations. This is why I have
not dilated on the speculations of the various schools of Shariat but
referred to only those conclusions which confirm the scriptural
injunctions or fix them with greater clarity. On the other hand, as my
subject has been primarily Islamic *jihãd* as expounded in the canonical
literature, I have not referred to the concept of *jihãd* as understood
by the Sufis, the proponents of Islamic mysticism. But for the sake of
completeness, I should mention that, according to some Sufis, the
canonical *jihãd* is *Jihãd al-Asghar* or the *Lesser Jihãd* whereas the
war against one’s sensual proclivities is *Jihãd al-Akbar* or the
*Greater Jihãd*. In a word, the Sufis emphasize self-control rather than
war against infidels in their conception of *jihãd*. But whatever merit
such a conception may possess, it is not known that Sufis in any country
under Islam have made the slightest impact on their co-religionists in
unsettling the deep-seated convictions regarding the bloodthirsty
business that is *jihãd*. For this reason, I take note of the Sufi
conception of *jihãd* for what it is worth, but do not find it necessary
to discuss it at length.

If one were to summarise the contents of this book, the point that would
need the uttermost emphasis is that *jihãd* is a bloody confrontation
with unbelievers; it is a war informed by the greatest possible spirit
of aggression; and, more often than not, it is a war of deception and
subterfuge. “War is stratagem” says the Prophet (*Sahih Muslim*, No.
4311) - a *hadîs* to which Aurangzeb was particularly addicted. But it
would be wrong to suppose that the Koran nowhere mentions *jihãd* as a
species of war in self-defence. According to verses 2/190-92 of the
Koran:

“Fight in the way of Allah against those who fight against you, but
begin not hostilities. Lo! Allah loveth not aggressors.

“And slay them wherever ye find them, and drive them out of the places
whence they drove you out… And fight them not at the Inviolable Place of
Worship until they first attack you there, but if they attack you, then
slay them… But if they desist then lo!  Allah is Forgiving Merciful.”

These verses clearly preach war in self-defence alone. Although they are
sanguinary enough, it is astonishing how they attempt to combine some
sort of humanity in a counsel of reckless bloodshed. On the face of it,
they do not indeed advocate aggressive warfare, so much so that they
forbid excesses committed even in self-defence. But what lurks behind
that seemingly benevolent face does not appear all that benevolent. This
is a matter on which we need not go by these verses alone. Very many
verses of the Koran and the whole of the Hadis literature breathe the
spirit of unqualified aggression. We need refer to the Immunity Verses
alone (K 9/1-12) to have a feel of that spirit. As regards the Sunnah,
not a single *ghazwah* (=war led by the Prophet in person) of the
Prophet, barring that of Uhud (AD 625) and Ahzãb (AD 627), can by any
stretch of imagination be reckoned defensive war. In other words, 24 out
of the 26 *ghazwahs* of the Prophet were aggressive in intent as well as
execution. It has been argued that these aggressive confrontations were
necessary if only to make Islam survive under uncongenial surroundings.
This is at best dubious reasoning if we remember that, at Medina, Islam
had found a haven of safety and security. But even if we accept this
reasoning as valid, the aggressive nature of the *ghazwahs* of the
Prophet can hardly be wished away. What, however, is more to the purpose
is the fact that whatever justification we can plead in favour of these
wars of early Islam, their status as a body of canonical Sunnah, to be
emulated till the end of the world, can hardly be dismissed as a relic
of the past. The Koran itself does not always conceal the
world-conquering mission of Islam behind ambiguous verbiage. “O ye who
believe! What aileth you when it is said unto you: Go forth in the way
of Allah, ye are bowed to the ground with heaviness?… If ye go not forth
He will afflict you with a painful doom, and will choose instead of you
a folk other than you” (K 9/38, 39). It is this strain which is the
informing note of most of the jihãd verses of the Koran, the verses of
self-defence being only a streak of pacifism that is both specious and
unconvincing.

\(2\) A second point of importance arising out of the present discussion
is this: the aim and the fruits of *jihãd* have all been spelled out in
a manner which is in perfect consonance with its overwhelmingly
aggressive design and intent. This is why although the conversion of
unbelievers to Islam is recognised as the supreme aim of *jihãd*, the
call for such conversion has not been made a compulsory pre-requisite
for mounting a jihadic offensive. This again is the reason why this
supreme aim has, in the Koran as well as the Hadis, generally been made
subservient to the comparatively minor aims of plunder, *jizyah*, and
slaughter. “Eat ye the spoils of war. They are lawful and pure” (K 8/69)
- such pronouncements have often been made in a louder and loftier voice
than the call for spreading Islam. A *hadîs* in the collection by
Tirmizî contains the singular exhortation: “Spread ye *salãm* (the
Islamic mode of salutation); feed ye the people that go without food;
and strike ye down the heads of unbelievers.” Tirmizî himself considers
this *hadîs* as *gharîb*, that is to say, poor in authenticity. But it
can hardly be denied that the keynote of the jihadic injunctions of the
Koran and the Hadis is the assumption of the most intimate relationship
between such expressions of Islamic deportment as *salãm* and such
Islamic achievements as striking down the heads of unbelievers. It must
also be remembered that even the recommendation for concubinage with
captured kafir women does not occur in the Koran in only one verse and
in an involuntary fit of divinely inspired lasciviousness, so to say.
Its repetition in so many verses cannot but raise in our mind the
question: could not the repetition of such pronouncements be avoided in
what is supposed to be the Holy Book of Islam? Small wonder that
religious riots are invariably marked by violation of infidel women,
even when loss of life is minimal.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
