+++
title = "16 12 Conclusion"

+++
**12**  
**Conclusion**

In concluding this small treatise on the important Islamic doctrine of
*jihãd*, the reader must be reminded that it does not purport to be a
critique of Islam as such. Even in the restricted field of its survey,
its aim has been descriptive rather than critical. But before one leaves
the subject it is only fair to address to the reader certain reflections
which the foregoing discussion inevitably raises.

\(1\) The first reflection is on the failure of the world at large to
take note of this creed of hate and violence, and get forewarned as to
the peril it entails to the civilisation of all non-Muslim peoples
including those who profess Christianity. The decline of the West, of
which Spengler wrote, is nowhere so evident as in its total indifference
to the Islamic doctrine of *jihãd*, and in the absolute neglect of its
duty to confront such a creed intellectually while broadcasting over the
whole world its pernicious implications. Thanks to the money-power of
the oilrich Arab countries, Islam has spread its tentacles to the
farthest point of the globe, and is making known its intention of
world-domination in no uncertain terms. The intellect of the West looks
at the spectacle, benumbed and fascinated, sometimes breaking into loud
acclamations as to the glory that is Islam, and sometimes mumbling
incoherent protests against its ‘fundamentalism’. As Nirad Chaudhury has
pointed out, this division of Islam into two variants - the one
Fundamentalist and the other Liberal - is the result of “either
ignorance or repulsive hypocrisy”. Whatever else may get liberalised,
*jihad* cannot; and the West’s failure to understand the true nature of
the current Islamic Revival must be recognised as the most colossal
intellectual failure of the present epoch. It is against the background
of this failure that a great many contemporary events have to be judged:
the West’s prevarication with the events in Bosnia or in Kashmir; its
impatience with Israel in its life-and-death struggle in surroundings
where a single false step could spell its destruction; and, coming to a
lower plane, the Prince of Wales’s breaking out into singing the glory
of Islam from a public platform.

\(2\) As regards Christian missionaries, their record is worse still.
Despite the far-flung apparatus of proselytisation they have built up
over the centuries, their latter-day flirtation with Islam is probably
the stupidest thing these worthies have done at the end of nearly two
thousand years of unceasing effort towards leading the ‘benighted
heathens’ of the world to the fold of Christianity. Apparently this
flirtation is aimed at peaceful conversion of the pagan peoples of Asia
and Africa in some sort of collaboration with the Islamic zealots active
in those countries and without causing them any unnecessary heartburn.
But it is certainly the strangest marriage of convenience that could
ever take place between two parties who have always been at loggerheads
with each other. Also it must be remembered that the study of Islam and
world’s acquaintance with its awful doctrines started with these
missionaries themselves. True, after the initial centuries of
mud-slinging at the prophet of Islam, Christian scholars had been
sobered by the reflection that in view of the identity of their own
creed of monotheism with Islam, a wholesale condemnation of the latter
would involve a condemnation of their own religion. But till the end of
the 19th century these scholars had a clear understanding of their task.
They did not fail to recognise the doctrine of *jihãd* for what it was -
a code of murder and rapine disguised under a thin coating of religious
verbiage. Also, however enamoured they might have been of the Koran’s
full-throated pagan-bashing, they never forgot the supposed superiority
of the Christian revelation. Even so serious a scholar as Sir William
Muir did not fail to administer a large dose of Christianity in his
monumental biography of the Prophet. Muir knew, as all Christian
missionaries knew in those days, that their greatest adversary in the
business of proselytisation was Islam. It is therefore incomprehensible
that their latter-day descendants should join hands with Islam in every
country of Asia and Africa in the game of proselytising the pagans of
those lands.

The worth of the short-lived gains they have thus achieved in those
countries must be viewed against the forces they have unleashed in their
continuing flirtation with the Islamic establishment. They must know
that a newly baptized pagan is more vulnerable to the blandishments of
Islam than an unregenerate pagan rooted in unalloyed heatheism. The
small dose of monotheism administered through Christianity merely
removes the pagan’s safeguards and renders him inclined to a larger and
a more massive dose of the same. And the toothless Christianity of the
20th century, preached by means of fraud and bribery and a prodigious
establishment of social service, will certainly prove no match for Islam
when the latter sets out to declare full-fledged *jihãd* against the
converts which Christianity has gained by years of hard labour and a
mind-boggling expenditure of money. The Western powers will certainly go
through the motions of protesting against the iniquities of such rampant
‘fundamentalism’, but will do precious little to save those converts for
Christianity.  Christian missionaries should take lesson from the fate
of the Christians under the Ottoman Empire, and, for the matter of that,
under its Kemalist successors. Slowly and surely, Turkey has been
denuded of the Christian element in its population, with the Western
powers looking on in blissful unconcern. There is no reason to believe
that the same fate does not await the new converts to Christianity in
Asia and Africa. Certainly the present-day flirtation of Christian
missionaries with Islam in these countries bodes little good to
Christianity’s long-term ends. Before it is too late the Christian
churches should take a hard look at this self-defeating policy of their
missionary establishments and warn their countries as to its possible
outcome.

\(3\) Coming to India, the future of Hindus who form the bulk of the
population of this country seems grim indeed if their obstinate refusal
to face the reality of the current Islamic Revival with its pronounced
jihadic overtones continues as before. Hindus have been victims of
*jihãd*-riots in an ever-increasing progression since the infamous Mopla
riots of 1921. Political independence, besides giving rise to an Islamic
state wedded to the goal of reconquering the whole of India for Islam,
witnessed a genocidal slaughter of Hindus the like of which is not known
in world history. The Indian State since 1947 has persistently refused
to investigate these riots and lay bare the jihadic motivation behind
them. This, however, is a large subject with prodigious political
dimensions, and no proper discussion of it can be made within the
compass of this book. I would confine myself to a few remarks of a
general nature regarding how Hindus and peace-loving Muslims should
address themselves to the Islamic creed under discussion.

As for Hindus, they should clearly understand that the doctrine of
*jihãd* is absolutely fatal to their life and property, not to speak of
the honour of their womenfolk. If the Hindu does not make a serious and
determined effort towards persuading his Muslim brethren to renounce the
doctrine of *jihãd*, if he does not devote his heart and soul to devise
adequate means of achieving that end, in a word, if he does not shed his
deep-seated indifference to things Islamic, then he is most certainly
proceeding towards self-destruction and that too in a not very distant
future. To realise the overwhelming urgency of this matter, it is only
necessary to point out that, starting from the Islamic revolution of
Khomeini’s Iran, Muslims all over the world are hell-bent on reviving
the jihadic frenzy of 7th century Islam. That Mussalmans of India should
continue to feed on such frenzy and that Hindus should persist in their
delusion regarding the feasibility of peaceful coexistence with such a
frenzied folk, does no longer make sense.

Muslims on their part must clearly understand that the doctrine of
*jihãd*, however useful it may be in promoting their worldly interests
and ensuring their eternal felicity in the hereafter, can hardly command
the approbation of men possessed of even a modicum of rationality and
sense of justice. An argumentative Muslim might plead that *jihãd* is
his only weapon for self-defence in a hostile world; but no one in his
senses would really declare permanent war against unbelievers on such a
plea. Self-defence is certainly every man’s birthright and one can very
well sympathize with a person going to war in order to establish his
birthright; but *jihãd* is hardly ever such a defensive war. *Jihãd* is
total war aimed at exterminating all unbelievers from the face of the
earth, and whoever justifies such war on the plea of self-defence plays
a gigantic game of deception on people’s credulity.

If this reasoning be admitted, the question that immediately suggests
itself is this: is it possible to have a version of Islam that may be
called *Islam without jihãd*? Is such an Islam not a truncated Islam? I
should attempt an answer to this second question first.

It requires but little reflection to note that Islam in its pure form -
the Islam that is firmly and unalterably rooted in the teachings of the
Koran and the Hadis - exists nowhere in the modern world. A big example
of the altered state of affairs is the obsolescence of slavery and the
maintaining of slave concubines which, according to the Koran, is the
birthright of every Muslim and the privilege of every *mujãhid*. The
practice is sanctioned in the Koran and the Hadis and confirmed by the
Prophet’s Sunnah. Despite such incontrovertible pleas of legality and
respectability, these two customs are no longer defended in Islamic
countries, and even the Ulema do not preach these usages with their
accustomed fervour. If, however, the Prophet’s Sunnah be binding on
every Muslim, then it follows that no practice sanctioned by him can
count as being of temporary validity. “It becometh not a believing man
or a believing woman, when Allah and His Messenger have decided an
affair (for them) that they should claim any say (in it),” says the
Koran (33/36). If this be true, then it is obvious that the observance
of one part of the Sunnah of the Prophet to the neglect of another would
prove destructive to the whole theory of the Sunnah. If the Sunnah for
the slave concubine be temporary, on what authority will the Sunnah for
*jihãd* count as permanent? The Koranic authority for both being
similar, how do we distinguish between the relative worth of either?

Indeed, the matter does not seem to admit of any very considerable
controversy. Theologians of Islam divide the whole gamut of Islamic
duties into five clear divisions: (1) *Itiqãdãt*, implying matters of
belief; (2) *Ãdãb*, the system of Islamic moralities; (3) *Ibãdãt*,
involving matters of religious practice like prayers and fasting
including the practice of *jihãd*; (4) *Mu‘malãt* which includes laws of
business transactions; and (5) *Uqûbãt*, penal provisions of Islam. Out
of these five divisions, the last two, namely, *Mu‘malãt* and *Uqûbãt*
are in a state of obsolescence in most countries under Islam. It stands
to reason that Islam in its pristine purity is non-existent in most
Islamic countries. In view of this it is sheer perverseness to argue
that Islamic *Ibãdãt* is not susceptible to any such modification as the
renunciation of *jihãd* would imply.

It may be objected that the Koran pronounces the undertaking of *jihãd*
to constitute a Mussalman’s supreme duty, whereas no such pronouncement
is available for divisions like *Mu‘malãt* and *Uqûbãt*. But
contrariwise, one can also argue that the Sunnah of the Prophet has been
declared to be perfect in its totality, the greatest good of a
Mussalman’s existence being supposed to consist in an unquestioning
copying of the Prophet’s life-style. Now if the Mussalman, even with
such deep-seated conviction regarding the inviolability of Sunnah, can
choose to violate the Prophet’ Sunnah with respect to slavery and slave
concubinage, and indeed to consider such violation as being of perfect
validity, then the violation of the injunction of *jihãd* can certainly
not be faulted on any count. What we should take up instead is an
investigation into the obstacles to such a step.

The greatest obstacle is no doubt the education imparted in the
*maktabs* and *madrasahs* - the seminaries that teach the tenets of
Islam. The Ulema would not allow the infringement of a single tenet, at
least on the plane of theory. That they have not renounced even the
injunction regarding slave concubines “whom one’s right hands
possesses”, comes out most clearly in communal riots in India in which
the violation of Hindu women always forms a part of the ritual. It is
doubtful if all communal riots are started by the Ulema, but the lesson
that infidel women are lawful plunder for Muslim rioters in their role
of *mujãhids* is undoubtedly inculcated in Islamic seminaries managed
and governed by the Ulema. Without a thorough-going reform of this
system of education, the prospect for *Islam without jihãd* is bleak
indeed.

It is here that India’s Secularism is attended with the biggest question
mark in its day to day observance. Since 1947, thousands of Islamic
seminaries have sprung up throughout the length and breadth of this
country in pursuance of clauses in our Constitution, and the Indian
State is prevented from interfering in their management by the operation
of those very clauses. Leading the Mussalmans to the path of peaceful
coexistence with their Hindu neighbours by appealing to such Secularism,
is an expectation ludicrous in itself; but the deception played upon
peace-loving Muslims by this sop of Secularism is worse still. The
intolerably farcical element in this sordid business is the unceasing
propaganda, daily mounted in our media with screaming headlines and loud
protestations, in favour of this very Secularism and the State’s
proclamation that without this policy no communal amity is possible in
India. This assertion is of course the exact opposite of the truth. A
Secularism that allows reckless proliferation of Islamic seminaries
without any attempt to reform their system of education is the surest
pathway to unhindered communal discord.

Is it possible to remove these forbidding obstacles? Could those
Mussalmans to whom the cause of communal concord is dearer than jihadic
outbursts of Islam, devise a way to preach the message of *Islam without
jihãd*?  To outward seeming the feasibility of such preaching appears
remote indeed. But even in Islam there are some pathways for peace and
communal concord. These are of course narrow and beset with
insurmountable hurdles, but honest and sincere endeavour on the part of
earnest Mussalmans can perhaps make them broader and more accessible to
the generality of Muslims.

It must be remembered that the Koran itself has recorded the hesitant
murmurings of certain followers of early Islam who had wanted ‘respite’
from the duty of *jihãd* (4/77), and others who had preferred service to
pilgrims as a better Islamic duty than going into battle against
infidels (9/19-22). It is true that on both occasion Allah dismissed
their conscientious objections peremptorily; but even after that the
trend persisted. The *hadîs* which declares that the Prophet had not
been sent to preach the pacifism of Jews and Christians acquires
significance in this context. The peace-loving Mussalman in our own day
can appeal to these incidents and forestall the objection of die-hard
*mujãhids* by pleading that Allah himself had enjoined the duty of war
as a contingent one necessitated by circumstances.

Indeed a close study of the Koran would convince any one that the duty
of *jihãd* was all along ‘contingent’ as distinguished from the
‘permanent’ duties of prayer, pilgrimage and the like. It was in fact no
part of the Meccan dispensation, but was enjoined only in Medina for the
expansion of Islam which was made possible only under certain
exceptional circumstances. Peace-loving Mussalmans of our time can very
well plead that an essentially contingent injunction can claim no
permanent validity and that the duty of *jihãd* can be set aside
following the change of circumstances.

Such a movement for *Islam without jihãd* would obviously require a
thorough-going reform in the existing scheme of Islamic education
obtaining in India. The Indian State’s supine indifference to such
reform is not only reprehensible in itself, but also goes against all
the lessons of history. As early as 1871, W.W. Hunter (in his *Indian
Mussalmans*) had impressed upon the then British-Indian Government the
absurdity of the British-managed Calcutta Madrassa providing an
educational fare in which *jihãd* formed a large part of the curriculum
prepared for Muslim students. The present Indian State has produced few
administrators of Hunter’s calibre, and the frequent outpourings of its
spokesmen regarding the noble and peace-living faith of Islam are not
known to have made the slightest dent into the scheme of Islamic
education obtaining under the present regime. Such a scheme of education
must be overhauled, yielding place to a more suitable one.

Indeed the movement for *Islam without jihãd* can never be organised by
Muslims alone, however well-intentioned. Such a movement requires the
active cooperation of Hindus as well as the Indian State. Had the Indian
State sponsored *Islam without jihãd* since its inception, there is
little doubt that by now the leadership of the Muslim community would
have passed on to peace-loving Muslims. But right from the start the
Muslim element in India’s political set up had been under the shadow of
the Ulema of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad’s vintage. Till now the
preponderating force in India’s polity has been the Azad-Nehru axis.
This force never emphasized the possible role of pacifism in Islam.
Since the days of the Khilafat agitation, Azad had been proclaiming the
role of the sword in Islam. In his view of course this sword was the
sword of self-defence, but as has been shown in the course of this work,
it is pre-eminently the sword for the destruction of infidels. The
confusion was worse confounded by the fathers of our Constitution
labouring under an invincible ignorance regarding the tenets of Islam. 

If the truth were to be told, the greatest enemies of Muslim pacifism
have not been the Ulema but the so-called secularists of India, most of
them hailing from Hindu society itself The ignorance of these worthies
in regard to everything Islamic has to be seen to be believed. The only
consolation they can derive is from the fact that at present such
ignorance is a universal phenomenon. The Western world’s intellectual
decline is nowhere so manifest as in this context. India’s Secularism is
on its own admission merely a pale imitation of its Western original
which itself has nowhere taken note of the Islamic doctrine of *jihãd*.
Consequently, the riot-prone behaviour pattern of the immigrant Muslim
population in Western countries has left them helpless and guessing. The
Western media call it ‘ethnic unrest’ - a stupid description betraying
abysmal ignorance about the nature of Islam.

The Indian State can seek consolation from the fact that its own Muslim
problem has gradually tended to become a problem for the whole world.
The problem cannot be solved without attempting far-reaching reform in
Islam in general and Islamic education in particular. Islam being a
world phenomenon, Indians cannot do much towards achieving such reform.
But the ‘Secular State’ of India has never attempted even the little
that it could achieve. The State which offers no helping hand to such
unfortunate victims of Islam as the helpless Shah Bano and the scholarly
Mushir-ul-Hassan but which confers honours on such exponents of *jihãd*
as Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, has certainly forfeited every right to exist
except on the sufferance of the hundreds and thousands of *mujãhids* it
sustains and nurtures and daily inspires with the holy resolve to
destroy its very foundation.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
