+++
title = "03 CHAPTER III PLEA FOR A PERSPECTIVE"

+++
**CHAPTER III**

**PLEA FOR A PERSPECTIVE**

Let us now consider the next guideline from the NCERT, namely, that
“characterisation of the medieval period as a time of conflict between
Hindus and Muslims is forbidden”.

The underlying assumption is that Muslims invaders of India in the
medieval period were as good natives and patriots as the Hindus who
resisted them, and that the numerous wars which the Hindus were forced
to fight with the Muslim marauders were nothing more than domestic
discords.

Those who have read the “histories” of this period written by the
Aligarh school of “historians” and their Communist cohorts, are familiar
with the arguments advanced in support of this proposition.  
 

**FACILE FORMULATION**

First of all, there is the point that the Muslim invaders had settled
down in India, and were no more foreigners. We have already dealt with
this point in the preceding chapter.

Secondly, we are told that Hindu rajas were fighting not only with
Muslim monarchs but also with other Hindu rajas. On the other hand,
Muslim monarchs were frequently at war not only with Hindu rajas but
also with other Muslim monarchs.

Thirdly, several instances are cited when Hindu rajas allied themselves
with Muslim monarchs to fight with other Hindu rajas, and when Muslim
monarchs sought and secured the help of Hindu rajas to wage wars against
other Muslim monarchs.

And at the end of it all, we are invited to draw the “logical
conclusion” that both Hindu and Muslim rulers were similarly and
simultaneously struggling for self-aggrandisement, and that no
distinction regarding their motives or missions need be drawn.

The facile nature of such formulations becomes evident as soon as we
draw a parallel between what happened during the medieval period, and
what happened when the British imperialists were busy building an Indian
empire for themselves.

The British appeared on the scene in the first quarter of the eighteenth
century. The Mughal empire at that time had started heading towards
disintegration into a number of provincial principalities. The Rajputs
were recovering their independence and initiative. The Marathas, the
Sikhs, and the Jats were looming large on the political horizon.

The British were not the only aliens casting covetous eyes on this
country. The Portuguese and the Dutch who had been worsted by the French
and the British, were still hopeful of having yet another innings. The
French were competing with the British on more or less equal terms for
quite some time in South India. In the north-west, Nadir Shah and Ahmad
Shah Abdali from neighbouring Persia and Afghanistan had also joined the
fray in an effort to salvage the sinking Islamic empire for themselves.

On a superficial view, it was a free for all in which every participant
was fighting simultaneously on several fronts, and seeking alliances
simultaneously in several quarters. Muslims were fighting with Muslims
and seeking allies among non-Muslims. Marathas were fighting with
Marathas and calling on non-Marathas for help. So also the Rajputs, and
the Sikhs, and the Jats. And all of them were fighting with the British,
singly or in combinations which cut across demarcations of creed and
community. The British themselves were fighting with the Dutch and the
French on the one hand, and with the native powers on the other. They
were also cooperating, now with this native power and now with that. The
permutations and combinations of combat and cooperation among various
powers, foreign and native, in the long-drawn-out drama from the middle
of the 18th century to the middle of the 19th were such as could not be
easily sorted out.

Shall we characterise this period as a period of domestic discord in
which the British provided only one of the parameters? The NCERT
“historians” will be the first to throw up their hands in holy horror at
this mix-up of natives and foreigners, patriots and imperialists. They
will be the first to advise us to have a proper perspective before we
start sorting out the jigsaw puzzle.  
 

**THE PROPER PERSPECTIVE**

What is the proper perspective? Looking at the history and character of
various forces in the field, it should be as follows:

1\. The Mughal empire, an alien imposition on India, was heading towards
the dustbin of history;

2\. The Rajputs, the Marathas, the Sikhs, and the Jats were rising up to
reclaim their lost patrimony in their own homeland.

3\. The provincial Muslim chieftains were fighting a rearguard action in
order to salvage some pieces of the Mughal empire for themselves;

4\. The Muslim chieftains were inviting other Islamic imperialists from
across the border to come and rescue the earlier Islamic imperialists
out of the morass;

5\. The British, the French, and other foreign powers were trying to
fish in troubled waters, and taking advantage of the ineptitude of the
native and Muslim princes in order to secure their own strangleholds.

It is in this perspective that we pass a harsh judgement on the Marathas
for losing the battle to the British, and allowing India to pass under
another imperialist yoke. For, at that time the Marathas were the only
power in the field with a potential to win national freedom from Islamic
imperialism, and save India from British imperialism.

Why should we fight shy of having the same sort of proper perspective on
the multifaced strife in medieval India? That strife also can be sorted
out as follows:

1\. On the eve of the Islamic invasion, India was witnessing a number of
Hindu princes fighting among themselves for supremacy;

2\. The Islamic invaders took advantage of this situation, defeated the
Hindu princes one by one, and established their own empires one after
another;

3\. Every Islamic empire was worn out by renewed Hindu resistance, and
veered on the verge of collapse;

4\. A new Islamic invader intervened every time, and preserved the
continuity of Islamic imperialism till British imperialism appeared on
the scene;

5\. Sometimes a weakened Islamic empire invited some Hindu power to come
to its help in its contest with a new Islamic invader.

The fact that the Hindu princes were fighting among themselves on the
eve of the Islamic invasion as well as in its aftermath, should not be
forced to mean that the Islamic invaders were not foreign imperialists.
Nor does the fact that Hindu princes sometimes joined hands with Muslim
princes to resist a new Muslim marauder from abroad, convert the Muslim
princes into patriots. The Hindu princes were fighting for their hearths
and homes and national honour. The Muslim princes, on the other hand,
were only trying to retain the imperialist power and privilege acquired
by them on earlier occasions.

The only difference between the two situations - the medieval and the
modern - was that, unlike the Islamic imperialists established in India,
the British imperialists did not fight physically among themselves. But
this is a minor and marginal difference which should not be used to
demarcate Islamic imperialism from British imperialism. The Islamic
imperialists too did not engage in internecine feuds whenever there was
a strong central authority to control them as in the days of the Mughal
empire. We have also to make allowance for a change in the character of
imperialism between the time the Mamluks “settled” down in Delhi, and
the time the British “liberated” the same city from the “Maratha
occupation”.

The mutual strife among Muslim princes over imperialist power and
privilege in India, does not change the fact that for the native Hindus
all of them were enemies and oppressors of the same stock. Nor does the
fact that Hindu princes were at war with each other at the same time,
put them on par with Islamic invaders from abroad.

It is in this perspective that we pass a harsh judgement on the Hindu
princes for their failure to combine in order 1) to resist the Islamic
invader when he entered India for the first time; 2) to throw him out
after he had been weakened by renewed Hindu resistance; and 3) to
prevent new Islamic invaders from re-enacting the devil-dance of death,
dishonour, and despoliation for the Hindus.

Let us travel a little farther down the corridors of time, and have a
close look at the national struggle for freedom from British
imperialism. Here also we have the same mixed situation, and have to
sort it out. The ranks of freedom fighters were divided into different
factions at different times. We had the liberals and the
constitutionalists pitted against the extremists and the agitationists
at one time. Later on, we had the non-violent non-cooperators and the
revolutionaries repudiating one another. Still later, we had the
leftists and the rightists struggling to capture the Indian National
Congress. Alongside, we had the Hindu Mahasabha which fought the British
but did not share the Congress culture of appeasing Islamic imperialism.
And we had the Hindu princes, some of whom were frightened by the
freedom struggle and sided with the British while some others flattered
the British outwardly but sympathised with and helped the national
struggle secretly.

Simultaneously, the scene was confused by that jackal, the Muslim
League, waiting in the wings to jump forward and claim the lion’s share
of whatever concessions the freedom fighters could force out of the
British imperialists with whom the Muslim League cooperated
whole-heartedly in the meanwhile. Another confusing factor was the
Soviet fifth-column, the Communist Party of India, which criticised and
ridiculed the freedom struggle for years as “bourgeois-capitalist” but
which went over to the imperialist camp when the battle was joined for a
final round.

How do we look at this drama in which so many characters played so many
roles? Do we absolve the British of being imperialists simply because
the freedom fighters were fighting among themselves? Did the British
administration in India cease to be an imperialist administration simply
because some Hindu princes collaborated with it? Shall we deny
patriotism to the Hindu Mahasabha simply because it clashed with the
Congress on a major problem? Did the Muslim League cease to be a
carrion-eater and collaborator with British imperialism simply because
it developed some differences with its British patrons when the latter
were getting ready to depart? Did the Soviet fifth-column become a
patriotic fraternity simply because it tried to foment an armed uprising
against the British in India after Soviet Russia had picked up a quarrel
with Britain over sharing of the spoils after the Second World War?

The answers to all these questions are crystal clear because our
perspective on the freedom struggle against British imperialism has not
yet been perverted. (The NCERT guidelines are now trying to pervert
it).  
 

**LOGIC OF A LACK OF PERSPECTIVE**

But one can well visualise a situation when Christian missionaries will
have succeeded in converting a sizable part of the Hindu population in
different parts of the country. The Christian converts may very well
object to their co-religionists from Britain being described as
imperialist invaders from abroad. The Christian converts may very well
withhold their votes from whosoever refuses to accept the British rulers
as native rulers like the Hindu rulers of yore. The Christian converts
may also threaten to break out into violent street riots if the British
rulers are not described as great and glorious benefactors of India.

We shall then have another momentous meeting of the National Integration
Council which will direct the Ministry of Education to order the NCERT
to evolve another set of guidelines for new textbooks of history in the
new political situation. The guidelines will sound very familiar to
those who have studied the current guidelines being dished out by the
NCERT. They will read as follows vis-a-vis the British period of Indian
history: “The British rulers cannot be identified as foreigners. The
British period will not be characterised as a time of conflict between
freedom fighters and foreign imperialists. The British bureaucrats
cannot be identified as rulers and Indians as subjects. Economic
exploitation and cultural ruination of India under the British rule
shall not be over-emphasised.”

The concrete characterisation of the heroes and villains of the freedom
struggle will be equally interesting under the new dispensation. The
freedom fighters will have to be re-drawn as petty politicians running a
rat race for personal profit! Mahatma Gandhi will have to be dethroned
as the Father of the Nation, and renamed as a scheming and small-minded
*bania* trying to buttress the industrial empire of the Birlas! Netaji
Subhash Chandra Bose will have to be turned into a traitor who conspired
with the German and the Japanese fascists against the British
benefactors of India! And Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru will have to be
ridiculed as a Don Quixote who presided over the passing of a ridiculous
resolution demanding an independence which had never suffered an
eclipse!

On the other hand, Clive, Warren Hastings, Cornwallis, Wellesley,
Dalhousie, and Curzon will have to be lionised as patriots par
excellence who gave us Pax Brittania, who freed us from the thugs and
the pindaris, who abolished social evils like sati, who patronised widow
remarriage, and who embellished this vast land with roads, railways,
canals, communications, schools, colleges, hospitals, and what not!
Mohammed Ali Jinnah will have to be hailed as an angel who came forward
to relieve the British of a part of the burden when the British got
tired of fighting against forces of anarchy, and decided to give up!
P.C. Joshi will have to be glorified as a great statesman who resisted
the Congress rabble when it started sabotaging the British war effort to
save India from Japanese imperialism, and who supported the demand for
Pakistan when the Congress fascists could not be stopped from seizing
power!

These logical implications of the new scheme sponsored by the NCERT may
sound like a distant nightmare which need not paralyse us at present.
But in the field of medieval Indian history we are already upto our neck
in such a nightmare. The doubting Thomases are referred to Volume 5 of
*A Comprehensive History of India* sponsored by the Indian History
Congress and published several year ago by the People’s Publishing
House, New Delhi. The late lamented Mohammad Habib who edited this
history of the Sultanate starts the story from the rise of Prophet
Muhammad in Arabia, and deals with the Muslim rule in India as an
integral part of the larger Muslim Empire spread over Asia, Africa, and
Europe. He sees it as a splendid fabric interspersed with some instances
of barbarism like that of Chengiz Khan and Halaku. Coming to the year
1192 AD, he pronounces that Prithiviraj Chauhan was executed by Muhammad
Ghuri for sedition! A later day historian of British imperialism in
India under the new dispensation may say the same thing about Tatya
Tope, the Kukas, and revolutionaries like Bhagat Singh.

If we fight shy of these logical and inescapable implications, let us
keep the record straight and not temper with it in the interests of a
vote-mongering politics, nor allow it to be perverted either by Islamic
imperialism masquerading as Secularism, or by the Communist traitors
trumpeting the “scientific” interpretation of history.

The record leaves no doubt that the medieval period under Muslim rule
was a period of continuous conflict between Hindus and Muslims. The
Hindus were patriots fighting for the freedom of their ancient homeland
and the preservation of their cultural patrimony. The Muslims, on the
other hand, were imperialist marauders inspired by a criminal creed
which they were trying to impose on the Hindus by means of force.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


