+++
title = "09 CHAPTER IX THE DETERMINANTS OF HINDU DEFEATS"

+++
**CHAPTER IX **

**THE DETERMINANTS OF HINDU DEFEATS**

It is true that Hindus resisted Islamic imperialism for a long time, and
overcame it in the long run. But it would be foolish to forget that
their failure for a long time in the face of an enemy with whom they had
become familiar pretty soon, was of frightening proportions. It is this
failure of the Hindus and not the defeat of the Muslim marauders which
invites a serious review and reflection. I will, therefore, do my own
loud thinking on this subject. For I feel very strongly that the lessons
we may learn from these failures are still valid for us.

It is held by almost all historians of this period, including those who
neither swear by Marxism nor apologise for Islam, that the Hindu failure
had its source in the Hindu social system, particularly the caste
structure. But that proposition does not stand a deeper probe. Moreover,
the proposition is preposterous because it reverses the chronological
sequence. The Hindu social system became moribund and the caste system
rigid only *after* Hindus had lost political power. There is sufficient
evidence to prove that on the eve of Islamic invasions, the Hindu social
system did not harbour the defects which it developed at a later stage.
It is my considered opinion that it was their highly organic social
system which saved the Hindus from extinction in the initial stages, and
provided the powerful impetus which propelled them to victory in the
long run. Iran, Iraq, Syria, Egypt, and North Africa were engulfed by
Islam because they did not have a social structure which could withstand
the storm.

At a first glance, the Hindu failure looks like the failure of their art
of warfare, pure and simple. The traditional Hindu warriors,
particularly the Rajputs, were in no way inferior, if not superior, to
the Turks in terms of valour and tenacity. Nor were the Muslim
mercenaries any match for the Hindu warriors when it came to dedication
to ideals of freedom and sense of honour and sacrifice. But the
superiority of the Turkish art of warfare in terms of strategy, tactics,
mobility, military morale, and arsenal set at nought the Hindu
superiority and Muslim inferiority in many other respects.

At a second remove, the Hindu failure can be perceived as a political
failure, a failure of their state system. In the initial stages at
least, the larger Hindu states like the Shahiyas, the Chauhans, the
Chandellas, the Gahadvads, and the Chaulukyas were far superior to the
Islamic invaders in terms of financial means as well as manpower. But
Hindus failed to mobilise these resources in any worthwhile manner. They
could not have mobilised these resources even if they had wanted to,
without radically reforming their state system. The decentralised and
democratic character of the Hindu state, and the paucity of central
revenue under the Hindu system of public finance, prevented Hindu
princes from maintaining standing armies on a permanent war-footing.
Hindu princes had to depend largely on levies recruited on the spur of
the moment. And most of the time, these levies behaved no better than
mobs. The larger the mob, the lower was its power to withstand assaults
from solid phalanxes such as the Muslim conquerors brought to the
battlefield. The battle could last only so long as the small number of
trained and traditional Hindu warriors could sustain the shock. The
Muslim war-machine on the other hand had been reared by a militarised
state system, and was geared to withstand a stiffer strain.

But the deeper reason fails to be satisfied even by these explanations
of the Hindu failure. Why did not the Hindus mend their art of warfare
after they had seen the superiority of Muslim military methods? Why did
the Hindus refuse to streamline their state system till it was too late?
The military as well as political failure could have been overcome
speedily if some deeper failure had not continued to linger for a long
time. It is this deeper failure which I want to discuss in this
chapter.  
 

**THE FOREMOST FAILURE: SPIRITUAL**

To start with, what strikes me most is the steep decline in the Hindu
spiritual perception. The sacred and philosophical literature produced
by Hindus from the 5th century onwards compares very unfavourably with
similar literature of an earlier age - like Mahabharata, the Ramayana,
the earlier literature Manusmriti. The earlier literature dwells
naturally and effortlessly on the Himalayan heights of the human soul,
but at the same time it pays due attention to every detail of
terrestrial life. The family, the clan, the village, the *janapada*, the
*rãshtra* - life at each of these levels is sustained by a *dharma*
appropriate to the level and complexity of relationships involved. The
*janmabhûmi*, the motherland, is equated with the *janani*, the loving
mother, and endowed with sanctity higher than that of heaven. Human
society in its smaller as well as larger segments is an enabling
environment in which the individual seeks *abhyudaya*, mundane welfare,
as well as *nisshreyas*, spiritual salvation. Society has a lot to give
to the individual in terms of upbringing, education, status within the
brotherhood of the *varNa*, and livelihood in the fraternity of the
*jãti*. But society also demands a lot in terms of self-discipline,
performance of duties due from one’s station in life, and sacrifice
which mostly means living for others. The *rãjã*, the state, is an
embodiment of the protecting power of the Divine, and demands in turn
taxes and obedience to legitimate laws.

In the eyes of this highly vigilant spirituality, evil is as much
present in human nature as the good, and manifests itself in as many
ways as the good. This spirituality is, therefore, wide awake to every
eruption of evil, individual as well as collective. It can spot evil at
the ideological and the psychological level as easily as at the level of
its physical manifestation or concrete action. And it recommends a
combat with evil, *devãsura-saMgrãma*, in every sphere of life. In this
spirituality, there is no place for suffering evil silently, or for
explaining it away, or for facing it with a subjective
sanctimoniousness, howsoever elevated the language that
sanctimoniousness may employ. When Alexander had asked a Brahmin as to
what they taught which inspired Hindu warriors to such high heroism, the
Brahmin had replied in one sentence – “We teach our people to live with
honour.”

While it does not lose any of its heights, its grip on life as lived in
this world gets greatly loosened. There is an insistent and increasing
rejection of terrestrial life, and turning one’s back upon it is termed
as the highest human endeavour. Dharma is no more a comprehensive
concept embracing the wide wealth of human relationships; it is narrowed
down to specialised disciplines enjoined by the goal of individual
salvation. In fact, human relationships start getting redefined as so
many snares which entangle and encumber the individual soul in its
journey towards the supreme attainment. Honour and heroism now become
lower values when compared to the herculean effort of breaking the
shackles of *karma* and getting across the ocean of rebirth. Most
spiritual seekers now not only take to *sannyãsa* but also go into
seclusion in search of *samãdhi*, the mystic trance. *Tantra, mantra,
maNDala* and *yantra* follow in sequence till spirituality in most cases
gets reduced to some sort of an esoteric ritualism which is loath to
subject itself to any objective test of character or performance. Those
who do not feel drawn towards this highly elaborate but entirely
subjective spirituality are now free to pursue *artha*, acquisitions, or
*kãma*, pleasures, or both, without any guidance from *dharma*.

Many students of the spiritual literature of this period have hailed the
medieval *siddhas* and the saints as harbingers of a casteless society.
They do not see the perspective in which *varNa* and *jãti* become
irrelevant for the spiritual seekers of this period. *The perspective is
one of social indifference, not one of social concern*. The siddhas and
the saints are indifferent not only to *varNa* and *jãti*, but also to
the *rãjã* and the *rãshtra*. None of them tells the princes that the
supreme test of their prowess and honour is the protection of their
*prajã*. Some of them do bemoan the terror, destruction, desecration,
and spoliation perpetrated by the Islamic invaders. But the complaint is
addressed to God Almighty who allows such horrible things to happen. The
voice which a Valmiki or a Vyasa would have raised for resistance to and
destruction of the *dasyu*, marauder, and the *ãtatãyî*, gangster, is
missing. Samartha Ramdas is the only exception.

It is small wonder, therefore, that Hindu saints of this period failed
to see Islam with the eyes of a wholesome spirituality practised in
earlier ages. They took at face value the professions of Islam that it
was a religion like one of their own. Some of them were impressed by
Islamic monotheism, and started denouncing the multiplicity of their own
Gods and Goddesses. None of them could see that the *Kalimah* - there is
no god but Allah and Muhammad is his last prophet - could emanate only
from a beastly rather than a religions consciousness. Not a single Hindu
saint made the effort to see or succeeded in seeing through the
professions of Islam or the piety of its sufis, and exposing the sin and
the sham masquerading as religion and sainthood. The *NirguNa* saints
did question the exclusive claims of Islam. But none of them questioned
its claim as an alternate path of salvation. And all of them assailed
Brahmanism and polytheism.

The thinkers and philosophers of this period proved worse than the
saints in this respect. They argued back and forth on all possible
positions in metaphysics, ethics, aesthetics, logic, linguistics, social
ceremonies, and religious rituals. But none of them made a systematic or
serious study of Islam, or traced to its scriptural source its terrorism
and cruelty. The saints at least soothed and strengthened their people
by their songs and sermons. The thinkers and philosophers cannot claim
even that much credit. They only divided their people by their highly
sectarian scholasticism. A majority of the Muslims were Hindu converts
who had been forced or lured into the fold of Islam which sat lightly on
them for a long time. Hindu society closed its doors on them, and
condemned them to permanent and progressive alienation. The results
would have been radically different if Hindu thinkers and philosophers
had rejected Islam, and won back the converts to Islam into their mother
society.  
 

**THE SECOND FAILURE: CULTURAL**

The failure of Hindu spiritual perception had something, perhaps much,
to do with the failure of the Hindu cultural vision. There was a lapse
of historical memory and cultural tradition about the essential unity,
integrity, and sanctity of what the Mahabharata, the Ramayana, the
Puranas, and the Dharmashastras had clearly defined as Bharatavarsha.
This vast land which Islam has dismembered in due course into the
separate states of Afghanistan, Pakistan, Hindustan, and Bangladesh had
been a single indivisible whole since times immemorial. Bharatavarsha
had been termed by the ancients as the cradle of *varNãšrama-dharma*,
witness to the wheel of the *caturyugas*, and the *kShetra* for
*chakravãrtya*, spiritual as well as political. This historical memory
and cultural tradition was alive as late as the imperial Guptas.
Kalidasa had clothed it in immortal poetry in his far-famed
*RaghuvaMša*.

This failure of Hindu cultural vision had serious consequences. Hindus
failed to organise a collective effort to guard the frontiers of
Bharatavarsha. Hindu princes in the interior did not rally round Raja
Dahir when Muhammad bin Qasim violated the sacred soil of Sindh. They
made some better effort when the Hindu Shahiyas of Udbhandapur were
challenged by Subuktigin. But the effort fizzled out before long,
because very few of them had their heart in it. Hindu princes by now had
taken a deep dose of Kautalya’s *Arthašãstra* which, along with
Vatsyayana’s *Kãmasûtra*, had become a prime part of their political
education. In this sterile statecraft, centred on the politics of the
*maNDalayoni*, one’s neighbour was always an enemy, and the enemy of an
enemy always a friend! Hindu princes, therefore, failed to hang together
in the face of a common calamity. In the event, they were hanged
separately.  
 

**THE THIRD FAILURE: MENTAL**

The third failure which was closely linked with the first two was the
failure of mental alertness to what was happening in the world around.
Hindu merchants were still selling the products of Indian agriculture
and industry in all lands invaded by Islam. Hindu saints, particularly
the Buddhist monks, were still practising their austerities and
preaching their sermons in their farflung monasteries in Iran and
Khorasan. But none of them could see the storm that was rising on the
sands of Arabia and sowing a harvest of mass slaughter, pillage, plunder
and enslavement, not even when it swept over neighbouring lands. They
waited where they were till they were slaughtered and/or plundered in
their own turn, or, if they fled back home, they did not say the word
that could have served as a warning. Nor were the Hindu princes in a
mental mood to heed any warning even if it had been tendered to them. An
awareness of what was happening in neighbouring lands was no more needed
by them. Each one of them was busy with his immediate neighbours. There
was no lack of martial spirit, or sense of honour, or sentiments of
chivalry in them. But all this wealth of character was wasted in proving
their prowess over primacy of the right to a first dip in holy rivers
and tanks, or to the hands of pretty princesses. What they lacked was
statesmanship which is always an outcome of an alert and wide-ranging
mind. They learnt neither from their own defeats, nor from the victories
of the enemy. They mended neither their statecraft, nor their system of
revenue, nor their military establishment, nor yet their art of warfare.

It cannot be maintained that Islam did not provide an ample opportunity
to Hindu saints, philosophers and princes to understand its true
character and role. Before the armies of Islam invaded India, the sufis
had settled down in many parts of India, built mosque and khanqahs and
started their work of conversion. They were the sappers and miners of
Islamic invasions which followed in due course. Muinuddin Chishti was
not the first “saint” of Islam to send out an invitation to an Islamic
invader to come and kill the *kãfirs*, desecrate their shrines, and
plunder their wealth. He was following in the footsteps of earlier
Islamic “saints” functioning as fifth-columnists for Muhammad bin Qasim
and Mahmud Ghaznavi. There was an interval of two and a half centuries
between the Arab demonstration in Sindh of what Islam had in store for
the Hindus, and the horrors let loose by Mahmud Ghaznavi. Again, there
was another interval of a century and a half between the invasions of
Mahmud Ghaznavi and those of Muhammad Ghuri. But neither the Hindu
saints, nor the Hindu philosophers, nor the Hindu princes could see the
sufis for what they were in essence, or draw any worthwhile conclusions
about the character of Islam.

This triple Hindu failure on the spiritual, cultural, and mental levels
prevented Hindu society from evolving and pursuing policies which were
imperative in the unprecedented situation, and which would have saved it
from the permanent scourge of a malignant fraternity embedded in its
very heart.  
 

**THE POLICIES WHICH WERE NOT PURSUED**

The first need of the situation was a centre round which Hindus could
rally, and from which Hindu resistance to the Islamic invasion could be
directed. The effectiveness of such a centre was demonstrated first in
Mewar under Maharana Pratap, secondly in the South under Vijayanagara,
thirdly in Maharashtra under Shivaji, and lastly in the Punjab under
Banda Bahadur. But these centres crystallised too late. A nationwide
centre established earlier could have contained Islamic imperialism at
the borders of Bharatavarsha, or defeated and driven it out from
wherever it had secured a foothold. Chandragupta, Vikramaditya, and
Skandagupta had headed such a centre, and saved the motherland by
hurling back the barbarians as soon as they came.

The second need of the situation was a forward policy which would have
taken the war into the heartland of Islam, instead of being fought over
the length and breadth of Bharatavarsha. But the Hindus during this
period were afflicted by a fortress psychology. They waited for the
invader till he arrived at Panipat, or shut themselves into citadels
which could be stormed or starved into surrender while the unprotected
populace outside was slaughtered. Nor did they ever pursue and destroy
the invader even when he was defeated and made of flee. If the
Chaulukyas of Gujarat had pursued and destroyed Muhammad Ghuri and his
hordes when he was defeated by them in his first expedition in 1178 AD,
he would not have come back to Tarain in 1191 AD. Again, if the Chauhans
had pursued and punished Ghuri after his defeat in the first battle of
Tarain, there would have been no second battle of Tarain, and perhaps no
more Muslim invasion of India, at least for some time to come. The
effectiveness of a forward policy was demonstrated first by the Marathas
under Shivaji, and later on by the Sikhs under Banda Bahadur. But that
was against an Islamic state already established in India. Meanwhile,
Islam had succeeded in doing very severe damage to the self-respect and
self-confidence of Hindu society, particularly to the psyche of its
elite.

The consequences of this damage to the Hindu psyche came to the surface
during the days of the Mughal empire. Hindu generals like Mansingh
Kacchwaha, Jaswant Singh Rathore, and Mirza Raja Jaisingh, to name only
the most notable, proved their great calibre when employed by an alien
imperialism. Hindu administrators like Raja Todarmal streamlined the
revenue system of an alien state. But they could not use their abundant
talents for establishing their own leadership in the service of their
own nation. The Marathas who finally occupied Delhi in 1771 AD provide
an excellent example of this loss of *elan*. They could not muster the
courage to proclaim their own sovereignty over their own motherland, and
continued to function in the name of a phantom whom they had themselves
freed from British captivity. They were frightened of their own
greatness. The notion of an independent nationhood no more informed
their vision.

The third need of the situation was a policy of reciprocity which
nations have to follow when they are faced with gangsterism. Islam was
suffering from the high fever of self-righteousness, and was badly in
need of some strong medicine. If the Islamic invaders had been made to
understand that what they intended to do to Somnath could also be done
to the Ka‘bah, they would have paused to think and shed some of their
self-righteousness. But Hindus never tried to cure Islam of its
iconoclastic zeal. On the contrary, they used every opportunity to
convince Muslims that their mosques, mazars, and khanqahs were
absolutely inviolable. No wonder Muslims came to the conclusion that
while Somnath was built from bricks and mortar, and the *Šivaliñga* made
of mere stone, the Ka‘bah was hewn out of some spiritual substance and
the *sang-i-aswad* hallowed by the Almighty Allah. Muslims felt sure
that while Hindu images had no power to protect themselves, their own
idol in Mecca was capable of hurling into hell whole armies of infidels.
Their sense of surety would have been shaken and done them immense good
if it had been demonstrated by Hindu armies that the Ka‘bah was also
built from bricks and mortar, and that the *sang-i-aswad* also had no
power to save itself, not to speak of sending even a mosquito to
perdition.

Europe saved itself from the depredations of Islam because it had a
centre in the Catholic Church which gave a call for action to Christian
princes, and followed a forward policy in the Crusades. It did not allow
Islam to retain any of its self-righteousness. Spain was ruled by
Muslims for several centuries. But today there is no Muslim “minority”
in Spain to poison its body politic, and no Muslim “places of worship”
from which Muslim hooligans can hurl stones on Christian processions or
in which they can assemble arsenals.  
 

**ISLAM IS STILL SELF-RIGHTEOUS**

Islam in India is still suffering from the high fever of
self-righteousness, though lately it has shifted its claim from the
“only true religion” to the only “human brotherhood”. Powered by
petro-dollars, it is again dreaming of an empire in India. Hindus, on
the other hand, have learnt no lesson from history as is evident from
their slogan of *sarva-dharma-samabhãva* vis-a-vis Islam which is only a
totalitarian and terrorist ideology of imperialism. And now the Hindu
secularists are bent upon perverting the historical record in order to
prove that Islam never intended any harm to Hindus or Hinduism! Will
Hindu society have to pay the price again? It is highly doubtful if
Hindu society will survive another determined assault from Islam, such
is the mental, moral and spiritual health of this society.

A society which has no self-confidence, which suffers from self-pity,
which indulges in breast-beating at the behest of every Hindu-baiter,
and which stands in daily need of certificates of good conduct from its
sworn enemies, has not the ghost of a chance in a world which is
becoming deadlier with the passing of every day.  Can such a society
make any creative contribution to the greater good of mankind? Let every
Hindu search his heart, and seek the answer.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


