+++
title = "preface"

+++
**Preface**

The first half century of India’s existence as a free nation is
characterized by two significant failures: first, a failure to define
the concept of India as a nation; second, a failure to evolve national
institutions in education and intellectual life. In other words, a
comprehensive failure to define a vision of nationalism rooted in the
country’s history and culture. The result is that anti-national forces
have had a field day, seriously undermining national security. Since
these fifty years have been dominated by the Congress Party — by the
Nehru-Gandhi family in particular — the party and the dynasty cannot
escape responsibility for these momentous failures.

I have written this little book to meet a specific need. There is a
great deal of interest among young people about the history of India,
which many correctly believe to have been distorted by interests hostile
to the nation. I receive repeated requests from organizations all over
the country to speak on these topics. It is impossible for me to honor
even a small fraction of them. But there is no denying the need for
these lectures and seminars. At this time there is a shortage of people
who can speak and write on these subjects. I hope this little book will
encourage young people to develop their own study groups to meet the
need that I cannot personally meet. The final section on additional
readings should help in this regard.

To return to the main theme of this book, most nations distort their
history to enhance achievements and build their national spirit. But in
India, the situation in the first fifty years since independence has
been the reverse of this. Indian history has been distorted to favor
ideas and groups hostile to national interests. The result is that
students are brought up to be apologetic and even ashamed of their
history and tradition, despite having one of the greatest heritages in
the world, if not the greatest. This is not an accident. During the
colonial era, it was natural that the British should have established
institutions and an education system that promoted their own interests.
But for fifty years after independence, the same values and institutions
were perpetuated by successors of the British.

These successors to colonial rulers identify themselves with alien
values and their former rulers to such an extent that they are
implacably hostile to anything Indian, especially Hindu. Advances in
knowledge brought about by archaeology and other sciences did not make
them give up discredited versions rooted in the colonial past. The
result is a version of history that is not only unworthy of a great
nation but also mostly false. This small volume is meant partly as a
corrective. I have tried also to identify the causes and suggested some
remedies.

My goal in writing this little volume is therefore twofold. First, I
want to expose and highlight the magnitude of the failures and
distortions and identify their causes. Second, I want young people to go
to the sources given in the readings to develop their own independent
study groups and conduct seminars. This will go towards building an
intellectual infrastructure rooted in Indian history and culture in
contrast to copies of defunct colonial values that dominates the
intellectual scene today.

N.S. Rajaram April 2000

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)  
  
