+++
title = "01  FIRST PREFACE"

+++
FIRST PREFACE

The eighteen chapters of this book appeared originally as eighteen
installments of a series written by 'Ekaki' in the weekly Organiser, New
Delhi, from June 5 to October 9, 1961. The nineteenth chapter, *Choosing
Between USA And USSR*, was contributed by me to the Diwali 1962 issue of
the Organiser which came out soon after the first wave of Chinese
invasion on October 20, 1962. They have been reprinted with a few minor
changes here and there.

While these articles were appearing in the *Organiser*, there was
repeated demand from readers that the series should be brought out as a
book as soon as it was complete and, if possible, translated into other
Indian languages. A weekly magazine in Andhra, it was learnt later, was
following the Organiser with a Telugu translation. In November 1962,
Madaem Suzanne Labin, an international name in the campaign against
Communism, offered to take up the series with publishers in France. It
did not work out. Even now, full two years after the series was
completed, frequent enquiries are received from friends asking when they
can expect "that Krishna Menon Series" as a book.

It has not been possible to bring out this book before now due to a
number of reasons. But this delay has in no way dated it. Subsequent
events have only substantiated the central thesis presented in this
series, namely that fellow-travelling Pandit Nehru and not Krishna Menon
was the real author of those defence and foreign policies which led this
country to a debacle in the face of communist China, and that if we
wanted to change those policies and avoid greater debacles Pandit Nehru
should be sacked. Krishna Menon has since been dismissed under the
pressure of an outraged public opinion. But the policies for which he
was held responsible are still there, leading the nation into a trap
from which it will be a troublesome task to take her out. This series
is, therefore, still relevant as a warning to the nation which is again
becoming self-complacent and permitting Pandit Nehru to ride roughshod
over voices of dissent, be they from within his own Congress Party or
from other patriotic people.

I do not suffer from any illusion that this book will finally educated
our people, particularly our intelligentsia, who have willfully remained
ignorant of the realities of present-day international politics. Nor do
I harbour the hope that our politicians win be easily cured of those
romantic notions about other nations which have persuaded them to
practise blackmail in peace and servility in war. I am placing this book
before our people, as I did so many others, simply because I want to be
true to my own impulse for action in terms of my own lights. Rest is in
the hands of Him who sends Saviours as well as Scourges according to His
own inscrutable Law.

I am not unmindful of the tragedy which has forced me to take up my pen
against one of the foremost names in India's fight for freedom. It is
true that I have never been an admirer of Jawaharlal Nehru. It was as a
teenager that I heard him shouting like an ordinary street bully and
slapping a Congressman on the public stage simply because the mike had
failed for a few minutes. I also saw him kicking and slapping our common
people who had travelled long distances to have his *darshan* and touch
his feet. I had sensed in him that snobbery which is so characteristic
of our upstart "upper" classes and against which I have been in total
revolt all my life. His admirers call him an aristocrat who has a right
to be short-tempered and rude. For me, it is simply an absence of any
culture, inherited or acquired.

Yet, Prime Minister Nehru is exactly as old as my own father. Normally,
and in keeping with our Indian tradition, I should have been sitting at
his feet and listening to words of wisdom dropping from his lips. It is
a tragedy that it had to be otherwise. In a clash of larger loyalties,
considerations of age and station have had to yield place to what I
regard as weightier considerations. But lest people be led away by my
polemics, let me confess that I have done what I have done with a very
heavy heart. I still believe that Pandit Nehru can be as great an asset
to India as he has been a liability, if he gives up his
self-righteousness, admits his mistakes like Mahatma Gandhi whose
company he kept for so many years, and stops haranguing others to march
with the times while he himself remains a prisoner of outmoded
categories of thought.

It was only as a result of first-hand political experience that I came
to these conclusions about Prime Minister Nehru. They are the outcome of
observation and contemplation of the political drama enacted in India
after attainment of independence. Perhaps I would have never been able
to see Pandit Nehru as a Soviet-addict, had I not been involved in a
struggle against Communism which has been trying to engulf us all these
years. I, therefore, think it proper to tell the story of that struggle
which started in the second half of 1948 and which is far from finished
as yet. Readers will thus be able to appreciate this series in its
proper perspective. For, this series is only a sequel to a struggle
waged in the past and, God willing, the forerunner of some more
struggles in future.

  
II

The struggle started with a small pamphlet *Let Us Fight The Communist
Menace*, written and published by Ram Swarup[1](#1) towards the end of
1948. It was an appeal to our political leadership to organise an
"information service to supply objective data about communist Russia and
the communist parties to the people" so that they may beware of the
Soviet Trojan horse which was busy beguiling them towards a totalitarian
tyranny unprecedented in human history. A publishing house, Prachi
Prakashan, was floated in 1949 for the fulfilment of this objective. Its
very first publication, *Russian Imperialism: How to Stop It* by Ram
Swarup, was brought out in early 1950. It was blessed by Sri Aurobindo
and recommended by Bertrand Russell, Arthur Koestler and Philip Spratt.
Besides providing detailed data about the nature of Soviet society under
Stalin, this book presented a thorough analysis of communist economic
thinking which has been responsible for so much mischief and misery, and
which has had such a strong hold over our thinking as a nation in recent
years.

Sardar Patel was one of the recipients of a copy of *Russian
Imperialism* which had been sent to all political leaders of note
including Prime Minister Nehru. He responded speedily and very
sympathetically. I still remember that morning in the summer of 1950
when an emissary of the Home Ministry at New Delhi came to my house in
Calcutta with a message from the Home Minister. "The Home Minister wants
me to convey to you," he said, "that if the work started by you is not
encouraged and assisted right now, it will have to be done by the Indian
Army one day." That was very encouraging for our group. But,
unfortunately for India, Sardar Patel did not live for long thereafter.
The nation was fated, as it were, to see the day when its sons had to
shed their blood in the snows of the Himalayas for no other reason than
the folly of their Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru. That story is too
well known to need repetition here. But very few people know how
seriously Sardar Patel had taken the Chinese occupation of Tibet, and
what foresight was contained in the policies which he had formulated for
the defence of our northern frontiers. Pandit Nehru was almost on the
verge of leaving the Congress Party because he was finding it difficult
to get reconciled to the Sardar's resolve to fight communist aggression,
outside and inside, to the last ditch.

As soon as Sardar Patel was dead, Pandit Nehru reversed the stand we had
taken over communist aggression in Korea. That was the forerunner of a
similar reversal over Tibet. It was in this context that Ram Swarup
wrote his article, *A Critique of India's Foreign Policy*, which was
published in Mother India, a fornightly published by the Sri Aurobindo
Circle at Bombay, on February 21, 1951. He floodit the false analysis on
the basis of which our foreign policy was being formulated, and
recommended a revision as follows:

"What is our foreign policy? It is difficult to be very exact about it
but, summarised fairly, its premises are: that the world is divided
between two power-blocs; that they are equally good and equally bad-more
bad than good; that with very little to choose between the two, we do
not choose at all but maintain an attitude of superiority and neutrality
between them; that when we do have to choose we choose without alignment
with any specific power-bloc and consider each happening and action on
its individual merits or rather demerits.

"While we are essentially fighting for our own freedom and defence, this
defence is closely bound up with the kind of world in which the
continued defence of our freedom is automatically assured.

"The struggle that is being waged today is not primarily between the
U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R., though they are parties to the struggle as we
all are, whether we like it or not. It is a deeper struggle, a struggle
between forces of freedom, democracy, equal co-operation, economic
advance through mutual aid and self-dependence on one hand and forces of
darkness, slavery, fascism and progressive pauperization on the other.
What we become tomorrow will depend on the outcome of this struggle, and
the outcome of this struggle will depend on what we do and where we
stand with regard to these basic issues today.

"We are faced with a situation in which we have been called upon to
forget old quarrels in order to fight new dangers. It is suggested that
the time has come when we must give up our peculiarly unrealistic and
barren policy and base it on the recognition of the following solid
facts:

> 1\. that our freedom is at stake;
>
> 2\. that this is a danger which we share with many free nations of the
> world;
>
> 3\. that in the face of this global danger, a global strategy is
> needed;
>
> 4\. that in order to make this global strategy effective, powerful and
> organic, it should be based on local strength and regional security.

"Not only do we stand for the defence of freedom and democracy in India
and in the world, we also stand for redressing some old wrongs. We stand
for the liberation of dependent countries, the economic advance of
undeveloped areas, free communication between people of different
countries. For achieving these positive values, we should base our
conduct in international affairs on the following:

> 1\. Support to the cause of genuinely nationalist movements of old
> colonies.
>
> 2\. Support to the nationalist struggle of the newly conquered
> countries in East Europe.
>
> 3\. Refusal to accord recognition to governments which capture power
> by abolishing parliaments and maintain power by disallowing all
> opposition. In cases where we are forced to accord diplomatic
> recognition to such governments owing to world circumstances, we
> should never place them morally on par with governments based on free,
> unimpeded elections.
>
> 4\. Peace in the world is impossible so long as the people of the free
> world cannot speak directly and freely to the people beyond the Iron
> Curtain, and vice versa. This is the most important single obstacle to
> peace.
>
> 5\. Economic development of undeveloped countries must be related to
> the needs and resources of these areas. While we in these areas can
> advance largely on the basis of our own efforts and sacrifices, we
> look to industrially developed nations to give such marginal catalytic
> help as is necessary. We on our part must educate our people to regard
> this step, if taken, as a friendly one which should be welcomed."

Meanwhile, a discussion had developed within our group that the danger
of a world war to stop Communism was as grave as the danger of Communism
itself. Ram Swarup summed up the conclusions of this discussion in
another article, *Plea For A Fourth Force*, published in *The Statesman*
of November 18, 1951. He wrote:

"To-day the free world is faced with a dilemma; the defence of freedom
against a very total evil which is Communism, and a world war which this
defence apparently involves and which would mean a probable destruction
of the human race. Can we escape or transcend this dilemma? Can we both
save freedom and avoid a third world war?

"The escape generally sought is either in minimising the evil nature of
Communism, or in denying the horrible nature of the atomic third world
war.

"There is no question of soft-pedalling either the one or the other. War
threatens the existence of the race, while Communism threatens the
spirit of man, negates and denies it completely. This point should be
well understood. Communism is not an evil in the ordinary sense of the
term like violating some social convention of monogamy or property. Its
horror is deeper, more deadly than any physical pain. The whole
spiritual evolution of man is at stake. Fashionable pacifism which is
blind to this fact must be rejected.

"But can we combine anti-communism with anti-war and integrate both with
the positive forces of love and justice? And can we combine all these
sentiments into an effective programme of action? A programme of action
which while uncompromising on principles is still plastic and patient
enough to discuss and undertake gradual measures and make piecemeal
efforts.

"We believe that such a synthesis is possible; and in the world
situation to-day it is eminently desirable.

"The premises of what may be called the 'Fourth Force' is that Communism
is an evil which must be resisted, that due to the total nature of
present-day war, a war is the least effective method of resistance, that
the best way of resistance is the intellectual and moral mobilization of
the common people. This resistance involves the following:

> 1\. A vastly expanded informational-interpretative programme. People
> should be told about the true conditions in Soviet Russia and her
> satellite countries;
>
> 2\. A special programme for converting the communists and the
> fellow-travellers, particularly those who believe in Communism because
> of its original generous impulses. They should learn that Communism
> has failed and they should be invited to start a reformist,
> revisionist movement from within;
>
> 3\. Approaching communist leaders to encourage their giving up
> communist doctrines ex-cathedra, particularly those relating to
> tactics and strategy. So long as they believe in an amoral approach
> and primacy of ends over the means, they would always inspire fear and
> suspicion;
>
> 4\. Calling upon the Soviet leaders to call off their local
> fifth-columns;
>
> 5\. Calling upon the Soviet leaders to close down forced-labour camps,
> and introduce civil liberties and free elections in their country;
>
> 6\. Calling upon the Soviet leaders to lift up the Iron Curtain. If
> there is no response, the free people should organise an international
> volunteer force ready to cross the Soviet borders;
>
> 7\. Organising an agitational programme for a world Government among
> the peoples of the world. Non-governmental agencies may run their own
> candidates in local elections on the ticket of world Government. These
> agencies could also convene an experimental world parliament, its
> members being elected directly by the people. During the time the idea
> of a world Government matures, we should be working for greater
> regional cooperation and larger political units. For example, let
> India, America and the British Commonwealth come into some kind of
> loose federal relationship;
>
> 8\. Promoting progressive disarmament and international control of all
> dangerous weapons;
>
> 9\. Promoting equality of productivity between individuals and nations
> by working for population control, free economic aid, and exchange of
> techniques."

A larger effort along these line was launched by our group in March 1952
from a new platform suggestively named Society for Defence of Freedom in
Asia (SDFA). For, while the innate strength of the Western countries and
the Atlantic Pact had stopped communist aggression and subversion in
Europe and North America, the emergence of Red China had turned the
whole of Asia into a battleground in which international Communism was
making rapid advances., The Western Powers were bound to intervene in
every country threatened by communist take-over, as they had already
done in Korea, Indo-China and Malaya. No good could come, to any
independent Asian nation out of that intervention. In the case of Asian
nations still under foreign rule, it meant a postponement of the day
when they could attain independence. It was, therefore, in the interest
of Asian nations themselves to remove the basic cause of that
intervention, namely a powerful communist movement bent upon seizing
power by violence and subterfuge and tilting the world balance of power
further in favour of the Soviet bloc.

The SDFA was a national platform on which people from all our patriotic
political parties and non-political movements cooperated in the service
of a common cause. It published many books, pamphlets, handbills and
posters, and, as a friend who did not approve of its effort put it,
"placed anti-communism squarely on the map of political India". Although
it did anti-communist work on several fronts, its main concerns were:
(i) to start a peasant movement against Communism which has killed and
enslaved vast peasant masses in Russia, China and East Europe, and for a
prosperous countryside which programme was conspiciously missing from
our Five Year Plans; and (ii) to awaken the nation against the communist
danger developing all along our Himalayan frontiers in the wake of Red
China's occupation of Tibet.

Ram Swarup had written his book, *Communism And Peasantry Implications
of Collectivist Agriculture For Asia*, in 1950 to serve as the plank of
a peasants' conference to be called for launching a peasant movement of
our conception. But paucity of resources and other opportunities
prevented us from going much farther than the publication of this "path
breaking study" as the socialist leader and thinker, Ashoka Mehta,
described it in 1954. The book received very good reviews.

As regards the security of our Himalayan frontiers, however, the SDFA
was able to make considerable headway, thanks to the lead taken by
Munshi Ahmed Deen and Professor Tilak Raj Chaddha of the Praja Socialist
Party (PSP). A Tibet Committee was organised in August 1953 and a Tibet
Day was observed in September that year when a demonstration and a
meeting were organised in New Delhi.

In February 1954, the Tibet Committee called a Himalayan Borders
Conference in New Delhi and it was resolved to hold such conferences in
all parts of India till such time as our Government saw the danger and
started doing something -about it. Another Conference did materialise at
Patiala later in the same year.

But the programme could not be carried further than that because Prime
Minister Nehru sprang a surprise with his Panchshila surrender over
Tibet in April 1954, and the *Hindi-Chini Bhai-Bhai* movement misled the
whole country soon after. In an atmosphere seething with pro-Chinese
communist propaganda done by goodwill missions going to and coming from
Peking almost every week, it became increasingly difficult for us to
convey our as yet weak voice to the Indian people at large. We would
have continued the battle and waited for better times, but for the
bitter hostility shown by Prime Minister Nehru personally. It was
perhaps the most painful experience of our lives to see the Prime
Minister of a democratic country openly patronising the Chinese lobby
led by the Communist Party of India, and angrily denouncing tried and
tested patriots of a long standing in India's freedom movement.

  
III

The communist press in India and abroad came out against the SDFA since
its very inception. Both *Pravda* and *Izvestia* denounced it in their
issues dated October 16, 1952.[2](#2) On October, 26,1952 the communist
weekly in India, Cross Roads, opened its famous campaign with a full
front-page story which sprawled over the entire back-page as well. R.K.
Karanjia could not lag behind in inventing and spreading the standard
communist lies about a patriotic effort aimed at exposing the communist
game. His yellow sheet, *Blitz*, set a new record in rascalism in a
matter of few months. One of us had to spend some time in analysing
Karanjia's "legitimate" sources of income through advertisements in the
columns of *Blitz*. The results, published by D.F. Karaka's weekly
*Current*, silenced this "vox populi" for the rest of the SDFA's tenure.
He returned to the charge only after the SDFA was closed down in
December 1955.

This communist hysteria gave us moral strength to wage the struggle with
greater determination. We were really hitting the enemy where it hurt
him most-the Soviet and the Chinese myths which were the only props of
his false propaganda. Several years before Comrade Khrushchev and other
Soviet leaders were free to agree with us publicly, we exploded the
Soviet myth skyhigh and the explosion was heard throughout the length
and breadth of India. The Russian and Chinese embassies started sending
memoranda to our External Affairs Ministry protesting that their
countries were being systematically "blackened" by the SDFA.

It took us some time to know the mind of Prime Minister Nehru about our
anti-communist work. To start with, we were under the impression that
like most of our busy politicians he had neglected his readings about
the nature of Soviet society under Stalin. It did not occur to us that
he was soon going to come out openly as an angry opponent of any effort
to expose the Soviet myth. H.D. Malaviya, editor of the official
Congress fortnightly AICC Economic Review, had started heaping abuses on
us under the pretext of reviewing some of our publications. But it was
misunderstood by us to be the personal predelections of a known
fellow-traveller rather than the expression of an avowed party policy
approved by the Prime Minister. Prem Bhatia of *The Statesman*, another
spokesman for Soviet Russia, Red China and Krishna Menon in those days,
had also displayed malice towards our work in the columns of that
important daily. But that, too, we did not immediately interpret as the
authentic voice of official India.

Several events were, however, getting linked in a chain which
unmistakably led to Prime Minister Nehru. I summarise them below:

1\. We were using a slogan - *Communism bas nothing to offer but chains*
- on all our mail posted from our Calcutta office. The slogan had been
duly applied for and approved by the General Post Office (GPO) when we
bought a Franking Machine in June 1952. Early in 1953, *Cross Roads*
published a photostat of this slogan on its front page, and a communist
M.P. put a question in Parliament about its 'propriety' in view of
India's friendship with Soviet Russia, Red China, and other communist
countries. The very next day, an inspector from the GPO barged into our
office and took away the plate bearing the slogan without assigning any
reason whatsoever. Several days later a letter from the Post Master
General, West Bengal, lied that "the use of the slogan has not been
authorised either in the Licence or otherwise".

2\. In August 1953, the SDFA organised a Tibet Committee which announced
a Tibet Day to be observed in September. As many as 12 M.Ps including
Professor N.G. Ranga were associated with the Committee. The Prime
Minister came out against the Committee the day after it was formed. He
called upon Congressmen not to associate with the Committee in any way.
He put pressure on Ranga to resign from the Committee. The use of the
Constitution Hall on Curzon Road was refused for the meeting organised
by the SDFA on Tibet Day. But since the SDFA could not be stopped from
its own course of action, the Prime Minister used the floor of the
Parliament to denounce the organisers of Tibet Day, and threatened them
with Government action.

3\. The Prime Minister had perhaps become wiser about the futility of
these direct methods in a democratic country by the time the SDFA
organised the first ever Himalayan Borders Conference in February 1954.
So he resorted to indirect and insidious methods. The Himalayan Borders
Conference was to be denied publicity in the Press under pressure from
the Prime Minister's office. The event, however, happened to be so
important that the Press could not ignore it. Now the Prime Minister was
really desperate. So when a second Conference started taking shape in
Patiala a few months later, he ordered Colonel Raghubir Singh, the then
Chief Minister of PEPSU, who was closely associated with the Conference,
to withdraw his support. The Colonel obeyed but not without confessing
to the organisers that he was doing so under pressure from the Prime
Minister.

4\. In April 1954, Prachi Prakashan had rented a stall in the Government
sponsored Industrial Exhibition at Eden Gardens, Calcutta, for selling
its own and SDFA's publications which were always in good demand among
our politically conscious intelligentsia. Such stalls had been rented by
Prachi Prakashan in several Puja celebrations at Calcutta in 1952 and
1953. A stall at the Kalyani Congress session in January 1954 had shown
record sales. Pandit Govind Ballabh Pant, the Chief Minister of Uttar
Pradesh, and Shri Morarji Desai, the Chief Minister of Bombay, had
visited the stall and recommended our publications to our people in
comments they wrote on the visitors' book. The communist press in
Calcutta had all along raised a hue and cry against these stalls but its
harangues as well as threats had so far failed to force the sponsors of
Pujas and other exhibitions-private agencies-to deny us the normal
facilities which the Communist Party of India itself had always enjoyed.
But its outrary succeeded with the Government sponsored exhibition. A
two-column attack on the stall was frontpaged in the Calcutta communist
daily, *Swadhinata*, on May 10, 1954. The paper particularly mentioned
several books written by me on communist China. On May 11, an official
of the Publicity Department, Government of West Bengal, asked our
workers to close the stall. I myself had a talk with him in the evening
that day. He offered to refund the entire rent we had paid for the
duration of the exhibition but was absolutely firm that the stall should
go. But as we refused to oblige him voluntarily, he issued an official
order on May 20 for closing the stall immediately. We had no alternative
except removing our books and furniture when we were told that they will
be dumped on the street outside. The whole thing was very intriguing
because the Government of West Bengal had so far been far from hostile
to our work. Enquiries revealed that there was pressure from New Delhi
where the communists had represented their case to the Prime Minister.

5\. In February 1955, I received an invitation to attend the forthcoming
Conference of the Asian People's Anti-Communist League in Formosa. I
sent the entire correspondence - including a very warm letter written to
me personally by President Chiang Kai-shek - to our External Affairs
Ministry, saying that I would accept the invitation only under advice
from them. Months passed and not a word came from New Delhi. Meanwhile,
I had applied for a passport to the regional Bureau at Calcutta because
I wanted to have the document in hand in case I was advised to go.
Normally, a passport is issued by the regional passport Bureau to
citizens residing in its jurisdiction. But when I approached the Bureau
after more than two months to find out the status of my case, they told
me confidentially that my case was receiving attention from the Prime
Minister himself. I wrote an urgent letter to the Prime Minister on May
3 and followed it up with a telegram. My plane ticket for Formosa had
already arrived. It was only on May 21 that I received a one-line
memorandum from the Ministry of External Affairs stating that "Mr. Sita
Ram Goel is hereby informed that passport facilities applied for cannot
be granted". But hundreds of communists and fellow-travellers had been
granted passports during this very period and very speedily, for joining
delegations which were going out to various communist capitals almost
every week.

  
IV

Having thus become aware of the Prime Minister's attitude towards our
work, we enquired from friends in the Congress Party and the Government
as to why he was so hostile. They told us that, the Prime Minister did
not mind our anti-communist work as such but only disliked our
"propaganda" against Soviet Russia and People's China which countries he
was trying to befriend in pursuit of his foreign policy. They also
assured us that so far as he was concerned, we could safely assail the
Communist Party of India, but assailing the communist countries was a
different matter because that embarrassed India's stand in international
affairs.

We wanted these friends to find out a way in consultation with the Prime
Minister by which we could fight the Communist Party of India without
exploding the Soviet and the Chinese myths which were its only
stock-in-trade. We did not insist on our democratic right to criticize
India's foreign policy which we disliked. In fact, none of our
publications had commented on India's foreign policy so far. But we
received no guidance from our Congress friends, or the Prime Minister.
Nor was the assurance that we could assail the Communist Party of India
without arousing opposition from the Prime Minister, meant seriously.
For, when we exposed communist infiltration in Kashmir, we were accused
of doing propaganda for Pakistan! The fact that we had advocated full
and final integration of Kashmir with India, was conveniently forgotten.
Our response to vile attacks on us by fellow-travellers crowding the
numerous communist fronts was interpreted as a "slader campaign" against
"respectable citizens". It was as strange phenomenon indeed that all
these "respectable citizens" happened to be famous fellow-travellers
like Dr. V.K.R.V. Rao who in those days was advocating the Chinese path
very aggressively, and shouting from the platform of the India-China
Friendship Association that all those who criticised China were enemies
of the country.

Another explanation of the Prime Minister's hostility was that the SDFA
had become a platform for parties opposed to the Congress. But we could
not help it. We had started with a wide support in the Congress as the
letters on our files from leading Congressment could prove. These
Congressment had to fall silent and avoid all association with us under
pressure from the Prime Minister. We did not go in search of people from
the opposition parties. We found anti-communist patriots wherever they
existed and were prepared to participate in the movement. The fact that
most of them belonged to the opposition parties was not a portent of any
partisan spirit on our part but a sad reflection on the state of the
Congress organisation. Moreover, the Prime Minister refused to see that
some sections of the opposition parties were also opposed to our effort.
We were far from representing the official position of any opposition
party. Nor did we have a complete political platform which could satisfy
the opposition friends associated with us. In fact, some of these
friends had accused us of being soft towards the Congress Party and the
Government.

It was intolerance, pure and simple, towards any anti-communists effort
which had persuaded the Prime Minister to become hostile towards our
effort. His hostility went on mounting up as he saw our work having an
impact on public opinion. Finally, Prem Bhatia was chosen to express the
official opinion in his weekly column, The Political Scene, in *The
Statesman*. He wrote as follows on August 7, 1955:

"Over a period of some years now a group of indigenous MacCarthies have
been operating in India, sometimes subtly, through rumour and scandal,
but mostly by means of scurrilous writing. No means are repugnant to
their conscience. 'Letters to the Editor' are manufactured by the dozen,
other people's views distorted, misquoted and tom out of context and
vile personal attacks launched in the crusading spirit of the farway
idol whom they seek to emulate. My own information is that the
Government of India has a dossier of the activities of such authors,
journalists and writers of 'Letters to the Editor' and their connexions.

"Here is yellow journalism in one of its worst forms. Most of these
'journals' have small circulations, and whenever one of them makes a
personal MacCarthy attack, the victim is obligingly supplied with a free
copy of the publication with a neat printed slip on the cover inviting
attention to page so-and-so. Essentially, the object of the attack is
the Prime Minister's foreign policy, but placing discretion above
valour, they direct their fury at correspondents whose professional
decency may prevent them from engaging in an unclean controversy or who
may be frightened into silence and discouraged from doing their job with
honest objectivity.

"In the present stage of India's political development, the greatest
amount of freedom of thought and expression is an essential requirement
of our progress, but the main condition is an honesty of motives.
Admittedly, political reporting has to be objective to win respect or
influence public opinion, but objectivity does not necessarily mean
either a crusade against one Power bloc or the other.

"In any case, Indian MacCarthies may soon find themselves left out in
the cold as East-West tension decreases, much the same as the Communist
Party of India will find itself out of step with the fountainhead of its
inspiration if it does not quickly adjust itself to changed conditions.
Meanwhile public opinion must beware of our Little MacCarthies and the
Government take note of their *modus operandi*, which extends from
personal blackmail to pontifical lectures on objective journalism."

It was an ultimatum from the Prime Minister whose unofficial spokesman
Bhatia had become in those days. I wrote to Bhatia on August 22: "Anyone
can easily descend to your level and call you a Russian agent,
opportunist and all sorts of bad names in terms of that swearology to
which the communists have given currency. But I do not believe in that
technique and I do not use it. My only appeal to you is to practise a
little charity and do a little self-examination before you feel so
self-righteous and so cocksure. I am praying for your soul."

It was true that 'Letters to the Editor' written by our team were quite
frequent and were published in many newspapers and periodicals of
standing. That was our cheapest way of reaching large sections of our
people. But we had no way of preventing the communist side from joining
the debate in the same columns. Nor was the press reluctant to publish
their side of the story. It was not our fault that the other side,
although boasting all the time that it had many outstanding scholars in
its ranks, did not try to rebut our facts and arguments. Compared to the
far-flung communist phalanx, we were only a few. Their utter failure to
refute the solid facts and straight logic presented us, could mean only
one thing, namely that they had no case and had been selling plain lies
for years. Prem Bhatia could have grasped the situation, had he used his
own mind and some calm reflection. But time-servers have no minds of
their own. They bark whenever and on whomsoever their masters bid them
to do so. It is a great pity that people like Prem Bhatia continue to
pass as "veteran joumalists".[3](#3)

Events in the political firmament of India were now moving very fast.
Pandit Nehru's foreign policy had been approved by the whole country
which had been swept off its feet by a flood of foreign dignitaries
visiting New Delhi every now and then. Nobody seemed to notice that the
Communist Party of India was in the vanguard of those who supported this
foreign policy most vociferously. If the fact was pointed out by some
doubting Thomases like ourselves in the SDFA, pat came the stock reply
that the Communist Part had seen the error of its own ways and the
wisdom of Pandit Nehru's policies. Some enthusiasts went even so far as
to believe that Pandit Nehru's influence was fast spreading in the
international communist movement and bringing about basic changes in
communist theory and practice.

But we in the SDFA had closely followed those intra-party discussions of
the communist movement in India which formed the background of communist
support to "progressive" Congressmen led by Pandit Nehru as against
"reactionary" Congressmen led by Morarji Desai, B.C. Roy, etc. The
communists had absolutely no doubt that Pandit Nehru's foreign policy
was serving their best interests and paving their way to power. In fact,
this foreign policy was a communist plot planted in the heart of the
Congress Party and the country through the agency of a fellow-travelling
but popular Prime Minister.

It was in this atmosphere that I voiced the misgivings of our group in
two articles published in the *Organiser*, one in August and the other
in November, 1955. In the first article I traced *The Sources of
Communist Power in India*. I summed up: "Our foreign policy, especially
after the grant of American military aid to Pakistan, has become a
powerful motive which simultaneously props up the Soviet myth and the
American spectre. The Government of India now frowns upon efforts to
explode the Soviet myth in the name of goodwill towards a 'friendly
nation'. The outstanding newspapers in this country are increasingly
employing communists and fellow-travellers in responsible positions to
please the Prime Minister. Even a paper like *The Statesman* has been
forced to accept an inveterate fellow-traveller like Prem Bhatia (who
writes under various guises) as its reporter and columnist.[4](#4) Quite
a few editors and journalists have changed their tone, if not their
opinion, to suit the Prime Minister's taste. *In my opinion, the refusal
of the opposition parties at this juncture to attack Nehru's foreign
policy and the increasing influence of Communism in the country will
prove ultimately the most disastrous event in the history of India*.
Whether the refusal is an outcome of confusion, cowardice, or
calculation is immaterial."

In the second article, *Nehru's Fatal Friendship*, I traced the history
of countries like Spain, France, Czechoslvakia and China which had
permitted their communist parties to grow strong under the pretext of
friendship with the Soviet Union. There was a warning in the following
words:

"'I want with my vote to support Henderson in the same way as the rope
supports a hanged man', wrote Lenin in what is considered to be his
maturest work, namely *Left-wing Communism: An Infantile Disorder*,
first published in June 1920. And this has been the guiding principle
not only of the communist parties in their 'united front' tactics, but
also of the Soviet state in its 'friendly' relations with other states.

"Ever since the signing of the U.S.-Pakistan Military Aid Agreement, our
Government has, to all intents and purposes, abandoned its policy of
neutrality and entered on a phase of enthusiastic friendship for the
Soviet Union and its satellite, Red China. Whether there was a
prediscposition for this change, and the U.S.-Pak Agreement provided
merely a handy excuse, is a larger question which I do not want to
discuss here. But this much is clear that our Government has recently
started making earnest endeavours to popularise Soviet Russia and its
satellites as a first step to inhibiting all efforts, howsoever small,
at an objective estimate of these countries and their professed religion
of Communism. Scores of official delegations and missions have been
recently swarming towards the Soviet Union and Red China, and one can
discover a note of unity in their praise for the communist countries
such as can only be masterminded by a deliberate propaganda effort. That
effort is very much obvious in the news bulletins over the All India
Radio and the documentaries released by the Ministry of Information for
display in thousands of our cinema houses.

"Those who have made a close study of Communism, the Soviet Union, and
the history of the international communist movement can see in this new
policy nothing but disaster and ruination for independent, democratic
India. I know that these people are scoffed at as 'Indian MacCarthies,'
'reactionaries obsessed with the spectre of social revolution',
'American Agents' and 'enemies of India'. I also remember that the very
same scoffers has used the very same technique when they denounced
people opposed to the Muslim League and its slogan of Pakistan as
'communalists', 'agents of British imperialism', 'disruptors of national
unity', and so on. The Muslim League triumphed and Pakistan became a
fact because the nation allowed the scoffers to triumph. It is an irony
of history that the same people who created Pakistan are today leading
the country into another disaster, this time in the name of opposition
to Pakistan!"

But the warning went in vain. Politicians were drunk with power, social
workers with the success of their own pet projects, and businessmen and
industrialists with an unprecedented plunder in the name of fulfilling
the "socialist plan". The public at large had been completely drugged by
communist propaganda patronised by the Prime Minister. Slowly, the
voices of warning also fell silent.

  
V

This, then, is the background against which this series was written. I
had time between 1955 and 1960 to read the writings and speeches of
Pandit Nehru which I had neglected earlier because he had never
impressed me as a thinker of any consequence. It was in this way that I
discovered for the first time the basic convictions of Jawaharlal Nehru,
"the jewel of India". I could understand at last why Pandit Nehru had
behaved the way he did. Normally, a fellow-traveller loses his appetite
and sleep whenever the worth of his Soviet Fatherland is questioned. So
the fellow-travelling Pandit Nehru was behaving according to his
fundamental mental makeup, which is that of a self-righteous bully who
surrounds himself with bourgeois luxury and flirts with Communism.

But all honour to the Prime Minister for showing the courage of his
convictions. There have been only a few others who could combine their
private convictions with public courage. If this country ever goes down,
it will not be due to Prime Minister Nehru's fellow-travelling follies,
but because of the cowardice of the other Indian leaders. I am sure that
Pandit Nehru would not have dared go that far in pursuit of his policies
had he been challenged by a healthy democracy inside the Congress Party
and a free and frank debate in the country at large. In a way, aft of us
are as guilty, if not more, as Prime Minister Nehru. But the time for
undoing that guilt is not yet past. We can still restore to this country
and the Congress Party the freedom of debate and discussion over all
those matters in which die Prime Minister chooses to be a contesting
party. The communist conspiracy has never survived a democratic debate.

  
VI

I take this opportunity to ask my countrymen to recall the names of
those patriots who came together in the SDFA and did their utmost to
fight the floods let loose by Jawaharlal Nehru in collaboration with the
Communist Party of India-. My mind goes back to those days when Har
Bhajan Singh, Brij Mohan Toofan, Bhajan Dasgupta, Jaswant Singh, Som
Prakash Shaida, Samir Das, Jaigopal, Jagdish Mehta, Yudhisthir, Santosh
Sahrai, Prem Pal Bhatia, Amlendu Dasgupta and Pran Sabharwal of the PSP;
Naresh Ganguli, Dinkar Dange, Ajit Bhattacharya and Devi Singh Rana of
the Jana Sangh., Binode Bihari Chakravarty and Gopal Mittal of the
Congress Party; Vishwajit Datta of Bengal Volunteers; Gauri Shankar
Mohta, C. Parameshwaran and J.G. Tiwari in their individual capacity as
scholars; and many others from all parts of the country and belonging to
all shades of patriotic opinion, came together and served a common
cause.

I am also reminded of the goodwill which many outstanding leaders and
men of note in our public life showed for the SDFA all along. It was
very encouraging indeed to know that we had with us the blessings of
Acharya Kripalani, Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya, Dr. Shyama Prasad
Mukherjee, Jayaprkash Narayan and Ashoka Mehta. Dr. H.C. Mukherjee,
Governor of West Bengal, and Mr. A. J. John, Chief Minister of Kerala,
appreciated our work and gave us words of good cheer. Sajani Kant Das,
editor of *Sonibarer Chitti* from Calcutta, was an unfailing friend to
whom we could always go in moments of difficulty. Amal Home, Director of
Publicity, Government of West Bengal at one time, was always sympathetic
and helpful. Professor Balraj Madhok and Prabhakar Faizpurkar of the
Jana Sangh stood by us squarely. The reviews of our publications which
Philip Spratt frequently wrote in the weekly *Mysindia* from Bangalore
assured us that we were keeping along the right path in tracking down
the communist conspiracy of which only a few have had a better
first-hand knowledge than he. And there were many others who were
equally friendly but who may not like to be named now.

  
VII

In the end, I should like to express my heartfelt gratitude towards K.R.
Malkani and L.K. Advani of the *Organiser* who gave 'Ekaki' freedom to
say in their "fascist" paper what the "free press" in India was not
prepared to publish. They might not have always agreed with what 'Ekaki'
wrote on so many matters. But they are perhaps the only editors who are
convinced about a person's right to say what he wants to say provided he
can fortify his case with facts and figures. They took meticulous care
to publish these articles as 'Ekaki' wrote them, and used their
specialised skill to display them to the best effect.

  
SITA RAM GOEL

19/11, Shaktinagar,  
Delhi.  
October 16, 1963

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Not to be confused with Ram Swarup Sabharwal who has recently
dropped his surname who has added an "a" to his first name and made it
"Rama", and who smiles Meaningfully when asked if he is the same Ram
Swarup who organised and led the biggest battle against Communism. Rama
Swarup is now a representative of the Asian People's Anti-Communist
League in India. \[He was in front-page news in 1986 when he was taken
into police custody for investigation as a spy in the service of
foreigners.\]  

[2](#2a) Both papers named Brij Mohan Toofan of the PSP and the present
author as the "chief conspirators.

[3](#3a) Para added in 1993.

[4](#4a) I was mistaken about Prem Bhatia. It turned out that he was not
a fellow-traveller but only a time-server. Fellow-travellers have some
convictions. Time-servers have none; they have the powers that be.
(Footnote added in 1993.)

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
