+++
title = "04  TWO A PILGRIM TO THE SOVIET PARADISE"

+++
TWO  
A PILGRIM TO THE SOVIET PARADISE

The first job is to find out how Pandit Nehru has looked at the Soviet
Union and the creed of Communism all through these years. For purposes
of this investigation we have chosen five basic books written by him,
namely *Soviet Russia* (1929), *Glimpses of World History* (1934), *An
Autobiography* (1936), *Unity of India* (1941), and *Discovery of India*
(1946). All these books, except the first and the fourth, have been
reprinted many times and still constitute the basic reading for anyone
who wants to understand Pandit Nehru. We shall take these books one by
one.

The book *Soviet Russia: Some Random Sketches And Impressions* was
compiled from a series of articles that Pandit Nehru wrote in various
Indian newspapers after his return from a visit to Moscow in November
1927.[1](#1) A reprint of this book was brought out in 1949 and is even
now recommended as well as readily made available by communist
bookshops. I have myself seen translations of this book in several
Indian languages brought out by communist publishing houses as late as
1954. So far as I know, Pandit Nehru has never withdrawn, or disclaimed,
or dated this book. We can, therefore, conclude that he still regards as
valid the views he expressed in it.

He had spent altogether three or four days in Soviet Russia and that too
in Moscow. But in his book he expresses very definite opinions about
every important aspect of what he eulogises as "the Soviet Experiment".
No one who is familiar with the torrent of books written by communists
and fellow-travellers after brief visits to this or that communist
country, can fail to see that while writing this book Pandit Nehru had
depended entirely upon official Soviet handouts that were heaped upon
him while he was in Moscow. He added to this official version the
version of various "progressive" writers from outside the Soviet Union.

The book opens with a chapter "Fascination of Russia". Russia, he says,
is "a country which has many points of contact with ours and which has
launched one of the mightiest experiments in history. All the world is
watching her, some with fear and hatred, and others with passionate hope
and longing to follow in her path." Then identifying himself with the
second group, he theorises. "Much depends on the prejudices and
preconceived notions which he brings to his task. But whichever view may
be right, no one can deny the fascination of this strange Eurasian
country of the hammer and sickle, where workers and peasants sit on the
thrones of the mighty and upset the best-laid schemes of mice and
men."[2](#2)

Again: "For us in India the fascination is even greater, and even .our
self-interest compels us to understand the vast forces which have upset
the old order of things and brought a new world into existence, where
values have changed utterly and old standards have given place to new.
We are a conservative people, not ever-fond of change, always trying to
forget our present misery and degradation in vague fancies of our
glorious past and immortal civilisation. But the past is dead and gone
and our immortal civilisation does not help us greatly in solving the
problems of today."[3](#3)

And again: "Russia thus interests us because it may help us to find some
solution for the great problems which face the world today. It interests
us specially because conditions there have not been, and are not even
now, very dissimilar to conditions in India. Both are vast agricultural
countries with only the beginnings of industrialisation, and both have
to face poverty and illiteracy. If Russia finds a satisfactory solution
for these, our work in India is made easier."[4](#4)

Then he bursts out against non-communist news agencies which, in his
opinion, are preventing India from knowing the truth about the Soviet
Union. He says: "It is right therefore that India should be eager to
learn more about Russia. So far her information has been largely derived
from subsidised news agencies inimical to Russia, and the most fantastic
stories about her have been circulated."[5](#5) Comrade Khrushchev,
however, informed us in 1956 that it was not these news agencies but
communist propagandists like Pandit Nehru who had been telling the most
fantastic stories about Stalin's Soviet Russia.

Before entering the Soviet Union, Pandit Nehru had to pass through
Poland which had committed the "crime" of being anti-communist because
she had been invaded by the Red Army in 1920 and had freed herself only
after a grim struggle. He writes: "We went from Berlin and crossed the
whole of Poland. It was an uneventful and dreary journey. Poland looked
a desolate and dismal country. Except for Warsaw, the stations were
small wayside buildings with very few houses in the neighbour-hood. It
may be, however, that the cheerless aspect of the country was due to the
season; it was the beginning of winter. But even winter could not have
made much difference to an industrial country and from what we could see
from the train there were few evidences of industrialism."[6](#6)

Soviet Russia too had hardly any industries worth the name at that time.
But that did not diminish his enthusiasm. He himself tells us the
reason: "We had already taken our dinner but the station staff produced
large quantities of food and, after the Indian fashion, would have no
refusal. We had to comply with their wishes .... Our berths had been
reserved by our hosts and we had a very comfortable journey. There is
only one class in Russia but they have some special sleeping cars and we
had been provided with these. We travelled the whole night and the
greater part of the next day, arriving at Moscow the next afternoon. All
the stations *en route* were decorated with flags and pictures in honour
of the anniversary. The men and women and children we saw at the
stations were well-clad and most of them had great coats reaching to
their ankles and big Russian boots up to the knees."[7](#7) In exchange
for this wining, dining and welcome, he could very well forgive Soviet
Russia for not having any industries.

But he arrived late. The big *tamasha* in the Red Square of Moscow was
already over. So he weeps: "Our first feeling was of great regret that
we had not come a day or two earlier. The real anniversary celebration
had taken place the day before and we had missed it.... Effigies there
were of Chamberlain and Briand and Baldwin, some of them very clever.
One of these showed Chamberlain wedged in a sickle with the hammer
falling on his head.... Such were the accounts that we heard, and the
more we heard them the more we regretted having missed this magnificent
spectacle."[8](#8)

From all accounts the poverty in Russia at that time was appalling. But
he has always been able to find a justification for every shortcoming in
the Soviet Union. He rationalises: "Generally the goods displayed in the
shops were simple and modest and had no pretensions to fashion or
smartness. There were none of the dainties of the Rue de Rivoli or of
Bond Street. People in the streets and indeed everywhere were clad
regardless of fashion, many without collars or ties. Many of them of
course could not afford to buy any thing expensive. But apart from the
question of expense it was considered a bourgeois failing to waste time
and money on dothes."[9](#9) It did not occur to him that even if the
people in Moscow had become prepared to "waste time and money" on
clothes, there were no clothes which they could buy. If he had tried to
sell his old garments in Moscow at that time, he could have easily
obtained a fabulous price. Many others did, and the Muscovites not only
paid but were also extremely thankful. The Bolsheviks had completely
disrupted Russia's economy and there was an all-round shortage of
consumer goods.

He visited Lenin's mummy in Moscow. This new *avatara* of Chingiz Khan,
who was responsible for seven million deaths in Russia, bewitched him
completely. He writes: "He lies asleep as it were and it is difficult to
believe that he is dead. In life they say he was not beautiful to look
at. He had too much of common clay in him and about him was the 'smell
of the Russian soil'. But in death there is a strange beauty and his
brow is peaceful and unclouded. On his lips there hovers a smile and
there is a suggestion of pugnacity, of work done and success achieved.
He has a uniform on and one of his hands is lightly clenched. Even in
death he is the dictator. In India, he would certainly have been
canonised, but saints are not held in repute in Soviet circles, and the
people of Russia have done him the higher honour of loving him as one of
themselves."[10](#10) Knowing nothing about India at that time, or ever
since for that matter, he alone could believe that the Indian people
would have hailed as a saint a mass-murderer like Lenin.

Not only that. Thinking of Lenin and his deeds, he becomes bitter about
his own Congress Party in India. He complains: "It is difficult for most
of us to think of our ideals and our theories in terms of reality. We
have talked and written of Swaraj for years, but when Swaraj comes it
will probably take us by surprise. We have passed the independence
resolution at the Congress, and yet how many of us realise its full
implications? How many belie it by their words and actions? For them it
is something to be considered as a distant goal, not as a thing of today
or tomorrow. They talk of Swaraj and independence in their councils but
their minds are full of reservations and their acts are feeble and
halting."[11](#11) He was looking around in India for a similar
spectacle as had drowned Russia in rivers of innocent blood during
1917-21.

This self-appointed leader of the peasantry in U.P. was angry with the
Russian peasants because, at that time, they were resisting the
Bolshevik bandits from depriving them of their land and whatever meagre
amounts of grain they had managed to save and hide. Repeating the most
mendacious communist lies against "counterrevolutionary *Kulaks*", he
writes: "The city proletariats of Leningrad and Moscow were the
spear-heads of the revolution and the peasantry was for some time poorly
represented in the soviets. Immediate advantage, however, was taken by
the peasantry of the Soviet decree to nationalise land, and even without
the intervention of the central authority they ejected the landlords and
divided the land amongst themselves. Having done so the more prosperous
of them were content and had no desire for further change or more
revolution. Many of them knew little about communism and cared less, and
gradually they developed hostility to the Soviet power which did not
view with favour the hoarding of corn and the profiteering in which the
richer peasantry was indulging."[12](#12)

It was, however, the criminal law and prison administration of Soviet
Russia which simply bewitched him. He enthuses: "Nothing is perhaps more
confusing to the student of Russia than the conflicting reports that
come of the treatment of prisoners and of the criminal law. We are told
of the Red Terror and ghastly and horrible details are provided for our
consumption; we are also told that the Russian prison is an ideal
residence where anyone can live in comfort and ease and with a minimum
of restraint. *Our own visit to the chief prison in Moscow created a
most favourable impression on our minds*."[13](#13)

Again: "As we were very much pressed for time we were unable to see as
much of the jail as we wanted to. We had an impression that we had been
shown the brighter side of jail life. Nonetheless, two facts stood out.
One was that we had actually seen desirable and radical improvements
over the old system prevailing even now in most countries and the second
and even more important fact was the mentality of the prison officials,
and presumably the higher officials of the government also, in regard to
jails. Actual conditions may or may not be good but the general
principles laid down for jails are certainly far in advance of anything
we had known elsewhere in practice. Anyone with a knowledge of prisons
in India and of the barbarous way in which handcuffs, fetters and other
punishments are used will appreciate the difference. The governor of the
prison in Moscow who took us round was all the time laying stress on the
human side of jail life, and how it was their endeavour to keep this in
the front and not to make the prisoner feel in any way dehumanised or
outcasted. I wish we in India would remember this wholesome principle
and practise it in our daily lives even outside jail.... *It can be said
without a shadow of doubt that to be in a Russian prison is far more
preferable than to be a worker in an Indian factory, whose lot is 10 to
11 hours work a day and then to live in a crowded and dark and airless
tenement, hardly fit for an animal*. The mere fact that there are some
prisons like the ones we saw is in itself something for the Soviet
Government to be proud of."[14](#14)

One wishes that the British Government of India had adopted the Soviet
system of criminal law and prison administration, at least so far as
Pandit Nehru was concerned. In that event, he would not have had the
opportunity to write the voluminous amounts of abominable nonsense he
did in later years while serving short sentences in the cool comfort of
Dehra Dun District Jail. No one has yet heard of a book written by a
prisoner in a Soviet jail. Even most of the prisoners have never been
heard of once they went behind the bars in the Soviet Union. In any
case, we have first hand accounts of conditions in Soviet jails from the
few who were fortunate enough to come out.. They tell a different and
dismal story.

He is not sure that his own account of the Soviet Union is sufficiently
convincing. He knows that the truth about the Bolshevik butchers has
leaked out into the wide world. So he recommends to his readers larger
doses of the dope which has paralysed his own mind. He writes: "I
remember attending a banquet given by the scientists and professors in
Moscow. There were people from many countries present and speeches in a
variety of languages were made. I remember specially a speech given by a
young student who had come from far off Uruguay in South America .... He
spoke in the beautiful sonorous periods of the Spanish language and he
told us that he was going back to his distant country with the red star
of Soviet Russia engraved in his heart and carrying the message of
social freedom to his young comrades in Uruguay. Such was the reaction
of Soviet Russia on his young and generous heart. And yet there are many
who tell us that Russia is a land of anarchy and misery and the
Bolsheviks are assassins and murderers who have cast themselves outside
the pale of human society."[15](#15)

He wants his readers not to bother about communist theory while
contemplating communist creations in Soviet Russia. According to him:
"But to understand the great drama of the Russian Revolution and the
inner forces that shaped and brought the great change about, a study of
cold theory is of little use. The October Revolution was undoubtedly one
of the great events of world history, the greatest since the first
French Revolution, and its story is more absorbing, from the human and
the dramatic point of view, than any We or phantasy."[16](#16) A
critique of Soviet Russia in terms of what Marx or even Lenin had
promised after the proletarian revolution is likely to be too
disturbing. So he says: to hell with the theory of Communism! But, later
on, when he is faced with the ugliness of Soviet Russia in too
overwhelming a manner, he will ask his readers to forget the reality on
the ground, and contemplate the promise which communist theory holds for
mankind!

He recommends that his readers should read *Ten days That Shook The
World* which the American communist, John Reed, had written in 1920 and
which was, incidentally, for some time an officially prescribed
text-book for children in Soviet schools. Reviewing this propaganda
book, he says: "And as one reads, with horror and pain at times, the
wonder grows that such a miracle could have happened and succeeded. And
above all there is admiration for the group of men who did not flinch at
the mightiest of obstacles, and, in the midst of war and rebellion, with
a cruel death and disaster continually facing them, set down to evolve a
socialist order out of the chaos that surrounded them. They had time
even on the fourth day of the revolution, with firing going on in the
streets, to establish the eight hour day for the workers and formulate
their policy for a system of popular education. Within a week they had
tackled the problem of minorities, which like the poor is always with us
in India."[17](#17)

Prof. Anton Karlgren's book, *Boshevist Russia*, is, in his opinion,
"patently and-Bolshevik propaganda"[18](#18). But he recommended a book
which he himself has not read! "A recent book," he writes, "well
recommended but which I have not read, is Maurice Dobb's *Russian
Economic Development Since the Revolution* (Routledge). Dobb is an
eminent economist with considerable sympathy for the basic ideas of the
revolution, but withal critical and scientific."[19](#19) He forgets to
tell his readers that Maurice Dobb is a communist.

Or, better still people could read *Soviet Russia Today*. "It is frankly
a report of the friends of Russia, but is nonetheless valuable and full
of information. It is signed by 92 representatives of workers'
organisations in England and Scotland and no such document however
partisan it may be can be lightly treated. It is only not very critical
and is full of enthusiasm for what they saw ... That Russia should
produce such a reaction on representative hard-headed workers is itself
a significant fact. It gives us a glimpse of how the Russian Revolution
is creeping into the hearts of workers in different countries and Moscow
is becoming the Mecca of the proletariat. Soviet Russia by translating
their dreams into reality has given them a new hope and a new
courage."[20](#20) He does not know or tell us that these "hard-headed
workers" were picked up and quite often paid by the world-wide communist
network for saying precisely the things they said.

Thus whatever the facts, his conclusions are the same. He is out of sell
Soviet Russia to his own countrymen.  

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Jawaharlal Nehru, *Soviet Russia: Some Random Sketches and
Impressions*, reprinted by Chetana, Bombay, 1949, p.1.  

[2](#2a) Ibid., p.2

[3](#3a) Ibid.

[4](#4a) Ibid., p. 3.

[5](#5a) Ibid., pp. 3-4.

[6](#6a) Ibid., pp. 6-7.

[7](#7a) Ibid., pp. 7-8.  

[8](#8a) Ibid., pp. 9-10.  

[9](#9a) Ibid., pp. 14-15.  

[10](#10a) Ibid., pp. 40-41. Incidentally, Lenin, like most of our
communists in India, came from the landlord class, and never worked in a
field or factory. No one else has ever accused him of having the "smell
of the Russian soil". (Footnote added in 1993.)

[11](#11a) Ibid., p. 47. Belittling others was always this small man's
cheap way of becoming big in is own eyes. (Comment added in 1993.)  

[12](#12a) Ibid., pp. 57-58.

[13](#13a) Ibid, P. 63. Italics added. "Red Terror" was not a term
invented by anti-communists. It was Trotsky who used this term in order
to glorify his slaughter of sailors in St. Petersburg. (Footnote added
in 1993)

[14](#14a) Ibid., pp. 74-76. Italics added.

[15](#15a) Ibid, p. 33.

[16](#16a) Ibid, p. 36.

[17](#17a) Ibid., pp. 37-38.  

[18](#18a) Ibid., p. 50.  

[19](#19a) Ibid., p. 51.  

[20](#20a) Ibid., pp. 51-52.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
