+++
title = "11  NINE A FELLOW-TRAVELLER OF SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY-1"

+++
NINE  
A FELLOW-TRAVELLER OF SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY-1

The Gita has laid down a profound principle in the following words: "The
person is characterised by his credo. Whatever is a person's credo, that
he is."

And a person's credo can be identified not so much in the words he
speaks or writes as in the actions that flow freely out of him. The
speaker or the writer who fails to act in terms of the faith he
propounds in his speeches and writings is no more than a sophist who may
be successful with some people or for some time but who is sure to be
found out sooner or later. The tragedy of a sophist is that his own
words fail to sink into the inner recesses of his being and inspire his
actions in life.

Most of us ordinary human beings are sophists to a certain extent. We
speak and write many words which we never mean. But some of our own
words do find a way within, and we act in terms of the credo contained
in those words. So if our professions are compared with our practices, a
residue can always be discovered where the two correspond with one
another. If the rest of our professions are peeled off, the core of our
personality stands revealed.

Now, if we were to identify Shri Jawaharlal Nehru's person in terms of
the professions put forward in his books and speeches, we must, like his
American admirers, come to the conclusion that he is without a doubt a
very complex person. For, in his written and spoken words, he has not
been an unadulterated admirer of the Soviet Union and the creed of
Communism. In fact, he as a writer and speaker seems to be an admirer of
many things which completely contradict the communist credo.

He has composed some essays on the beauties of Buddhism as he
understands it. Whenever he has turned his face to the "materialistic"
West, he has talked fondly of India's "ancient heritage" and
"moral-spiritual values". As and when there has been tension on the
international stage, he has dramatised himself as a devoted disciple of
Mahatma Gandhi. He has also spoken and written a lot about the
profundities of parliamentary democracy. On an occasion, particularly in
moments of frustration in his whole-time pursuit of power, he has
contemplated the cosmos and mumbled about the mysteriousness of it all.

But he has never been so complex in his actions. In fact, he in action
has been more straight and simple than most of us moderns are. There has
never been a trace of tortuousness in his actions, which have always
travelled along a single track. He might have often failed to have his
own way because this nation has yet to fully affirm his own cherished
faith. But he has never failed to charter the nation's course in very
clear-cut terms.

Had he been a Soviet-addict only in his writings and speeches, he would
have presented no serious problem. We have had so many socialists who in
their speeches or writings have been, till recently, like blue-blooded
communists in their admiration for the Soviet Union. But whenever the
interests of the Soviet Union have clashed with the interests of their
own nation, our socialists have acted like true nationalists. Whenever
the Soviet Union has outraged their sense of human values, our
socialists have denounced the Soviet Union.

But Pandit Nehru has never been like our socialists whom he has often
pooh-poohed as a "debating club". He has always tried to translate his
admiration for the Soviet Union into clear and concrete action. That is
the point, and the only point, where his professions have corresponded
with his practice. The whole history of his career in national and
international politics is characterised by this close correspondence. We
shall review that history in the following articles.

Pandit Nehru had entered the Comintern network for the first time in
1924-25 when he was clandestinely contacted by Eileen Roy, the first
wife of M.N. Roy, who had set up in Paris the Comite *Pro-Hindou* in
collaboration with the famous French communist, Henri Barbusse. This
organisation was a communist front financed by the Comintern for
planting the communist conspiracy in India. He left for Europe in March
1925, ostensibly for the medical treatment of his wife but really in
order to establish a liaison with the world communist movement. He
himself admits: "Further treatment in Switzerland was recommended for my
wife. *I welcomed the idea for I wanted an excuse to go out of India
myself*. My mind was befogged, and no clear path was visible; and I
thought that, perhaps, if I was far from India I could see things in a
better perspective and lighten up the dark corners of my mind."[1](#1)

Those were the days when the socialist parties affiliated to the
Comintern were being Bolshevised in keeping with the decisions of the
5th Congress of the Comintern held in June 1924. Soviet Russia's attempt
to turn these socialist parties into mere mouthpieces of Soviet foreign
policy had split the socialist movement. The Social Democrats in most
European countries were getting separated from the communist cliques,
and the Second International was getting revived as a challenge to the
Third or the Communist International. So the Comintern was moving
towards denouncing all Social Democrats as Social Fascists who were, in
its own terminology, "imperialism's second line of defence".

The Comintern called a Congress of Oppressed Nationalities in February
1927 to crystallise its new line in the colonies of the various Western
Powers. The Congress met in Brussels and Pandit Nehru attended it on
behalf of the Indian National Congress. He writes: "Towards the end of
1926 I happened to be in Berlin, and I learnt there of a forthcoming
Congress of Oppressed Nationalities, which was to be held at Brussels.
The idea appealed to me, and I wrote home, suggesting that the Indian
National Congress might take official part in the Brussels Congress. My
suggestion was approved; and I was appointed the Indian Congress
representative for this purpose."[2](#2)

And he swallowed the Comintern line against the Social Democrats - hook,
line and sinker. He himself confesses: "The Brussels Congress, as well
as the subsequent Committee meetings of the League, which were held in
various places from time to time, helped me to understand some of the
problems of colonial and dependent countries. They gave me also an
insight into the inner conflicts of the Western Labour world. I knew
something about them already; I had read about them, but there was no
reality behind my knowledge, as there had been no personal contacts. I
had some such contacts now, and sometimes had to face problems which
reflected these inner conflicts. *As between the Labour worlds of the
Second International and the Third International, my sympathies were
with the latter*. The whole record of the Second International from the
War onwards filled me with distaste, and we in India had had sufficient
personal experience of the methods of one of its strongest supports-the
British Labour Party. *So I burned inevitably with goodwill towards
Communism, for whatever its faults, it was at least not hypocritical and
not imperialistic*. It was not a doctrinal adherence, as I did not know
much about the fine points of Communism, my acquaintance being limited
at the time to its broad features. These attracted me as also the
tremendous changes taking place in Russia."[3](#3)

This unflinching faith in the Comintern qualified him for an important
position in the League against Imperialism, the permanent organisation
created by the Congress of Oppressed Nationalities. He was elected to
the Executive Committee of the League and attended several of its
meetings while he was staying in Europe. He had also qualified as a
worthy visitor to the Soviet Union, where he was taken in November 1927.

He returned to India in December 1927 to attend the Madras session of
the Indian National Congress which was being held that month. Now he was
a man with a firm faith. He says: "I was returning from Europe in good
physical and mental condition. *I felt I had a clear perception of world
affairs, more grip on the present day world, ever changing as it was*. I
had read largely, not only on current affairs and politics, but on many
other subjects that interested me, cultural and scientific. I found the
vast political, economic, and cultural changes going on in Europe and
America a fascinating study. Soviet Russia, despite certain unpleasant
aspects, attracted me greatly, and seemed to hold forth a message of
hope to the world."[4](#4)

The first job he did for the Comintern on his return to India was to
draft a number of resolutions in keeping with the Comintern line and
present them to the Madras Congress. All of them were passed. He
records: "I presented a bunch of resolutions to the Working
Committee-resolutions on Independence, War Danger, association with the
League against Imperialism, etc.-and nearly all of these were accepted
and made into official Working Committee resolutions."[5](#5)

By now the Comintern had finalised its thesis on the "capitalistic
encirclement of the Soviet Union" according to which the leading Western
Powers, particularly Britain and France, were getting ready for waging
an "imperialist war" against the Soviet Union. That thesis was to be
proclaimed by the VI Congress of the Comintern held in 1928. Meanwhile,
the Comintern network everywhere had been instructed to raise a hue and
cry against the "impending imperialist war". According to the
"information" brought to India by Pandit Nehru, the British Government
was getting ready to invade the Soviet Union from the North-West
Frontier Province of India and the Persian Gulf.

He incorporated this "information" and its implications for India in the
War Danger resolution which he presented to the Madras meeting. The
resolution read:

"This Congress has noted with grave concern the extraordinary and
extensive war preparations which the British Government is carrying on
in India and in the eastern seas, specially in the North-West Frontier
of India. These preparations for war are not only calculated to
strengthen the hold of British Imperialism on India in order to strangle
all attempts at freedom, but must result in hastening a disastrous war
in which an attempt will be made to make India again a tool in the hands
of foreign imperialists.

"The Congress declares that the people of India have no quarrel with
their neighbours and desire to live at peace with them, and asserts
their right to determine whether or not they will take part in any war.

"The Congress demands that these war preparations be put an end to, and
further declares that in the event of the British Government embarking
on any warlike adventure and endeavouring to involve India in it for the
furtherance of their imperialist aims, it will be the duty of the people
of India to refuse to take any part in such a war or to co-operate with
them in any way whatsoever."[6](#6)

Those who have studied the history of inter-war years know that Britain
and France were not plotting for any war against the Soviet Union. But
they were certainly objecting to Soviet Russia's interference in their
internal affairs through communist fifth-columns created by the
Comintern in these countries and their colonies. It is recorded history
that Soviet Russia was trying to arm the Pathan tribals on India's
North-West Frontier, and let them loose on the Punjab. The preparations
referred to in the resolution were aimed at tackling the tribal
uprising. Pandit Nehru had, however, already become used to looking at
the world through Comintern glasses. He had been fully indoctrinated by
now so far as Soviet Union's foreign policy was concerned.

He could accept the new Comintern thesis because he had already accepted
the other communist lie that the "imperialists" had tried to "strangle"
the Soviet Union at its very birth in 1917-18. It never occurred to him
that if any Great Power in Europe or America or Japan had seriously
desired to destroy, the "proletarian revolution" in 1917-18, it had only
to use a single battalion of trained soldiers. Even in 1927, when he was
visiting the Soviet Union, the communist regime would have collapsed
like nine-pins if any first class Western Power or Japan had made a move
against it. But the non-communist nations at that time were too busy in
quarrelling with each other to be able to conspire together against the
Soviet Union. In fact, around 1928, the capitalists in Europe and
America were getting ready to do business with the Red regime which in
their estimation had stabilised itself in Russia.

The ideological background of this War Danger resolution was fully
floodlit by a series of articles which Pandit Nehru wrote in various
Indian newspapers immediately after the Madras Congress. All these
articles were collected in his first book, *Soviet Russia*, published in
October 1928. Herein he revealed very clearly how deeply he had been
infected by the Comintern line on the world situation.

Commenting on relations between India and Soviet Russia, he wrote: "We
have grown up in the tradition, carefully nurtured by England, of
hostility to Russia. For long years past the bogey of a Russian invasion
has been held up to us and has been made the excuse of vast expenditure
on our armaments. In the days of the Tsar we were told that the
imperialism of Russia was for ever driving south, coveting an outlet to
the sea, or may be India itself. The Tsar has gone but the rivalry
between England and Russia continues and we are now told that India is
threatened by the Soviet Government."[7](#7) He should have known that
the rivalry between British imperialism and Tsarist imperialism in
Central Asia, Persia, and Afghanistan was no fiction, and the British in
India had to be alert.

In any case, in his opinion now Soviet Russia could never want war, for:
"Russia has only recently passed through a period of international war
and civil war, of famine and blockade, and above everything she desires
peace to consolidate her economic position and build up on a sure
foundation tier new order of society. She has already attained a large
measure of success and is working at high pressure and with 'full steam'
to develop peacefully her vast territories. War, even successful war,
must put a stop to this process of consolidation and development, and is
bound to delay indefinitely the full establishment of her new social
order."[8](#8) He would advance similar arguments for Red China even
though the People's Army had invaded Korea and Tibet, and instigated
insurrections in Indo-China. Till his own country was invaded in 1962,
the real warmongers for him were the Western democracies and their
allies in Asia.

The real warmonger for him in 1928 was Britain. Taking stock of
Britain's post-war policy in Europe, he assured his readers: "The whole
basis of this policy has been to encircle Russia by pacts and alliances,
ultimately to crush her. England has worked unceasingly for this end and
has made the League of Nations an instrument of her policy. Locarno was
the result of this policy, and the occasional flirtations of England
with Germany have also the isolation of Russia for their object... Thus
it is absolutely clear from the official utterances and policy of
British politicians that they eagerly desire a conflict with Russia and
prepare for it and only await a suitable opportunity to wage open
war."[9](#9)

India had nothing to fear from Bolshevik Russia. According to Pandit
Nehru: "It is inconceivable that Russia, in her present condition at
least, and for a long time to come, will threaten India. She can desire
no additional territory, and even if she did the risks are too great for
her. She is still mainly an agricultural country trying to develop her
industries. For this she requires capital and expert knowledge. She gets
neither from India. She produces raw materials in abundance and not
manufactured articles for export and dumping in foreign countries. So
does India. The two countries are today too similar to be exploited by
each other, and there can be no economic motive for Russia to covet
India."[10](#10)

On the same premises, Red China had no reason to invade India. The
communists in India are in fact using Pandit Nehru's logic to refute
"Indian propaganda" that India has been the sinned-against. There is,
however, no truth in this logic except that it is a paraphrase of
Lenin's theory of imperialism which he had concocted in order to damn
the capitalist countries.

The real barrier between India and Bolshevik Russia, according to Pandit
Nehru, was not the latter's creed of Communism but Britain's imperialist
interests. In his own words: "Ordinarily Russia and India should live as
the best of neighbours with the fewest points of friction. The continual
friction that we see today is between England and Russia, not between
India and Russia. Is there any reason why we in India should inherit the
agelong rivalry of England against Russia? That is based on the greed
and covetousness of British imperialism, and our interests surely lie in
ending this imperialism and not in supporting and strengthening
it."[11](#11)

Indians should, therefore, "make it clear that we shall not permit
ourselves to be pawns in England's imperial game, to be moved hither and
thither for her benefit. We must continually proclaim, in the words of
the Madras Congress resolution, 'that in the event of the British
Government embarking on any warlike adventure and endeavouring to
involve India in it for the furtherance of their imperialist aims, it
will be the duty of the people of India to refuse to take any part in
such a war, or to co-operate with them in any way whatsoever'. **And if
this declaration is made repeatedly and emphatically, it may be that
England may hesitate to embark on this adventure; and India and the
world may be spared the horrors of another great war."[12](#12)

Thus the real inspiration behind his resolution on War Danger presented
at the Madras Congress was his eagerness to protect Soviet Russia from a
war which he believed Britain was threatening. The resolution had
nothing to do with India's own struggle for independence. Even its
language was largely borrowed from resolutions being passed everywhere
in those days by all sorts of communist fronts.

The same resolution was presented to and passed by the Calcutta Congress
which met towards the end of 1928. It said: "This Congress reiterates
the War Danger resolution of the Madras session of the Congress, and
wishes to declare that the present Government of India in no way
represents the people of India, and their policy has been traditionally
guided by considerations of holding India under subjection and not of
protecting her frontiers. **The people of India have no quarrel with the
neighbouring states or the other nations of the world and they will not
permit themselves to be exploited by England to further her imperialist
aims."[13](#13)

This Congress passed another resolution for participation in the League
against Imperialism. **The resolution said: "This Congress welcomes the
Second World Congress of the League against Imperialism to be held next
year and authorises the Working Committee to appoint a representative on
behalf of the Congress."[14](#14)

And with a view to colonise the Indian National Congress with Comintern
agents, Pandit Nehru persuaded its Calcutta session to pass another
resolution which stressed: "This Congress, being of opinion that the
struggle of the Indian people for freedom is a part of the general world
struggle against imperialism and its manifestations, considers it
desirable that India should develop contacts with other countries and
peoples who also suffer under imperialism and desire to combat it. **The
Congress therefore calls upon the All India Congress Committee to
develop such contacts and to open a Foreign Department in this
behalf."[15](#15)

The Foreign Department could not be set up at that time because very
soon the country was plunged in the Simon Commission agitation and the
Salt Satyagraha. Pandit Nehru's opportunity came only in 1936 when, as
President of the Congress, he created a Foreign Department and staffed
it with card-carrying communists, notably Z.A. Ahmed and K.M. Ashraf.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) *An Autobiography*, p. 147. Italics added.  

[2](#2a) Ibid., p. 161.

[3](#3a) Ibid., p. 163. Italics added.

[4](#4a) Ibid., p. 166. Italics added. It was not long before he started
attacking his colleagues in the Congress as reactionaries and the rest.
He was even reported to have said that the Mahatma had gone senile. The
exchange of letters between him and the Mahatma provides an interesting
episode - how he aggressed, how he took fright, and how he retreated
fast. (Footnote added in 1993.)

[5](#5a) Ibid., p. 167.

[6](#6a) All India Congress Committee, *The Background of India's
Foreign Policy*, New Delhi, April 1952, pp. 46-47.

[7](#7a) *Soviet Russia*, p. 126.  

[8](#8a) Ibid., p. 127.  

[9](#9a) Ibid., pp. 129-30.  

[10](#10a) Ibid., p. 131.

[11](#11a) Ibid.  

[12](#12a) Ibid., pp. 131-32.

[13](#13a) The Background of India's Foreign Policy, p. 48.

[14](#14a) Ibid.

[15](#15a) Ibid., p. 47.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
