+++
title = "05 4. Hindutva"

+++
**4. Hindutva**

**4.1. Savarkar’s definition**

The ideological contours of the Hindu Mahasabha and the RSS-BJP are
usually summed up in the term *Hindutva*, literally “Hindu-ness”,
meaning Hindu identity as a unifying identity transcending castewise,
regional and sectarian differences within Hindu society.  The term was
coined by the Freedom Fighter and later HMS president V. D. Savarkar as
the title of his book *Hindutva*, written in prison and clandestinely
published in 1924.  Inspired by the doctrines of the Italian liberal
nationalist Giuseppe Mazzini, he tried to give a nationalist content to
the concept of Hinduness. Incidentally, non-Hindutva nationalists
including Jawaharlal Nehru equally recognized the influence which
Mazzini had had on their ideological orientation during their student
days.^([1](#1))

While there may be good reasons to reject the very attempt of capturing
Hinduism in an essentialist definition, and while most attempts to
capture it in a doctrinal definition are failures omitting large numbers
of de facto Hindus, Savarkar devised his definition as very inclusive
but still meaningful: “A Hindu means a person who regards this land of
Bharatavarsha, from the Indus to the Seas, as his Fatherland as well as
his Holyland, that is the cradle-land of his religion.”^([2](#2))

This means that a non-Indian cannot be a Hindu, even if he considers
India as his “Holyland”; while a born Indian cannot be a Hindu if he
considers a non-Indian place (Mecca, Jerusalem, Rome) as his
“Holyland”.  Since Jainism, Buddhism, Veerashaivism, Sikhism, and all
Indian tribal cults have their historical origins and sacred sites on
Indian soil, all Indian Jains, Buddhists, Veerashaivas, Sikhs and
so-called “animists” qualify as Hindus.

Following Savarkar, the RSS-BJP and other Hindu parties including
Savarkar’s own Hindu Mahasabha use the term “Hindu” in the broad sense:
as including Buddhism, Jainism, Sikhism, Veerashaivism, Arya Samaj,
Ramakrishna Mission, Indian tribal “animists”, and other sects and
movements which elsewhere are sometimes described as separate religions
in their own right.  This merely follows the historical usage of the
ancient Persians and of the medieval Muslim invaders, and the “legal
Hindu” category of modern Indian legislation.  The inclusive usage by
Savarkar and the RSS-BJP has better legal and historical credentials
than the insistently restrictive usage by India’s secularists, who try
to narrow the term’s referent down to cow-worshipping non-tribal
upper-caste *Sanâtanî* (“eternalist”, here in the sense of
“nonreformist”, “non-Arya Samaji”) Hindus, if at all they admit that
Hinduism exists.

**4.2. Can geography define religion?**

A problem with Savarkar’s definition is that certain communities may
consider only their own area as fatherland and holyland, and do not
identify with India as a whole.  The horizon of many tribal communities
is limited to a small area; they may say that they only consider that
small area as their own, and that they feel like foreigners in other
parts of India.  This might even be claimed on behalf of the Sikhs,
whose separatism is sometimes rationalized in secular terms as “Panjabi
nationalism” (in spite of the pan-Indian pilgrimages of some of the Sikh
Gurus).  But Savarkar was satisfied that at any rate, their loyalty
would be to an area within India, rather than to one outside of it.

That leaves us with the more fundamental problem that genuine Hindus may
not bother to consider India as a kind of “holyland”, holier than other
pieces of Mother Earth.  Hinduism has become international, and
increasingly includes people who have never seen India or have only been
there once or twice on a family visit, appalled at the dirt and lack of
efficiency, and anxious to get back home to London or Vancouver. 
Further, many people with no Indian blood take up practices developed by
Hindu culture without being very interested in the geographical cradle
of their new-found “spiritual path”.  They may not be inclined to call
themselves “Hindu” because of the term’s geographical connotation, but
they do commit themselves to the Hindu civilization, using terms like
“Vedic” or “Dharma”.^([3](#3))

The values of Sanatana Dharma are not tied up with this piece of land,
and the Vedas or the Gita, though obviously situated in India, are not
bothered with notions of “fatherland” and “holyland”.  As Dr. Pukh Raj
Sharma, a teacher of Ayurveda and Bhakti-Yoga from Jodhpur once said:
“The country India is not important.  One day, India too will
go.”^([4](#4)) So, we may question the wisdom of defining a religious
tradition by an external characteristic such as its geographical
location, even if the domain of this definition admirably coincides with
the actual referent of the term *Hindu* in its common usage.

**4.3. The Sangh Parivar’s understanding of Hindutva**

The RSS-BJP try to make Savarkar’s term *Hindutva* even more inclusive
than Savarkar intended.  They claim that any Indian who “identifies with
India” is thereby a Hindu.  A Muslim who satisfies this condition (what
Gandhians called a “nationalist Muslim”) should call himself a
“Mohammedi Hindu”.  As L.K. Advani explains: “those residing in the
country are Hindus even if many of them believe in different
religions.(…) those following Islam are ‘Mohammedi Hindus’.  Likewise,
Christians living in the country are ‘Christian Hindus’, while Sikhs are
termed ‘Sikh Hindus’.  The respective identities are not undermined by
such a fonnulation.”^([5](#5)) in this sense, they would be just as much
at home in a Hindu Rashtra as a Vaishnava or Shaiva Hindu.

Thus, veteran journalist M.V. Kamath writes in the *Organiser*. 
“Hindutva, then, is what is common to all of us, Hindus, Muslims,
Christians, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists... whoever has Indian heritage. 
Hindutva is the engine that pulls the nation and takes us into the
future.  It is cultural nationalism that has the power to
unite.(…) Hindutva is not Hinduism, it does not ask anyone to follow a
particular creed or ritual. Indeed, it does not speak for Hinduism, it
is not a religious doctrine.”^([6](#6)) Remark that an acknowledged
spokesman of Sangh Parivar ideology includes Indian Christianity and
Indian Islam in his understanding of Hindutva.  This would reduce the
meaning of *Hindutva* to the casual reasoning of a Sikh couple in
Defence Colony interviewed during the 1989 elections: *“Ham Hindustân
men rehte hain, bam Hindû hî to hue*. (We live in Hindustan, that makes
us Hindu).”^([7](#7))

Both the nationalist definition of Hindu-ness developed by Savarkar and
the clumsy notion of “Mohammedi Hindus” brandished by the RSS and BJP
are elements of an attempt to delink the term Hinduism from its natural
religious or cultural contents.  In Savarkar’s case, the definition
restores a historical usage, but the RSS definition extends the meaning
even further: the opposition between “Indian secular nationalism” and
“Hindu communalism” is declared non-existent, essentially by replacing
the latter’s position with the former’s: Kamath’s conception of
*Hindutva* is entirely coterminous with Jawaharlal Nehru’s secular
patriotism.

To support the non-doctrinal, non-religious, non-communal usage of the
term *Hindu*, RSS joint secretary-general K. S. Sudarshan relates some
anecdotes in which Arabs and Frenchmen refer to any Indian (including
the imam of Delhi’s Jama Masjid when he visited Arabia) as a
“Hindu”.^([8](#8)) So what?  A linguist would say that in that case, the
word *Hindu* is a “false friend”: though sounding the same and having
the same etymology, it has a different meaning in Arabic or French on
the one and English or Hindi on the other hand.  This is obviously no
sound basis for denying the operative (and historical, and legal)
meaning of *Hindu* as “any Indian *except* Muslims, Christians and
Parsis”.

A point of comparison for this overextended definition of Hindu identity
is the now-common understanding of “Christian civilization” as
encompassing more than just the believing
Christians.  Christian-Democrats after World War 2 have argued that
“Christian values” have since long become a common heritage of Europe
(and the Americas), shared by non-Christians as well.^([9](#9)) And some
non-Christians also accept this view.^([10](#10)) If Christianity, which
has strictly defined its own contours with precise beliefs, can be
definitionally broadened to coincide with a “value system”, the same
could legitimately be done with the much less rigidly self-defined
Hinduism.

**4.4. Equality of religions**

Some Hindu activists insist that “all religions are equally true”, a
logically untenable sentimentalist position now widely shared in
Western-educated Hindu circles as well as among some “progressive”
Christians and “New Agers” in the West.  As an explicit position, this
is marginal in the Hindutva movement, though the Gandhian phrase “equal
respect for all religions” (*sarva-dharma-samabhava*), invoked in the
BJP Constitution, comes close to the same meaning.  At any rate, as an
implicit guideline, the acceptance of all religions as equally good can
be found all over the Hindutva literature.

Official publications of the BJP and even of the RSS studiously avoid
criticism of Islam and Christianity as belief systems.  Even the Rushdie
affair, when the BJP put up a rather perfunctory defence of Salman
Rushdie, did not trigger any debate on the basic doctrines of Islam in
the pages of the Hindutva papers.  The position of both RSS and BJP, and
even of Hindutva hard-liners like Balraj Madhok, is that Islam
and Christianity are alright in themselves, but that in India, they
constitute a problem of disloyalty.  As soon as these foreign-originated
religions agree to shed their foreign loyalties and to “indianize”
themselves, the problem vanishes.^([11](#11))

In theory, and at first sight, the doctrine of the equal validity of all
religions could be intellectually defensible if we start from the Hindu
doctrine of the *ishta devatâ*, the “chosen deity”: every Hindu has a
right to worship the deity or divine incarnation or guru whom he
chooses, and this may include exotic characters like Allah or Jesus
Christ.  In practice, however, anyone can feel that something isn’t
right with this semantic manipulation: Muslims and Christians abhor and
mock the idea of being defined as sects within “Hindutva”, and apart
from a handful of multi-culturalist Christians who call themselves “both
Hindu and Christian”, this cooptation of Muslims and Christians into the
Hindu fold has no takers.^([12](#12)) It is an elementary courtesy to
check with the people concerned before you give them labels.

**4.5. The impotence of semantic manipulation**

If the attempt to redefine Indian Muslims as “Mohammedi Hindus” is
received with little enthusiasm by non-Hindus, it is criticized even
more sternly by Radical Hindus, who point out that the attempt to get
Muslims and Christians under the umbrella of an extended Hindu identity
constitutes a retreat from the historical Hindu position vis-à-vis the
proselytizing religions: it confers an undeserved legitimacy upon the
presence of the “predatory religions”, Islam and Christianity, in
India.  The time-length of the presence of the colonial powers in their
colonies (nearly five centuries in the case of some Portuguese colonies,
and more than seven centuries in the case of the Arab possessions in
Spain) did not *justify* their presence in the eyes of the native
anti-colonial liberation movements.  Likewise, the fact that Islam and
Christianity have acquired a firm and enduring foothold in India does
not, to Hindu Revivalists, make them acceptable as legitimate components
of Indian culture.  As Harsh Narain argues: “Muslim culture invaded
Indian culture not to make friends with it but to wipe it out. (…) Hence
Muslim culture cannot be said to be an integral part of Indian culture
and must be regarded as an anticulture or counter-culture in our
bodypolitic.”^([13](#13))

Moreover, these semantic manipulations undermine the credibility of
Hindu protests (regularly seen in the RSS weeklies and sometimes even in
the BJP fortnightly *BJP Today*) against Christian and Muslim
proselytization activities. After all, if there is nothing wrong with
these religions per se, then why bother if Hindus convert to them?  Now
that the Catholic Church uses “inculturation” as a mission strategy, why
object to Hindus adopting this duly “indianized” version of
Christianity?

These impotent semantic manipulations about “Mohammedi Hindus” invite
contempt and ridicule.  They have never convinced anyone, and it is
typical of the RSS’s refusal to learn from feedback that it still
propagates these notions.  Defining India’s communal conflict in terms
of secular nationalism, as a matter of “nationalist” vs. “antinational”
loyalties, is mostly the effect of Hindu escapism, of the refusal to
confront Hinduism’s challengers ideologically.  Such exercises in
self-deception are understandable as a symptom of Hindu society’s
lingering psychology of defeat, but after half a century of
independence, that excuse has worn out its validity.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a)Nehrti talking to Tibor Mende: *Conversations with Mr. Nehr*u,
p. 15. 

[²](#2a)D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p. 116.  In some editions this
definition is also given as motto on the title page

[³](#3a)E.g. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi’s projects are all called “Vedic”,
partly at least because the term “Hindu” would repel many Westerners;
ISKCON has a publication series *Veda Pockets* (Amsterdam); David
Frawley’s institute in Santa Fe is called *American Institute of Vedic
Studies*, etc.

[⁴](#4a)Speaking in Mechelen, Belgium, 1991.

[⁵](#5a)“Advani wants Muslims to identify with ‘Hindutva’”, *Times of
India*, 30-1-1995.

[⁶](#6a)M.V. Kamath: “The Essence of Hindutva”, *Organiser*, 28-4-1996.

[⁷](#7a)“Voters in a dilemma”, *Times of India*, 24-11-1989.

[⁸](#8a)In H.V. Seshadri et al.: *Why Hindu Rashtra?*, p. 5. In French,
the usage of *hindou* for “Indian” is obsolete.  An anecdote not
included though well-known is that HMS leader B.S. Moonje was asked in
America whether “all Hindus are Muslims?”

[⁹](#9a)The founding “Christmas Programme” (1945) of the Belgian
Christian-Democratic Party says: “The human values which form the basis
of our Western civilization (…) were contributed by Christianity, yet
today they are the common property of the faithful and the unbelievers”;
quoted in L. Tindemans: *De toekomst van een idee* (Dutch: “The future
of an idea”, viz. of Christian-Democratic “personalism”), p.32.

[¹⁰](#10a)Thus, in 1994, the Dutch Liberal Party leader Frits
Bolkestein, an agnostic and secularist, affirmed that the European
polity could only be rooted in Christian values.

[¹¹](#11a)This is the central flies of Balraj Madhok: *Indianisation*.

[¹²](#12a)About Christian syncretism with Hinduism, see e.g. Bede
Griffiths: *The Marriage of East and West*, and Catherine Cornille: *The
Guru in Indian Catholicism*. A very critical Hindu comment on this trend
is S.R. Goel: *Christian Ashrams: Sannyasins or Swindlers?*

[¹³](#13a)H. Narain: *Myth of Composite Culture*, p.29.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------


