+++
title = "06 5. “Semitization”, of Hinduism"

+++
**5. “Semitization”, of Hinduism**

**5.1. The “Semitic religions”**

At the height of the Ayodhya controversy, many secularists suddenly set
themselves up as teachers of Hinduism, of “real Hinduism” as opposed to
the “distorted” Hinduism of the Hindu Nationalists.^([1](#1)) This was a
crucial step forward for the Hindu cause, for it meant that Hinduism was
replacing secularism as the norm.  The secularists told the Hindu
activists that Hinduism is alright, only, it is something altogether
different from what you think it is.

Thus, to depict Rama as a virile warrior was a sin against Hinduism, an
imitation of colonialist virility myths, a betrayal of the feminine
passivity of genuine Hinduism.  Or, to organize the Hindu religious
personnel on a common platform (the Dharma Sansad, more or less
“religious parliament”) is an un-Hindu imitation of the Bishops’ Synod
in the Catholic Church.  Or, to alert the Hindus against Muslim or
Christian conversion campaigns is an abandonment of the cheerful Hindu
indifference to sectarian name-tags, the only thing which really changes
upon conversion.  Indeed, anything that could play a role in upholding
and preserving Hinduism was found to be un-Hindu, while anything that
could make or keep Hinduism defenceless and moribund, was glorified as
true Hinduism.  Anything that smacked of vitality and the will to
survive was dubbed “Semitic”.^([2](#2))

In India, it is not uncommon to lump Judaism, Christianity and Islam, or
what the latter calls “the peoples of the Book”, together under the
heading “Semitic religions”.  The choice of the term is unfortunate, not
only because it is tainted (at least to Western cars) by its association
with “anti-Semitism”, but also because it is hopelessly inaccurate.  It
wrongly identifies a religious current with a language family, even
while many Semitic-speaking peoples were Pagans (Babylonians, Assyrians,
pre-Mosaic and even many post-Mosaic Israelites, pre-Mohammedan
Arabs)^([3](#3)) and the basic text of Christianity was written in
non-Semitic Greek.  Therefore, Sita Ram Goel and N.S. Rajaram advocate
the abandonment of this term in favour of more analytic terms like
“prophetic monotheism”.  In Goel’s words: “I consider neither
Christianity nor Islam Semitic religions.  The Semites of the Middle
East were Pagans; their tradition was pluralistic before the arrival of
the Biblical God.”^([4](#4))

Meanwhile, the term “Semitic” is still being used in a derogatory sense,
mostly in a somewhat bizarre Marxist discourse alleging a tendency in
the Hindu movement to borrow elements from the prophetic-monotheist
religions.  Hindutva is said to constitute a “semitization” of Hinduism.

**5.2. “Semitic”, or dogmatic and intolerant**

It must be admitted at the outset that this usage of the term “Semitic”
as meaning “that which Hinduism is not and should never become” is
sometimes applied in good faith by people who wish Hinduism well.  Thus,
novelist U.R. Ananthamurthy (of the famous anti-Brahmin novel
*Samskara*), when contrasting the Upanishadic tradition with
contemporary Hindu militancy, offered the following observation which I
could largely make my own: “The Hindu militancy that we see today is
short-sighted because those behind it are aware of their history until
300 years ago. I do not begin with Shivaji.  My ancestor is
Yajnavalkya.  The great tradition to which I belong was suspicious of
all temples. I don’t think there is room for radical mysticism in Hindu
militancy.  It’s more political than spiritual.  What I would describe
briefly as-trying to semitise the Hindus.”^([5](#5))

This is a benign piece of advice for the Hindutva movement to get
serious about exploring the roots of the tradition to which it pays so
much lip-service.  What it says is that in comparison with the
Upanishadic tradition, the Semitic religions lack inferiority, and so
does the Hindutva movement. In brandishing pro-Hindu slogans and
pledging allegiance to Hindu civilization, the Hindutva activists
resemble the proverbial donkey who carries a bag of gold on its back
without being aware of the gold’s value.

But unlike Ananthamurthy, most authors who use this concept of the
“semitization of Hinduism” have no eye for the spiritual dimension which
the Hindutva activists allegedly neglect.  They bring up other concerns,
which are also deemed un-Semitic by implication, e.g. social
reform.  Thus, Praful Bidwai sees a “forced attempt to forge a Semitic,
monolithic, chosen people identity for Hindus” which “stands in sharp
contrast to the enlightened effort at founding a modern, social
rationale for religion as, say, in Vivekananda”.^([6](#6)) As if
Vivekananda did not stand for an assertive-allegedly “Semitic”-Hinduism,
all while paying attention to the need for social reform.

Most specifically, the allegation of “semitization” amounts to a claim
that Hinduism is turned into a centralized, exclusivist and monopolistic
religion.  The Ayodhya movement is described as “an attempt to semitise
the Hindu religion.  Ram is to be the prophet and Ayodhya the Vatican
City.”^([7](#7))

But the Ayodhya movement has not changed the status which Ram had
acquired long ago in existing Hindu tradition, nor has it ever defined
him as a “prophet”.  It never tried to give him any “Semitic” kind of
spiritual monopoly by discarding other (“rival”) Hindu Gods.  It never
tried to give Ayodhya a new status nor to set up any institution similar
in status to what the Papal State represents in Catholicism.  Rather,
the claim quoted appears to Le the effect of first adopting the
“semitization” rhetoric and then filling it in with the required
“Semitic” features, without checking whether these correspond to the
reality of the Ayodhya movement.  Secularist criticism of Hindutva is
amazingly careless on facts, apparently because a decades-long monopoly
on public discourse has made the secularists smug and lazy.

**5.3. Romila Thapar on semitization**

The *locus classicus* of the theory of the “semitization of Hinduism by
the Hindutva movement”, implying a derogatory use of the term “Semitic”,
is JNU Professor Romila Thapar’s claim that in the Hindu right wing’s
reasoning, “if capitalism is to succeed in India, then Hinduism would
have to be moulded to a Semitic form (…) Characteristic of the Semitic
religions are features such as a historically attested teacher or
prophet, a sacred book, a geographically identifiable location for its
beginnings, an ecclesiastical infrastructure and the conversion of large
numbers of people to the religion-all characteristics which are largely
irrelevant to the various manifestations of Hinduism until recent
times.  Thus instead of emphasizing the fact that the religious
experience of Indian civilization and of religious sects which are
bunched together under the label of ‘Hindu’ are distinctively different
from that of the Semitic, attempts are being made to find parallels with
the Semitic religions as if these parallels are necessary to the future
of Hinduism. (…)

“The teacher or prophet is replaced by the *avatâra* of Vishnu, Rama;
the sacred book is the *Râmâyana*; the geographical identity or the
beginnings of the cult and the historicity of Rama are being sought in
the insistence that the precise birthplace of Rama in Ayodhya was marked
by a temple, which was destroyed by Babur and replaced by the Babri
Masjid; an ecclesiastical infrastructure is implied by inducting into
the movement the support of Mahants and the Shankaracharyas or what the
Vishwa Hindu Parishad calls a *Dharma Sansad*; the support of large
numbers of people, far surpassing the figures of earlier followers of
*Rama-bhakti*, was organized through the worship of bricks destined for
the building of a temple on the location of the mosque.”^([8](#8))

Though the general impression that the Ayodhya militants display more
muscle than understanding of the subtleties of Hinduism deserves
consideration, much in this attack on Hindu activism as “false,
semitized Hinduism” is unrelated to reality.  To make “capitalism” the
secret goal of Hindutva betrays ignorance of the strong socialist
current within the Hindutva movement, esp. in the erstwhile Jana Sangh
(1952-77) and in the RSS trade union, the Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh.  At
any rate, now that capitalism has proved victorious, there is still a
Hindutva movement and a conflict between different ideologies, just as
in the capitalist USA there are still political antagonisms between
Christians and secularists.  Let us just smile about this Marxist
professor’s naive reduction of every debate in the ideological-political
superstructure to a conflict of interests in the economic
infrastructure.

To say that Rama and the Ramayana have acquired the same positions in
the Hindutva version of Hinduism as Jesus or Mohammed c.q. the Bible or
the Quran is simply untrue.  Since the discourse on “semitization” is
meant to evoke the impression of fanaticism, it would also imply that
Rama worshippers have practised typically Christian or Islamic forms of
fanaticism, say, destroying images of “false gods” (like Shiva or
Krishna?) or burning copies of rivalling “heretic” books (like the Vedas
or the Gita?), if not the readers of these books as well.  In reality,
Hindus who worship Krishna or Shiva as their chosen deity have
participated in the Ayodhya movement in huge numbers, without ever
getting the impression that their own deity was being disparaged.

Moreover, Prof. Thapar’s enumeration of the typical characteristics of
the “Semitic religions” is not entirely accurate.  A “historically
attested teacher” is not necessarily proof of a “Semitic” religion. 
While not available for Hinduism as a whole, the type exists for certain
sects and schools within Hinduism and other non- “Semitic” traditions
(e.g. Confucianism), though these teachers (the Buddha, Guru Nanak,
Chaitanya) never claimed the same unique and apocalyptic status for
themselves as Jesus and Mohammed did.  The fact of having a historically
situated founder is in itself no argument for or against the truth, the
humaneness or even the Hinduness of a religious tradition.

Ms. Thapar is right, however, about having a “prophet” as founder as a
defining characteristic of “Semitic religions”.  It would not be right
to describe Gautama the Buddha, Guru Nanak, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Swami
Narayan and other founders of Hindu traditions as “prophets”, i.e.
exclusive spokesmen of the Heavenly Sovereign.  By now, the term
*prophet* cannot be delinked anymore from the more specific meaning
which the Abrahamic religions have given to it: “one who communicates
messages from God”.  In a less monopolistic sense, “communicating
messages from a god” was a Shamanic practice common to many early
cultures, but it only acquired its exclusive connotation when it was
coupled with the doctrine of monotheism.

And this, then, is the crucial point about “Semitic religions” which
Professor Thapar strangely overlooks.  Monotheism is what the “Semitic
religions” see as their own contribution to humanity’s
progress.  Hinduism can accommodate monotheism: as Ram Swarup has
argued, it sees no incompatibility between the unicity and the
multiplicity of the Divine, nor between the immanence and transcendence
of the Divine.^([9](#9)) Hindutva authors never tire of quoting this
Vedic verse which bridges the gap between the One and the Many: “The
wise call the One Being by many names.”^([10](#10)) The defining
characteristic of the “Semitic” religions is that they do not see
unicity and multiplicity as two legitimately coexisting viewpoints but
as hostile positions identifiable with good and evil, respectively.

It is not true that this characteristic of the “Semitic religions” has
been adopted in any way by the Hindutva movement.  While the 19th
century Hindu reform sects Brahmo Samaj and Arya Samaj had been
persuaded (or intimidated by the prevalent religious power equation) to
reject polytheism and idol-worship as evil and as the cause of
Hinduism’s decline, today the “mono-poly” controversy is just not an
issue to the broad spectrum of sects and schools which have joined the
Dharma Sansad since 1985.  It is not true at all that Rama has been
projected in neo-monotheistic fashion as a sole “jealous God” or “final
Prophet”.

Further, there is nothing wrong or “Semitic” about having “a sacred
book, a geographically identifiable location for its beginnings, an
ecclesiastical infrastructure and the conversion of large numbers of
people to the religion”; nor is it true that these are “all
characteristics which are largely irrelevant to the various
manifestations of Hinduism until recent times”.  Hindus recited the
Vedas even before the first “Semitic” scripture was compiled, and later
the Gita, the Ramcharitmanas and other “sacred books”.  The Vedas and
the Epics give quite a bit of information concerning their locations,
and as for the Buddha, the Pali Canon tells us the exact location and
circumstance of every single speech he gave.

As for conversion, various forms of initiation of outsiders into
successively more inner circles of Hindu tradition have existed for
millennia, from the Vedic Vratyastoma ritual down to the Shuddhi ritual
of the Arya Samaj.^([11](#11)) Buddhism is one offshoot of Hinduism
which has practised the induction of newcomers on a large scale.  The
precise relation between Buddhism and Hinduism is a matter of dispute,
as we shall see, but at any rate Buddhism is not “Semitic”.  Most
“Pagan” religions have this more relaxed attitude towards the induction
of outsiders: they keep the option open, esp. for people who marry into
the community, but they don’t propagate it.  Some sects jealous of their
pedigree even refuse to accept converts, e.g. the Parsis.  However, to
object to Hinduism accepting converts or “reconverts” in the present
circumstances is to plead for the extinction of Hinduism, as indicated
by the near-extinction of indeed the Parsis.

Prof. Thapar is also off the mark when she alleges that Hindu
Revivalists deny or disregard “the fact that the religious experience of
Indian civilization \[is\] distinctively different from that of the
Semitic” and that, on the contrary, they make “attempts to find
parallels with the Semitic religions as if these parallels are necessary
to the future of Hinduism”.  The whole of Hindu Revivalist literature is
replete with emphatic assertions of the *contrast* between Hinduism and
the prophetic-monotheistic religions, starting with the contrast between
Hindu pluralism and prophetic-monotheist intolerance.  This remained
true even when some of the movement’s leading lights inadvertently
interiorized prejudices borrowed from Christianity or Islam, such as the
insistence on monotheism.

So, the argument that Hindutva is a “semitized” form of Hinduism is a
mixed affair, which in most respects fails to convince.  It is a
different matter whether the phenomena described as “semitization” are
all that undesirable.

**5.4. The need to “semitize” Hinduism**

Against criticism of the attempt to set up an organized platform of
Hindu religious leaders, the VHP’s reply is: to the extent that this is
an innovation, could it not be that Hindu society has the right to
innovate its organizing principles when this is needed in the struggle
for survival?^([12](#12)) Does not the secularist rejection of any
deviation from museum Hinduism betray a desire to impose *rigor mortis*
on Hinduism?  So far, there is no sign that the cooperation of religious
personnel in the Dharma Sansad has caused any new limitations on the
freedom of any sect to pursue its own spiritual path, quite unlike the
stifling control exercised by certain “Semitic” authorities on their
flock.  All that has happened is that Hindu religious leaders are
becoming more practical and adapting to the needs of modern society.

It is ironical that the sins of these “Semitic religions” are held
against the Hindutva movement, which seeks to safeguard India from the
further encroachment by those same religions.  To be sure, real history
presents such ironical cases of entities imitating their enemies all the
better to defeat them; in this case, it has been called “strategic
syncretism” or “strategic emulation”.^([13](#13)) But even if the
Hindutva movement is such a case, it is still illogical to take it to
task for imitating the prophetic-monotheistic religions without first
putting these religions themselves in the dock.

A Hindu-friendly India-watcher of the Foreign Broadcast Information
Service, a parastatal world-watch bureau in Washington DC, has remarked
that this alleged semitization, which is but a pejorative synonym for
self-organization, may simply be necessary for Hinduism’s survival.  He
points out that in Africa, the traditional religions are fast being
replaced by Christianity and Islam precisely because they have no
organization which can prepare a strategy of self-defence.^([14](#14))
African traditionalists are not denounced as “semitized fundamentalists”
because in effect, they submit to the liquidation of their tradition by
mass conversions.

It is hard to find fault with this observation (except to insist that
the missionary religions are intrinsically superior and that
consequently it is but a *good* thing if they replace the native
traditions).  Consider: why was the Roman Empire christianized, but not
the Persian Empire?  As a Flemish historian of early Christianity has
shown, without using the term, the difference was precisely that the
Roman state religion was not “semitized”, while the Persian state
religion was.^([15](#15)) The Roman state religion was pluralistic and
didn’t have much of a policy, while the Mazdean state religion in Persia
did organize the opposition against Christian proselytization,
mobilizing both the state and the population, and developing a combative
“Semitic” character in the process (the Mazdean oppression of
Christianity led to the migration of some Syrian Christians to Kerala in
the 4th century, where they survive till today).  It is a different
point whether the means used by the Persians were the right ones, but
organization was certainly a minimum requirement.

And why did, in ca. AD 630, the Arabs lose their religion?  In spite of
being numerically in the majority, they lost against Mohammed in the
battle of Badr, and likewise in the larger struggle for the land and
soul of Arabia, for this reason: “The weak point of the Meccan army was
that it consisted of different clans each with its own commander, while
on the Muslim side there was only one commander, Mohammed.  Moreover,
the Meccans had not come to kill as many people as possible: that would
only lead to endless vendettas.  They simply wanted to show their
strength and frighten the rebels.  By contrast, Mohammed reacted in a
fanatical way”.^([16](#16))

The Arabs were defeated because they were not sufficiently organized,
and not sufficiently determined.  In the *Ridda* (“apostasy”) war just
after Mohammed’s death, they repeated their mistake: after having
defeated the Muslim army, they did not pursue it in its retreat.  They
demobilized while the Muslims regrouped and struck back, this time to
liquidate Arab Paganism for good.  The Arabs lost their religion because
in the struggle against its mortal enemy, they were not “Semitic”
enough.

Ram Swarup analyzes the political intention behind laudatory labels like
“tolerant” and hate labels like “Semitic”. He too points to Africa as an
instance of what to avoid: “The African continent has been under the
attack of the two monolatrous religions, Christianity and Islam, for
centuries.  Under this attack, it has already lost much of its old
culture.  Recently, the attack has very much intensified and indigenous
Africa is on the verge of losing its age-old religions.  Some time ago,
there was an article in the London Economist praising it for taking this
attack with such pagan *tolerance*.  But there was no word of protest
against intolerance practised against its peoples and their
religions.”^([17](#17)) This praise of religions which submit to being
annihilated (“tolerant”) and the concomitant opprobrium for religions
which don’t, indeed the condemnation of the very will to survive as
“fanatical”, is reminiscent of a French saying: “This animal is very
mean: it defends itself when attacked.”

**5.5. The non-existence of Hinduism**

So far, we have been assuming that the word “Hinduism” does have a
referent in the real world.  But judging from recent trends in Hinduism
studies, this was naive.  Robert Frykenberg denies the Hindu identity as
a recent fiction, and a pernicious one at that: “The concept of
‘Hinduism’ as denoting a single religious community has (…) done
enormous, even incalculable damage to structures undergirding the peace,
security and unity of the whole Indian political system.”^([18](#18))

This habit of enclosing the word Hinduism in quotation marks is catching
on.  Thus, David Ludden rejects the notion that India “was ever
populated predominantly by people whose identity was formed by their
collective identification with a religion called ‘Hinduism’ or with a
‘Hindu’ religious persona”.^([19](#19)) In this view, the Hindu nation
is at best an “identity project”, and for that matter one bound to fail,
given the internal contradictions of the “Hindu” conglomerate of
communities.

But does Prof. Ludden’s argument refute the position of the Hindu
nationalists?  After all, they will readily agree with his observation
that “‘Hindu’ thus did not begin its career as a religious term, but
rather as a term used by outsiders and state officials to designate
people who lived east of the Indus”.^([20](#20)) Hindus indeed did not
call themselves Hindu until outsiders did so, a historical and
terminological anecdote which they do not find threatening to the
underlying reality of an ancient Hindu identity.^([21](#21))

This does not exclude a collective identity: people within a collective
refer to one another’s lower-level identities (i.c. Brahmins, Banias,
Jats, Chamars; or Kashmiris, Gujaratis, Tamils; or Vaishnavas,
Kabirpanthis etc.), but in a meeting with outsiders, everyone realizes
that something distinguishes the outsiders from all of them
collectively.  This scenario is not very problematic.  Everybody knows
that within the Brown family, Johnny and Mary never call each other
Brown, and if it wasn’t for the occasional meeting with outsiders
(schoolteachers reading out the list of their new pupils, etc.), they
would grow up without ever knowing that they were the Browns; but
outsiders call both of them Brown, because from the outside it is
obvious that for all their separate identities they are members of a
single family.

Consider Arun Shourie’s rewording of the dominant paradigm: “Caste is
real.  The working class is real.  Being a Naga is real.  But ‘India is
just a geographical expression!’ Similarly, being a Muslim, of course,
is real (…) But Hinduism?

Why, there is no such thing: it is just an aggregation, a pile of
assorted beliefs and practices.  In a word, the parts alone are real. 
The whole is just a construct.”^([22](#22)) Numerous Indians including
the Muslims for thirteen centuries have had no difficulty recognizing
some basic cultural traits collectively designated as *Hindu*.  If
today’s intellectuals cannot recognize these, the problem may well be in
the eye of the beholder.  Shourie, for one, does not believe in their
good faith: “The beginning of reconstruction, therefore, the *sine qua
non* for it, is to overturn the intellectual fashions set by these
intellectuals, and defeat their verbal terrorism.”^([23](#23))

So, in this view, the reality of narrower identities, like caste, need
not exclude the reality of larger identities, such as Hindu-ness, or for
that matter, Indian-ness, a notion equally challenged as unreal and
unhistorical.^([24](#24)) Identities are partly a matter of choice, and
the choice of secularists and Indologists to play down the larger
identity and fortify the smaller identity can legitimately be read as a
political act in an ongoing struggle, parallel and partly equivalent
with the struggle between various separatisms and Indian unity.  That,
at least, is a central Hindu Revivalist suspicion.^([25](#25)) Against
it, Hindus, for once on the same wavelength with “nation-builder”
Jawaharlal Nehru, want to strengthen the factors which unite these many
castes and language groups, want to maximize the more encompassing
levels of identity.

**5.6. Circular proof for Hinduism’s non-existence**

The fashionable view of Hinduism is summed up in Arthur Bonner’s
claim: “A Hindu is a Hindu not because he accepts doctrines or
philosophies but because he is a member of a caste”^([26](#26)) , and:
“Without caste there is no Hindu”.^([27](#27)) This caste identity is so
strong, that it excludes any common identity between members of
different castes: “Social entities functioned on a rigid caste
basis.  North Indians, for instance, saw one another as Brahmins,
Rajputs, Baniyas, Khatris, Jats, Ahirs, Chamars, or Muslims-distinctive
castes, not fellow citizens.”^([28](#28))

I let the claim of caste “rigidity” pass; a budding line in Hindu
Revivalist history-rewriting, rather well in touch with modem Western
scholarship, is to question this alleged age-old rigidity of caste and
emphasize the relative fluidity of the system before British policies
and the census classifications rigidified it.  Even Jawaharlal Nehru
observed: “But I think that the conception of Hindu society as a very
conservative society (…) is not quite correct. In the past, changes took
place not by legislation but by custom; by the people themselves
changing.”^([29](#29))

The impression of the all-pervasiveness of caste is a colonial
construct.  Firstly, the East India Company had entrusted Brahmins with
the task of informing its own officials who were compiling a
native-based law code; these Brahmins imposed their own view, which was
the scripturalist reference to the Shastras, but which was not shared by
all layers of society nor universally operative in social
practice.”^([30](#30)) Secondly, there was the, perhaps unintended,
effect of policies of the modem state.

As J.C. Heesterman writes, “the modern state-in contradistinction to the
ancien regime-is hived off from society and pretends to govern it by
remote control as it were.  To that end, it first of all needs an
all-inclusive and immutable grid of rigidly bounded and inflexible
categories (…) This need for an immutable grid of categories was filled
with deplorable obviousness by caste, seemingly custom-made for the
purpose, esp. in its Brahmanic form of varna separation.  Conversely,
the modern state and its census grid could not but project the image of
an unchangeably fixed order of society.  One may wonder whether and how
far the notion of a never-changing, utterly tradition-bound and
stagnating India has been formed by the modern state’s view of
society.”^([31](#31))

The point we should look into now, is whether, as Bonner claims, the
people concerned were *only* members of distinctive castes, and not
citizens of a common polity.  It seems to me that this claim is
factually incorrect.  Leave aside the higher levels, even the village
community was based on an ongoing process of compromise between the
castes represented in the village through the village panchayat, which
decided by consensus.^([32](#32)) It is simply obvious that the
communities interacted, not at random but as parts of a larger polity,
both at the village and at the state level; yes, there were structures
integrating the different castes into a single polity.  One of the
meanings of *Dharma* is precisely the harmonious integration of such
diverse units into a functioning whole, and that is precisely the
difference between present-day caste struggle and the ancient caste
system.  One could argue that this meant that people were kept in their
place with religious sop stories, “opium of the people” (like in most
pre-modern societies), but the fact itself stands out: the functional
gap between castes was bridged by a number of cultural factors,
integrating them into a society of which the Muslim invaders immediately
saw the distinctiveness and coherence, and which they labelled as
“Hindu”.  This is what Ram Swarup refers to when commenting on those who
reduce Hinduism to caste, lopping off its cultural and religious
dimensions: “The new self-styled social justice intellectuals and
parties do not want an India without castes, they want castes without
dharma.”^([33](#33))

Moreover, the inclusion of the Muslims in the list on an equal footing
with the Hindu castes is an unjustifiable sleight-of-hand, for there is
a decisive difference between Muslims on the one and all the others on
the other hand: from an Islamic viewpoint, the former go to heaven and
the latter to hell, the former can marry Muslim women and the latter
cannot, and other legally and theologically consequential contrasts. 
From a Hindu viewpoint too, there is a decisive difference: though an
orthodox Brahmin will keep both the Jat and the Muslim far from his
daughter and from his dinner table, he will serve as ritual officiant
for the Jat but not for the Muslim, and he knows that the Jat worships
the same Gods as he does, unlike the Muslim.

For another application of the dominant paradigm, Kancha Ilaiah tries to
prove the non-existence of a common “Hindu” identity by recounting that
in his own Andhra village, the Backward *Karuma* (wool-weaver) community
felt closer to Muslims and Christians (“we all eat meat”) than to
Brahmins and Banias, who treated the three other communities as equally
impure.^([34](#34)) Ironically, this argument is typically Hindu: it
does not consider belief but observation or non-observation of purity
rules as the decisive criterion.  This only makes sense as long as
religion, esp. the viewpoint of those Christians and Muslims, is kept
out of the picture; once you consider the criterion of religious belief
too, the cleavage between Christians or Muslims on the one hand and
Brahmins and Karumas on the other proves more fundamental.  Christians
and Muslims are trained to be sharply aware of religious identities, and
to them, both Shudras and Brahmins are unbelievers.  Possibly some of
Ilaiah’s Christian or Muslim neighbours were liberals uninterested in
matters of afterlife salvation, only Christian or Muslim in name, but
then their transcending these communal boundaries took place precisely
to the extent that they, too, kept religious doctrine out of the
picture.

Ilaiah describes the distinctive religious practices of the Backward
Castes, which do differ on some points with those of the Brahmins.  In
that context, he mentions the folk Goddess Pochamma, popular among the
Backwards but accessible to all, so that even “a Brahmin can speak to
her in Sanskrit”.^([35](#35)) The point is: a Muslim or a Christian who
takes his religion seriously, will not speak to her at all, unlike the
frequent Backward and the occasional Brahmin worshippers That is how, in
spite of the social distance, religion does unite all Hindu castes as
distinct from Christians and Muslims.

Bonner’s juxtaposition of Muslims with Brahmins and Karumas, suggesting
that the difference between the Hindu castes is as deep as that between
any of them and the Muslims, is similarly based on the denial of the
religious dimension.  It is more or less the logical and necessary
outcome of his assumption that Hinduism is caste, wholly caste and
nothing but caste.  That assumption is simply wrong.

If it were right, it would mean that all tribals, all Christians, most
Muslims, as well as the Parsis and the Jews of India, are all Hindus,
for practically all of them traditionally observe endogamy rules.  That
is admittedly one version of *Hindutva*, affirmed many times by BJP
stalwarts: that all Indians are Hindus because they share a common
culture (of which, fortunately or unfortunately, caste practices are a
part), even if they believe in Jesus or Mohammed.  But such an extension
rather than a denial of Hindu identity is obviously not what Bonner
meant.  On the other hand, many progressive and overseas Hindus who
ignore commensality rules altogether and increasingly dispense with
endogamy as well would fall outside the Hindu category, no matter how
much they perform Durga-puja or Surya-namaskar or
Agni-hotra.^([36](#36)) Such a definition of Hinduism is entirely
counterintuitive: what else would you call a Ganesha worshipper,
regardless of caste observance, if not Hindu?

Hindus are aware that Hindu civilization is not monolithic and subjected
to uniform normative prescriptions of faith and behaviour emanating from
a single scriptural or ecclesiastical authority.  Most Hindutva
ideologues keep on eulogizing this pluralism and diversity: “Since India
never had a religion in the sense in which Islam and Christianity are
religions, it never had religious unity of the type that Islamic and
Christian countries \[have\], in which the people are forced to conform
to the religion of the rulers.  Such a creed is alien to the Hindu
ethics and culture rooted in the Vedic gospel: *Ekam sad viprah bahudha
vadanti*, ‘God is one but the wise call Him by many names.’”^([37](#37))
The very phenomenon (decentralization, pluralism) which Frykenberg,
Ludden, Bonner and their school propose as a devastating refutation of
Hindu identity and as a trump card against the Hindu movement, has since
long been appropriated by the Hindu movement and brandished as one of
the great merits of Hinduism.

But the said Indologists, along with the Indian Marxists, do not accept
this more relaxed and pluralistic view of Hindu identity: to them, that
is no collective identity at all.  When Hindus try to set up a minimum
of pan-Hindu organization, they are accused of being unfaithful to the
true Hindu tradition of decentralization, and of “semitizing” Hinduism. 
At that point, their critics suddenly assume the existence of Hinduism
and even claim to know its essence well enough to assure us that it is
the opposite of “Semitic”. Yet, precisely because Hinduism does not have
a monolithic, “Semitic” view of its own collective identity, the same
critics refuse to acknowledge the very existence of such a thing as
Hinduism.^([38](#38))

Once more, Hindus are damned if they do, damned if they don’t, typifying
their lingering condition of colonial underlings.  And it is only
because of their inferior position that this game can be played with
them: first telling them that their religion doesn’t exist because it
has no “Semitic” type of core structure; then taunting them for being
untrue to their non-existent religion by devising an allegedly “Semitic”
structure.

**5.7. Conclusion**

There is no simple solution for the complex question, “Who is a Hindu?”
Definitions using tests of beliefs or caste practices fail to yield a
semantic domain which approximately coincides with the collection of
people actually described as Hindus at any time of the term’s usage. 
Yet, attempts to deny that there exist a meaningful usage of the
collective term *Hindu* must be rejected, even if there is plenty of
diversity within its normal semantic domain.

Moreover, we have discovered one definition which is both implied in the
oldest usage of the term in India and accepted by the Constitution and
Laws of the Indian Republic: is Hindu, every Indian who is not a Jew, a
Muslim, a Christian or a Zoroastrian (*Indian* being a geographical term
referring to the whole subcontinent).  Given these credentials, this
definition certainly deserves precedence over all newly-proposed
alternatives.  Hindus themselves have appropriated it as a key to a
universal dimension of their confrontation with Christianity and Islam,
viz. by catching it in the phrase “Indian Paganism”.

This definition is more or less equivalent with V.D. Savarkar’s
definition of *Hindutva*, which may be reformulated as follows: is
Hindu, every Indian who considers India his Holyland.  However, the
Sangh Parivar has tried to broaden the scope of this term in a
secular-nationalist sense, so as to include “nationalist” Christians and
Muslims.  This broader usage is not catching on, and for good reason:
the communities affected reject it, and the term *Hindu* in its
established usage is highly functional, whereas its proposed shift in
meaning to some kind of synonymy with the geographical term *Indian*
serves no purpose except to blur issues.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a)See e.g. the debate on whether Swami Vivekananda, undoubtedly a
Hindu, conformed to the modern definition of a “secularist”, between
A.B. Bardhan on the Communist side and Arun Shourie and Dina Nath Mishra
on the Hindu side, in *Sunday*, 31-1, 7-2, 28-3, 2-5 and 8-8-1993.

[²](#2a)For more on the use of the concept “Semitic” in secularist
discourse, vide K. Elst: *The Saffron Swastika*, Ch.8.5.4.

[³](#3a)In the USA, there are “neo-Pagan Jewish” associations harking
back to the Israelite tradition in its “original wholeness”, before
Goddess Ashera, traditionally worshipped in sacred groves, was lopped
off and censored out of the psalms by monotheistic and “patriarchal”
scribes.

[⁴](#4a)Interview with S.R. Goel in *Antaios* (Brussels), summer 1996,
p.78.

[⁵](#5a)U.R. Ananthamurthy, interviewed by Suchitra Chaudhary: “For
export only”, *Illustrated Weekly of India*, 5-12-1992.

[⁶](#6a)Praful Bidwai: “The Sena/VHP Offensive.  Disintegrative Politics
of Identity”, *Times of India* 25-10-1991, quoted with approval in
Antony Copley: “Indian Secularism Reconsidered: From Gandhi to Ayodhya”,
*Contemporary South Asia*, 1993, 2(1), p.45-65, n.4.

[⁷](#7a)Mushirul Hasan, historian, quoted in Raj Chengappa: “Dangerous
Dimensions”, *India Today*, 15-2-1993.

[⁸](#8a)Romila Thapar: “A Historical Perspective on the Story of Rama”,
in S. Gopal, ed.: *Anatomy of a Confrontation*, p.141-163, spec.
p.159-160. *Dharma Sansad* = “religious parliament”, common platform of
priests and renunciates convened by the VHP but shunned by the remaining
citadels of Hindu orthodoxy because of its reformist orientation.

[⁹](#9a)Vide Ram Swarup: *Word as Revelation*, and above, Ch.2.4.

[¹⁰](#10a)Rgveda 1:164:46.

[¹¹](#11a)*Vrâtyastoma* was the ritual for Vedic initiation of the
*Vrâtyas*, “those who live in groups” (though often explained as “those
who are bound by a vow”, such as the vow of silence, the vow of poverty,
the vow of loyalty), roaming bands of warriors in the eastern Ganga
plain, probably the origin of the ascetic Shramana sects.

[¹²](#12a)The need to *organize*, in Swami Shraddhananda’s terminology
*Hindu Sangathan*, is the basic philosophy and the very raison *d’Ítre*
of the Sangh Parivar.

[¹³](#13a)C. Jaffrelot: *Hindu Nationalist Movement*, p.359, where the
reference is to a policy of organizing collective (all-caste) services
in temples in emulation of collective worship in mosques.

[¹⁴](#14a)Graydon Chiappetta, speaking to me at the Annual South Asia
Conference in Madison, Wisconsin, October 1995.

[¹⁵](#15a)This is the main thesis of Dany Praet: *God der Goden*, in
which he seeks to explain how the breakthrough of Christianity was
possible.

[¹⁶](#16a)Lucas Catherine: *Islam voor ongelovigen* (Dutch: “Islam for
Unbelievers”), P.29.

[¹⁷](#17a)Ram Swarup: *Hindu View*, p.52; emphasis in the original.

[¹⁸](#18a)Robert Eric Frykenburg: “The Emergence of Modern ‘Hinduism’ as
a Concept and as an Institution”, in G. Sontheimer and H. Kulke, eds.:
*Hinduism Reconsidered*, p. 29.

[¹⁹](#19a)D. Ludden: *Making India Hindu*, p.6.

[²⁰](#20a)D. Ludden: *Making India Hindu*, p.7. Ludden is, however,
mistaken in attributing the fixation of the current meaning of Hindu to
the British (“government use in census statistics and elections”, p.7)
rather than the earliest Muslim invaders, a mistake of about 1,000
years.

[²¹](#21a)Explained in S.R. Goel: *Hindu and Hinduism, Manipulation of
Meanings*.

[²²](#22a)A Shourie: “Parts talk and anti-ourselves talk”, *Observer of
Business and Politics*, 15-11-1996.

[²³](#23a)A. Shourie: “Parts talk and anti-ourselves talk”, *Observer of
Business and Politics*, 15-11-1996.

[²⁴](#24a)E.g.: C. Aloysius: *Nationalism without a Nation in India*.

[²⁵](#25a)E.g.: A. Shourie: *A Secular Agenda. For Saving Our Country,
for Welding It*, esp. Ch. : “‘But we aren’t even one nation’”.

[²⁶](#26a)A. Bonner: *Democracy in India*, p.46, quoting J. Hinnells and
E. Sharpe: *Hinduism*, p. 128.

[²⁷](#27a)A. Bonner: *Democracy in India*, p.46, quoting Max Weber, no
reference given, but actually from Weber: *The Religion of India*, p.
29.

[²⁸](#28a)A. Bonner: *Democracy in India*, p.46.

[²⁹](#29a)Nehru talking to Tibor Mende: *Conversations with Mr. Nehru*,
p. 107.

[³⁰](#30a)“In fact, the whole of the law was hardly a codified law”,
according to J. Nehru talking to Tibor Mende: *Conversations with Mr.
Nehru*, p. 107.

[³¹](#31a)J.C. Heesterman: *The Inner Conflict of Tradition*, p.202.

[³²](#32a)*Panchâyat* = “council of five”, village council.

[³³](#33a)Ram Swarup: “Logic behind Perversion of Caste”, *Indian
Express*, 13-9-1996.

[³⁴](#34a)Kancha Ilaiah: *Why I Am Not a Hindu*, p.xi. With its
promising title, and in spite of its rich panorama of the specificities
of Backward Caste culture, the book disappoints because unlike its title
counterparts (Bertrand Russell: *Why I Am Not a Christian*, and Ibn
Warraq: *Why I Am Not a Muslim*), it fails to address the central
doctrinal aspects of the repudiated religion, on the admittedly voguish,
nearly paradigmatic assumption that Hinduism can be reduced to its
social structure (though to his credit, he is less extreme in this
approach than the Western scholars cited in this section)

[³⁵](#35a)K. Ilaiah: *Why I Am Not a Hindu*, p.92.

[³⁶](#36a)*Durgâ-pûjâ*: devotional ritual for Durga, annual autumn
festival; *Sûrya namaskâra*: “salute to the sun”, term of both a ritual
and a yogic exercise; Agni-hotra: vedic fire ceremony.

[³⁷](#37a)Balraj Madhok: *Rationale of Hindu State*, p.32. Madhok, under
Arya Samaj influence, translates “ekam sat” as “one God”; but it means
“one being”, “one truth”.

[³⁸](#38a)This manipulation of meanings, with non-Hindus appropriating
to themselves the authority of deciding what *Hindu* means, in disregard
of its established meaning and even of elementary logic (where the first
rule is “a = a”, a term retains the same meaning all through), is just a
matter of *who is in power*.  This is where *Alice in Wonderland* was
told by Humpty Dumpty that the meaning of words is a matter of who is
boss.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------


