+++
title = "11 10. Are Buddhists Hindus?"

+++
**10. Are Buddhists Hindus?**

**10.1. A polemic and a high-brow debate**

Now that Christians have started talking about “Jesus the Jew”, it is to
be expected that Hindus and Buddhists should explore the notion “Buddha
the Hindu”, or at least to highlight the Hindu foundations on which the
Buddha built.  It is now fairly widely accepted that Jesus was a
millennarist cult leader inside the Jewish fold who did not conceive of
his own message and mission as a new religion; the question may be asked
whether the Buddha was not likewise an innovator within the Hindu
tradition.  But so far, that question has only been raised by the Hindu
Revivalists and a lone Western scholar, certainly not by Buddhists, and
to secularists the question is mere proof of evil Hindu imperialist
(“boa constrictor”) designs.

According to BJP leader and Home Minister L.K. Advani, the Buddha “did
not announce any new religion.  He was only restating with a new
emphasis the ancient ideals of the Indo-Aryan
civilisation”.^([1](#1)) Advani reportedly provoked the dismay of a
handful of foreign Buddhist scholars by saying that the Buddha “derived
his teachings from the Bhagwad Gita and was an avatar of
Vishnu”.^([2](#2)) And the dismay of the polemicizing secularists who
reported the event and claimed that “Buddhism arose as a distinct faith,
in revolt against hierarchical Hinduism” while Advani’s position
amounted to “communal poison”.^([3](#3))

Yet, when Hindu Revivalists claim Buddhism as a continuous evolute of
Hinduism, they join an established viewpoint articulated by Western
scholars with no axe to grind.  Christian Lindtner quotes with approval
Dharmakirti’s list of four doctrines of contemporaneous Brahmanism which
Buddhism rejected: “The authority of the Veda, the doctrine of a Creator
of the world, the conviction that rituals can cause moral purity, and
the haughtiness based on claims of birth”.  Then Lindtner adds: “Apart
from that, ancient Indian Buddhism should be seen as reformed
Brahmanism.”^([4](#4)) He shows that Vedic “cosmogonic speculations and
Vedic exegesis were vital and formative for Gautama’s way of thinking”,
that after the Vedic injunction, he was “concerned with *tad ekam*
beyond *sat* and *asat*”.^([5](#5)) After presenting many more Vedic
concepts adopted by Buddhism, Lindtner summarizes that “early
(canonical) Buddhism to a very considerable extent can and should be
seen as reformed Brahmanism”.^([6](#6))

Though Western scholarship is usually invoked as the ultimate trump card
with which to silence opponents, the Buddha-separatist authors prefer to
ignore or dismiss it in this case.  Thus, Buddhist scholar Davidi. 
Kalupahana, who rejects the inclusion of Buddhism in Hinduism, is
irritated with Western scholarship: “Hindu scholars writing on Buddhism
made such statements as this: ‘Early Buddhism is not an absolutely
original doctrine.  It is no freak in the evolution of Indian thought.’
But even a more sober scholar from the West felt that ‘Buddhism started
from special Indian beliefs, which it took for granted.  The chief of
these were the belief in transmigration and the doctrine of retribution
of action (…) They were already taken for granted as a commonly accepted
view of life by most Indian religions.’”^([7](#7))

Kalupahana calls these views “unhistorical”, “uncritical” and
“superficial”; and by implication, he calls them “not sober”, and
ridicules them for denying that Buddhism was “a freak in the evolution
of Indian thought”.^([8](#8)) This is but one instance of the humourless
reaction of contemporary Buddhists against the suspicion that Buddhism
was not sent down in a flash from heaven, but developed organically from
its Hindu roots.

The first one to hold these views which irritate certain modern
Buddhists may well have been the Buddha himself, who claimed to teach
“the ancient way along which the previous Buddhas walked”.^([9](#9)) His
pride lay not in being original, but in being a representative of a
timeless truth: “The Buddhas who have been and who shall be, of these am
I and what they did, I do.”^([10](#10))

Yet, the undeniable rootedness of the Buddha’s teachings in vaguely
“Hindu” ideas and traditions does not exclude the possibility that at
least on some doctrinal points, Buddhism does constitute a break-away, a
definite rejection of some prevalent views and practices.  Four
important points are sure to be mentioned in modern company: Buddhism’s
purported rejection of caste inequality, the value of non-violence, the
doctrine of No Self, and a pessimistic and avowedly escapist view of the
world.  They will all be considered in this and the next chapter.

**10.2. Buddhism as India’s state religion**

The relation between Hinduism and Buddhism, or between Brahmanism and
Shramanism, i.e. the non-Vedic sects practising world-renunciation
(celibate monkhood), has been one of intellectual controversy since
antiquity.^([11](#11)) Today, Shramanism is represented by the
traditions of Jainism and Buddhism, but in the time of their eponymous
founders, Vardhamana Mahavira Jina and Siddhartha Gautama the Buddha,
there were dozens of separate Shramana sects with their distinctive
doctrines and rules.  Vedic Hinduism has also incorporated Shramanism in
the form of the Dashanami order of celibate monks founded by
Shankaracharya (ca. 800 AD) and other Sadhu orders founded by a number
of Sants.  In the rest of this chapter, we will only consider the
attitude of the Hindu movement vis-à-vis Buddhism.

The Hindu position regarding Buddhism is also of some practical
importance due to the following circumstances.  Firstly, the relations
with Buddhist countries are considered to be of great political
importance as a counterweight to the Western, Islamic and Communist
blocs.  Secondly, Buddhism has made a remarkable but heavily politicized
come-back in India, first with the conversion of Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar
and millions of his Scheduled Caste followers (1956), and soon after
with the settlement of a high-profile Tibetan refugee community and a
Tibetan Government-in-Exile (1959).

The Hindutva position on Buddhism is generally not one of hostility,
though in the past, Swami Dayananda and Veer Savarkar did write a few
trenchant paragraphs criticizing Buddhism.  Today, the tendency is
simply to include Buddhism in Hinduism, with very little effort to give
a scholarly articulation to this claim apart from emphasizing the
Bharatiya origin of Buddhism.

Buddhism was turned into “India’s undeclared state religion” by
Jawaharlal Nehru.^([12](#12)) Thus, he borrowed the Buddhist term Pancha
Shila (five moral rules) to describe the “five principles of peaceful
coexistence” laid down in the Sino-Indian Treaty of 1954 a *la* the
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk signed between Germany and Bolshevik Russia in
1917.  When invoking the national tradition of religious pluralism,
Nehru credited Buddhism: “Even since the distant past, it has been
India’s proud privilege to live in harmony with each other.  That has
been the basis of India’s culture.  Long ago, the Buddha taught us this
lesson.  From the days of Ashoka, 2300 years ago, this aspect of our
thought has been repeatedly declared and practised.”^([13](#13)) The
omission of Hindu tradition here is obviously unfair: the Buddha, rather
than bringing religious pluralism, was himself a beneficiary of a
well-established pluralism, which allowed him to preach his doctrine for
fifty years and die in old age of natural causes.

The Lion Pillar of the Maurya emperor Ashoka was made into India’s
official state emblem and is depicted on Indian currency notes and
coins.  The 24-spoked Dharma Chakra in India’s national flag was
understood to be a symbol introduced by Ashoka (it also figures on his
pillars, between the two lions), known for his patronage of Buddhism and
claimed to be a convert to Buddhism.^([14](#14)) Nehru, on top of
presenting the Chakra as a truly representative and truly Indian symbol
(as would befit the national flag), explicitly associated it with Ashoka
and with the ideology-based policies he stood for:

“That Wheel is a symbol of India’s culture.  It is a symbol of many
things that India had stood for through the ages. (…) we have associated
with this flag not only this emblem, but in a sense, the name of Ashoka,
one of the most magnificent names not only in India’s history, but in
the history of the whole world.”^([15](#15))

Unknown to Nehru, the Chakra was a pre-Ashokan and pre-Buddhist symbol
of “uniting the many”, viz. the different autonomous parts of India
under one suzerain or “wheel-turner” (*chakravarti*; the term implied in
the Buddhist term *dharmachakrapravartana*, “setting in motion the wheel
of the Dharma”).  So, in spite of Nehru, the centre-space of India’s
flag ended up being taken by a truly national rather than a sectarian
symbol.  Nehru’s intended imposition of a specific historical model and
the concomitant ideological message on a national symbol does amount, at
least in principle, to the declaration of a state ideology.  Like
Ashoka, who used his throne to preach Dharma, Nehru was guilty of
“*varna-sankara*”, here not in the sense of intermarriage between varnas
but in the sense of mixing up the distinct social functions: as rulers,
they had no business setting themselves up as preachers, since these are
distinct roles best exercised by separate groups of people.

Even in the choice of the official calendar, Nehru managed to impose his
Buddhist leanings.  Against the general preference for the widely-used
Vikram Samvat (counting from Vikramaditya, 57 BC) or the traditional
Kali Yuga (counting from Krishna’s death, 3102 BC), he opted for the
Shaka Samvat, supposed to have been instituted by another Buddhist
emperor, Kanishka: “Our modern young republic has immortalised him by
adopting Saka Era which was started by him in 78 AD when he ascended the
throne.”^([16](#16)) The exact basis of this calendar is actually
disputed, and in this case Nehru’s concern was perhaps less pro-Buddhist
than simply anti-Hindu.  Shaka Samvat was for him a way to distance
himself from the Hindu preference, comparable to his advocacy of Jana
Gana Mana over Vande Mataram as national anthem, of English over Hindi
as the link language, of “Hindustani” (i.e. Urdu) over proper Hindi, and
of Western-Arabic over Sanskritic numerals.

While political speeches and Government-approved schoolbooks in India
are full of criticism of “the evils of Hindu society”, there is not one
which will offer even the faintest criticism of the Buddha and
Buddhism.  In orientalist Western and urban Indian circles, both Hindu
and secularist, it is taken for granted that all kinds of things are
wrong with Hinduism, but criticizing Buddhism is just not done. it is
very hard to find a contemporary book on Buddhism which fails to
disparage Hinduism at some point.^([17](#17))

Except in Christian missionary literature and a single Hindutva
pamphlet, any incisive criticism of Buddhism by contemporary authors is
truly hard to find.  So, at the level of academic and public discourse,
Hinduism finds itself in an uphill battle for the public’s favour with
Buddhism, unless it incorporates Buddhism.

**10.3. Buddhism as an ally against Islam**

Before dealing with the Hindu attitude vis-à-vis Buddhism proper, we
should mention a commonality of interest between Hindus and Buddhists
vis-à-vis a third party, viz.  Islam.  Three regions are in focus:

1\. Bangladesh, where Muslim settlers backed by the Islamic Government
took over the lands of Buddhist and other non-Muslim tribes in the
Chittagong Hill Tracts, effectively expelling the natives.  Some of
these fled to India, while others started an armed resistance movement
called Shanti Bahini (“peace squad”), which agreed to dissolve itself
under the terms of a peace treaty concluded with the Bangladesh
Government in 1997.

2\. India’s Northeast, where Buddhist and other non-Muslim tribes are
confronted with Muslim illegal immigrants from Bangladesh; the picture
is complicated by resentment among non-Muslim natives against the
Buddhist refugees from Bangladesh, especially in Arunachal Pradesh.

3\. Ladakh, where a shrinking Buddhist majority feels threatened by a
growing and assertive Muslim minority, all the more so because nearby
Kargil has witnessed exactly the development which Ladakhis fear:
through demographics and conversions (esp. of Buddhist brides married
into Muslim families); a small immigrant group of Muslims in the 19th
century has by now become the majority, and the Buddhist character of
the region is but a memory.^([18](#18))

All three situations are monitored regularly (though certainly not
closely, merely giving publicity to reports and resolutions which the
affected communities themselves have prepared) by the Hindutva
press.  The Buddhist minority in Kargil (in Jammu & Kashmir) shares the
long-standing RSS demand that an anti-conversion law be enacted.  The
BJP has succeeded in recruiting a number of Ladakh Buddhists into its
ranks.^([19](#19)) After summing up some discriminations imposed by the
Muslim state and district authorities on the Buddhists of Kargil,
representatives of the Ladakh Buddhist Association complain:

“As if this is not enough, there is a deliberate and organised design to
convert Kargil’s Buddhists to Islam.  In the last four years, about 50
girls and married women with children were allured and converted from
village Wakha alone.  If this continues unchecked, we fear that
Buddhists will be wiped out from Kargil in the next two decades or so. 
Anyone objecting to such allurement and conversions is
harassed.”^([20](#20))

The most challenging face of Buddhism in India is that of the
neo-Buddhist movement initiated by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar. However, here too
the commonality of Hindu and Buddhist interests in facing Islam is
explicit, at least in Dr. Ambedkar’s own writings though less so in
those of his present-day followers.  Whatever criticism of Hinduism
Ambedkar may have formulated, his open rejection of both Christianity
and Islam (who assiduously courted him in the hope that he would bring
the Scheduled Castes into their fold) has endeared him to Hindu
activists.  Ambedkar took a cool and hard look at Islam as a sworn enemy
of Hindu society, even while being bitterly critical of the latter.

Dr. Ambedkar was particularly outspoken about the social injustices in
Islam, especially in his book *Pakistan or the Partition of India*
(1940).  According to his biographer Dhananjay Keer, “some penetrating
and caustic paragraphs were deleted, it is said, at the instance
of Ambedkar’s close admirers” for the sake of his own safety; but what
remains is still quite radical.^([21](#21)) Dr. Ambedkar also rejected
Islam because it had destroyed Buddhism in India and other countries. 
Many present-day Ambedkarites never tire of quoting his one-liner: “The
history of India is nothing but a history of a mortal conflict between
Buddhism and Brahmanism.”^([22](#22)) But Dr. Ambedkar has also written:
“There can be no doubt that the fall of Buddhism was due to the
invasions of the Muslims.”^([23](#23))

Referring to the Persian word for “idol”, *but*, derived from *Buddha*,
Dr. Ambedkar observes: “Thus the origin of the word indicates that in
the Muslim mind idol worship had come to be identified with the religion
of Buddha.  To the Muslims they were one and the same thing.  The
mission to break idols thus became the mission to destroy Buddhism. 
Islam destroyed Buddhism not only in India but wherever it went. 
Bactria, Parthia, Afghanistan, Gandhara and Chinese Turkestan (…) in all
these countries Islam destroyed Buddhism.”^([24](#24))

Moreover: “The Muslim invaders sacked the Buddhist universities of
Nalanda, Vikramasila, Jagaddala, Odantapuri to name only a few.  They
razed to the ground Buddhist monasteries with which the country was
studded.  The monks fled away in thousands to Nepal, Tibet and other
places outside India. A very large number were killed outright by the
Muslim commanders.”^([25](#25))

It is useful to quote Dr. Ambedkar as restating these facts, for the
secularists work overtime to deny them.  Thus, Marxist history-rewriter
Praful Bidwai claims: “Despotic state power persecuted Buddhists for
centuries as brahminical Hinduism held sway in large parts of India. 
Buddhism was all but banished from this land and found refuge in Sri
Lanka, Tibet, Myanmar, Thailand and eastwards.”^([26](#26)) In fact,
Buddhism went to these lands at a time when it was still flourishing in
India, so that at the time of the Muslim invasions, the surviving monks
fled to those countries because they knew a Buddhist establishment was
already in existence there.

Today, Dalit leaders like Bahujan Samaj Party president Kanshi Ram woo
the Muslim community.^([27](#27)) Yet, the pro-Islamic orientation which
some of them (most staunchly V.T. Rajshekar in his fortnightly *Dalit
Voice*) want to give to the Ambedkarite movement, is not at all in
consonance with Dr. Ambedkar’s own view of Islam.^([28](#28)) Many of
Dr. Ambedkar’s observations on Islam would now be branded as “Hindu
communalist” by the very people who claim his heritage. in fact, the
literature of the RSS Parivar offers no counterpart to Ambedkar’s strong
language about Islam: he was more openly anti-Islamic than Savarkar,
Golwalkar or any Hindutva stalwart who is regularly accused of being
just that.  From the Hindu Revivalist point of view, Ambedkar, in
writing his incisive criticism of Islam, did the homework which the
Hindutva ideologues neglected.

**10.4. Swami Dayananda on Buddhism**

The one Hindu leader who could always be counted upon to polemicize
against rival religions was Arya Samaj founder Swami Dayananda
Saraswati.  However, contrary to his refutations of Christianity and
Islam, Dayananda’s critique of Buddhism is limited to certain highbrow
points of philosophy, and avoids attacks on the morality of the founder
or on the humanity of the religion’s historical career.  We forego
discussion of the scholastic points on the epistemology and metaphysics
of Buddhism.^([29](#29)) We will consider the argument against the far
more fundamental Buddhist doctrine of *Dukkha* (suffering).

Against the cardinal principle of *Dukkha*, “(all is) suffering”, the
first of the Buddha’s “Four Noble Truths”, Dayananda asserts: “Had there
been nothing in this world but pain and sorrow, no living soul would
have had an inclination for anything in this world; but it is our daily
experience that the souls do desire for the objects of this world, hence
it cannot be true that in the whole universe there is nothing but pain
and sorrow.  If the Buddhists really believe in the above doctrine, why
do they attend to the health of their bodies, and for this purpose take
food and drink and follow the laws of health and in case of sickness
take medicine etc.? (…) If they answer that they certainly do these
things but at the same time believe that they lead to misery and pain,
it can never be true because the soul takes to what is conducive to its
happiness and shuns what entails misery and suffering.  Practice of
virtue, acquisition of knowledge and wisdom, association with the good
and the like undoubtedly are conducive to man’s happiness.  No wise man
can ever assert that these result in pain and sorrow.”^([30](#30))

Our natural experience is indeed that both suffering and happiness
exist.  While certain unwise forms of pleasure are pregnant with
experiences of pain, it is rather sweeping to include all occasions of
happiness in this category.^([31](#31)) It is by no means certain that
happiness is unreal; at most one could say that all worldly happiness is
very unimpressive when compared with the profound happiness of the yogic
state of consciousness.

Moreover, asymmetrical models like the Buddhist inclusion of happiness
in suffering are liable to being inverted, with the inverted model being
just as reasonable: just as all happy moments may be considered spoiled
by the concomitant fear of losing that which makes happy, all fleeting
moments of suffering are redeemed by the ensuing moments of relief
resulting in restored happiness.  This way, one could just as well say
that “all is bliss”.  But Dayananda upholds the more commonsensical
position, which is that, of course, both happiness and suffering are
real.

Though the actual meditation practices taught by Vedantic and Buddhist
yogis are not very different, the intellectual constructions which the
two traditions have built around the yogic experience are in some ways
diametrical opposites.  In Vedanta, the basic vision is positive: the
experience of the Self is Reality-Consciousness-Bliss, it is what we
have to get into.^([32](#32)) An afterthought could be that compared
with this yogic bliss, any external form of happiness is comparatively
bleak; but it could also be the realization that the same blissful Self
pervades everything.  In Buddhism, the basic vision is negative: life is
suffering brought about by the unquenchable thirst of desire; it is what
we have to get away from.  Fortunately, an alternative is found in the
experience of Nirvana, so all is well that ends well; but the negative
starting-point remains the distinctive signature of Buddhist philosophy.

In the Upanishads, the awakening to the Self is the crown of all
possible happy experiences, a happiness worth seeking for its own
sake.  To the Vedic seers, the worldly experiences are a mixed bag of
sorrow and happiness, in which capable people can ensure (through
*nîti*, “policy”, intelligent conduct)^([33](#33)) that the balance of
their lives is on the positive side; but this real measure of worldly
happiness should only spur us onwards to a more perfect happiness of
*enstasis* (to use Mircea Eliade’s term)^([34](#34)) in the Self.  This
experience is desirable not because it is an escape from worldly
suffering, but because it is so terrifically *true*, a true perception
of one’s true Self.

Swami Dayananda could have made his critique of Buddhism more attractive
if he had elaborated more on what Buddhism has in common with the
positive Vedantic way.  What is in common is after all the most
important part, viz. the practice of inner concentration.

An unpleasant suggestion would be that yogic practice was outside
Dayananda’s intellectual focus because he himself didn’t practise
much.^([35](#35)) This is in general a real problem: monks whose
prestige is derived from the assumption that they practice yoga, but who
don’t really practise.  As the late Agehananda Bharati, the Austrian
Indologist and nominally also a Hindu monk, observed: “Yoga and other
esoteric wisdoms are talked about, the monks and the other gurus of the
Hindu Renaissance are listened to and quoted, but their votaries do not
really meditate.  They *talk* about meditation.  This also holds for
modern monks whose professed job it is to meditate.” The same is true in
Buddhism, e.g. in Sri Lanka, the practice of meditation fell into disuse
centuries ago, to be replaced by ritualism, scholastic argument and
political intrigue.^([36](#36)) This goes far in explaining the petty
anti-Hindu sectarianism (including successful incitement to the
destruction of Hindu temples) common among the Lankan Buddhist clergy. 
It is not the accomplished yogis who indulge in sectarian identity
politics.

However, to my knowledge, and judging from the apparent seriousness with
which leading lights of the present-day Arya Samaj practise yoga, the
suggestion would be unfair in the case of Dayananda.^([37](#37)) The
more fitting explanation would probably remind us first of all that even
yogic accomplishment does not magically create worldly skills such as
intellectual knowledge, not even knowledge pertaining to other spiritual
philosophies beside one’s own.  As we shall see, even the Buddha himself
can reasonably be suspected of incomplete and inaccurate knowledge of
other (viz Upanishadic) philosophies, a matter entirely divorced from
his undeniable yogic accomplishment.  Dayananda’s objective was at any
rate not to give a full account of rival viewpoints, merely to indicate
where they strayed from the Vedic vision as he understood it.

**10.5. Incorporating the Buddha**

In recent decades, the Buddha has been enshrined as one of the great
sages of Hinduism.  This is largely due to the influence of Western
tastes, which have promoted the Buddha (supposedly a rationalist and
votary of social justice as against Hindu superstition and caste
oppression) to the status of India’s major claim to fame.  This
influence has operated mainly through two entries to Hindu society: a
certain governmental effort springing from Jawaharlal Nehru’s
glorification of the Buddha and the pro-Buddhist Emperor Ashoka, and
genuine intellectual developments in non-Arya Samaj Hindu Revivalism.

Even the Arya Samaj has been touched by this tendency, and its newer
publications have little anti-Buddhist polemic left in them.  Rather,
the tendency now is to pick from Buddhism those points which are
seemingly in common with the Arya Samaj’s programme.

For example, in the Chapter “Our saints and sages” of an Arya Samaj
catechism book, the very first sage discussed is the Buddha.  Most of
the text simply narrates the well-known episodes of the 29-year-old
Siddharta Gautama discovering the phenomenon of suffering and of the
accomplished Buddha dissuading king Bimbisara from conducting a
large-scale sacrifice of animals. In the summary of the Buddha’s five
“most important teachings”, the fourth one is: “All human beings are
equal.  There is no high or low caste.”^([38](#38)) Though it is
doubtful that the Buddha cared about social inequality, this anti-caste
plank is now routinely attributed to him, and the Arya Samaj follows
suit by adopting it into its own longstanding campaign for social
equality.

An even sharper contrast between criticism and subsequent glorification
of Buddhism is found in the writings of Veer Savarkar, whom we shall get
to know as an unforgiving critic of Buddhism.  In a chapter titled
“Reverence to Buddha”, Savarkar tones down his attack: “We have while
writing this section wounded our own feelings.  So we hasten to add that
the few harsh words we had to say in explaining the political necessity
that led to the rejection of Buddhism in India should not be understood
to mean that we have not a very high opinion of that Church as a whole! 
No, no!  I am as humble an admirer and an adorer of that great and holy
Sangha, the holiest the world has ever seen, as any of its initiated
worshippers.(…) The consciousness that the first great and the most
successful attempt to wean man from the brute inherent in him was
conceived, launched and carried on from century to century by a galaxy
of great teachers, Arhats and Bhikkus who were born in India, who were
bred in India and who owned India as the land of their worship, fills us
with feelings too deep for words.”^([39](#39))

There is scope for debate about the Hindu or un-Hindu inspiration in the
basic doctrines of Buddhism, partly equivalent to the doubts about the
exact meaning of the term Hindu.  The fact remains that the *Hindu*
Renaissance starting among English-speaking Hindus in Calcutta
resolutely chose to embrace the Buddha and emphasize his Hindu-ness.

The first reason for including Buddhism in Hinduism (and it is an
observation which in itself cannot honestly be doubted) is that, after
its establishment as a separate sect, Buddhism has continually moved
closer to its Puranic or Tantric surroundings.  Tibetan Buddhism, a
fairly late offshoot of Indian Mahayana Buddhism, is very close to
Hinduism in most respects, starting with its elaborate ritualism.  But
in Japanese Buddhism too, we find many practices that are not
traditionally Japanese nor Buddhist in the strictest sense, but that
have been carried along by Buddhism as a part of its Hindu heritage,
e.g. the fire ceremony of the Shingon sect which, like the Vedic
sacrifice, is called “feeding the Gods”.^([40](#40))

Indeed, Mahayana itself marks a major step back towards Hinduism, not
just because of its adoption of externals like the Sanskrit language and
devotional rituals to a legion of divine beings, but in its basic
spirit: it aims beyond the monk’s individual salvation (the concern of
Theravada Buddhism as of Jainism) to universal salvation for all monks,
laymen and other beings, thereby restoring the central Hindu value of
*responsibility* for the world.^([41](#41))

Sir John Woodroffe, a British apologist of Hinduism (as in his book *Is
India Civilized?*), observed: “There are then based on this common
foundation three main religions, Brahmanism, Buddhism and Jainism.  Of
the second, a great and universal faith, it has been said that, with
each fresh acquirement of knowledge, it seems more difficult to separate
it from the Hinduism out of which it emerged and into which (in Northern
Buddhism) it relapsed.  This is of course not to say that there are no
differences between the two, but that they share in certain general and
common principles as their base.”^([42](#42))

Even if Buddhism originally constituted a break-away from the
established religion in some respects, it was inevitable that it would
assimilate much of Hinduism, for the simple reason that it recruited its
monks in a Hindu environment: “From the very beginning the Order
contained Brahmins who might have renounced caste but retained their
intellectual traditions.  The current Brahmin ideology (not ritual or
cults) was often taken for granted, just as the Brahmins had given up
beef-eating and accepted non-killing (ahimsâ) as their main
philosophy.  The higher philosophies of both Buddhist and Brahmin began
to converge in essence.”^([43](#43))

The replacement of Pali with Sanskrit as the language of Mahayana
Buddhism is an excellent illustration of this tendency.  Most Buddhist
philosophers (e.g. Nagarjuna, Vasubandhu, Asanga, Ashvaghosha) were born
Brahmins.

With that, we have only admitted that Buddhism has been *influenced* by
Hinduism.  The fact that Buddhism moved closer to Hinduism does not
prove that Buddhism itself is essentially Hindu, rather the opposite: if
it could move closer, it was because its basic position was
substantially different from Hinduism.  If it is merely a question of
influence, then the Buddhists might choose to emphasize the separate
identity of Buddhism by “purifying Buddhism of its Hindu accretions” in
a kind of Buddhist Tabligh campaign.^([44](#44))

This way, a Hindu effort to win Buddhists over to a recognition of the
basic Hindu character of Buddhism would be hurt rather than helped by
highlighting the influence which Hinduism has exerted on later
Buddhism.  The intellectually and strategically more important question
is therefore whether there is a fundamental doctrinal kinship between
Hinduism and Buddhism, not one of external influence but one inherent in
the Buddha’s own teachings, so that Buddhism can be described as merely
one branch of Hinduism.

The question is definitely answered in the affirmative by most
anglicized Hindus in the 20th century.  Speaking to a largely Buddhist
audience, Mahatma Gandhi declared that “the essential part of the
teachings of Buddha now forms an integral part of Hinduism. (…) It is my
fixed opinion that the teaching of Buddha found its full fruition in
India, and it could not be otherwise, for Gautama was himself a Hindu of
Hindus.  He was saturated with the best that was in Hinduism, and he
gave life to some of the teachings that were buried in the Vedas and
which were overgrown with weeds. (…) Buddha never rejected Hinduism, but
he broadened its base.  He gave it a new life and a new
interpretation.”^([45](#45))

However, the first sentence could be interpreted as contradicting the
rest, for it seems to be saying that Hinduism has incorporated Buddhist
doctrine as if it was imported from outside.  Another problem is that
Gandhi had a theistic conception of Hinduism, which constitutes a
fundamental difference with agnostic Buddhism.

In the same vein, Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, President of India and a
typical Congress Brahmin, has written: “Buddhism is only a later phase
of the general movement of thought of which the Upanishads were earlier
\[expressions\].  Buddha did not look upon himself as an innovator, but
only a restorer of the way of the Upanishads.”^([46](#46)) This may be
more defensible, in that Upanishadic philosophy, like Buddhism and
unlike Gandhi’s Vaishnavism, is not theocentric.

An oft-quoted Orientalist support for this position was given by Dr.
T.W. Rhys-Davids, who had conformed to the modern interpretation of
Buddhism as original and subversive, yet had observed: “We should never
forget that Gautama was born and brought up a Hindu and lived and died a
Hindu.  His teaching, far-reaching and original as it was, and really
subversive of the religion of the day, was Indian throughout He was the
greatest and wisest and best of the Hindus.”^([47](#47))

On the occasion of the celebration of the 2500th anniversary of the
Buddha’s enlightenment (disregarding the uncertainty among historians
about the Buddha’s dates)^([48](#48)), and coinciding with the
mass-conversion of Mahar Untouchables to Buddhism led by Dr. Ambedkar,
Prof. V.S. Jha, Vice-Chancellor of Benares Hindu University, wrote the
preface to the book *Buddhism and Hinduism* by Gurusevak Upadhyaya, “who
reminds Hindu readers, in particular, of the Brahmanical roots of
Buddhism on the one hand and its impact on the shaping of Hinduism
throughout the centuries, on the other”.  The BHU Vice-Chancellor gave
as his own judgment that “the essential message of the Buddha
constitutes not a ‘different’ religion but forms an integral part of
Hinduism itself, supplying to it the dynamism needed for continuous
self-criticism and self-purification”.^([49](#49))

Leading spokesmen of Buddhism may complete our parade of witnesses to
the essential unity of Hinduism and Buddhism.  The Dalai Lama has said:
“When I say that Buddhism is a part of Hinduism, certain people
criticize me.  But if I were to say that Hinduism and Buddhism are
totally different, it would not be in conformity with
truth.”^([50](#50)) it is no coincidence that the Dalai Lama has
attended a number of Sangh Parivar events, e.g. the VHP’s second World
Hindu Conference in Allahabad in 1979.^([51](#51))

Likewise, the 5th European Hindu Conference in Frankfurt featured a
speech by Bhikkhu Jnana Jagat, Buddhist member of the Bodh Gaya temple
management committee and of the VHP.  He presented the standard VHP
viewpoint on Buddhism, viz. that “from time immemorial the ‘Vedic
culture’ and ‘Shramana (ascetic) culture’ have been growing and
flourishing simultaneously in this land.  Both being the integral part
of the same Aryan culture or way of life have been enriching and
sustaining each other through centuries.”^([52](#52)) It is all a bit
vague, but hard to refute.

**10.6. Vivekananda on the Buddha**

In contrast with the Arya Samaj’s rather bitter criticism of Buddhism,
the trend among urban, vaguely anglicized Hindus throughout the 20th
century is to glorify the Buddha without measure, and to consider
Buddhism a branch of Hinduism with which Hindus have no quarrel.  This
embracing of Buddhism is strongly present in the Hindutva movement as
well.  A trend-setting example was Swami Vivekananda’s fondness of the
Buddha as attested by his own most famous speeches and by his
associates.

Swami Vivekananda’s close associate Sister Nivedita testifies that
Swamiji was a great devotee of the Buddha: “Again and again he would
return upon the note of perfect rationality in his hero.  Buddha was to
him not only the greatest of Aryans but also ‘the one absolutely sane
man’ that the world had ever seen.  How he had refused worship! (…) How
vast had been the freedom and humility of the Blessed One!  He attended
the banquet of Ambapali, the courtesan.  Knowing that it would kill him,
but desiring that his last act should be one of communion with the
lowly, he received the food of the pariah, and afterwards sent a
courteous message to his host, thanking him for the Great
Deliverance.  How calm!  How masculine! (…) He alone was able to free
religion entirely from the argument of the supernatural, and yet make it
as binding in its force, and as living in its appeal, as it had ever
been."^([53](#53)) Sister Nivedita also relates that Swamiji’s first act
after taking Sannyas was to "hurry to Bodh Gaya, and sit under the great
tree"; and that his last journey, too, had taken him to Bodh
Gaya.^([54](#54))

Before we move on to some direct quotations from Vivekananda’s own
works, we comment on this rendering of his thoughts by his pupil Sister
Nivedita, if only because it is entirely representative of the line
taken by Swamiji’s organized following, the Ramakrishna Mission.  The
first remarkable thing is the superlatives.  Even if we allow for the
greater tendency to use exclamation marks and inflated superlatives
typical of the age, the fact remains that no Hindu religious teacher,
from Rishi Yajnavalkya to Shankaracharya and down to Sant Tulsidas, has
ever been lauded in such strong terms by either Swami Vivekananda or any
of his pupils.  This unquestioning idealization of the Buddha is
entirely typical of modern Hinduism, both in anti-religious circles,
where he is hailed as a "rationalist", and in Hindu Renaissance
movements such as Vivekananda’s own Ramakrishna Mission and the
following of Sri Aurobindo.

The one paragraph which we have just quoted is packed with modern myths
or at least fashionable notions about the Buddha.  The Buddha’s "perfect
rationality" would probably not he conceded by rationalists when they
read about the Buddha’s perception of seductive nymphs (sent by the Gods
to distract him) when meditating under the Bodhi Tree, or with his claim
of knowing all his previous incarnations.  Still, the point is well
taken: it is true and commendable that the Buddha, like Confucius, chose
to keep metaphysical speculation outside his discourse, on the pragmatic
plea that life is too short for sterile pursuits which distract our
attention from those fields of interest where genuine knowledge and
liberating action are within man’s reach.

Some of the idealization of the Buddha reported by Sister Nivedita goes
beyond what would be acceptable to modern tastes.  Thus, to say that the
aged Buddha "knew" that the pork (or the "pig’s meat", meaning the sweet
potato normally eaten by pigs) offered to him by the pariah "would kill
him", is a typical attribution of omniscience to a Guru; the phenomenon
can still be witnessed among contemporary adepts of various Gurus.  It
is a dubious honour to die willingly of a perfectly avoidable cause such
as food poisoning, merely for the sake of "communion with the lowly". If
this were the case (more probably it is a projection of modem social
concerns), did the Buddha not apprehend that others present would die
along with him from the same cause?  Or did he consider that the normal
fate of the "lowly"?  Or should we accept that in his omniscience, he
had foreseen the effect of this food on every other participant in the
meal as well?  At any rate, all this supernatural omniscience seems to
be in contradiction with Sister Nivedita’s next claim, which is in the
modernist mode again: that he "was able to free religion entirely from
the argument of the supernatural".

Sister Nivedita’s rendering of Swami Vivekananda’s position is only
sketchy, but so is the understanding of Vivekananda by the millions of
Hindus who consider him to be one of the greatest exponents of
Hinduism.  No wonder, then, that the words of praise to the Buddha just
quoted are now the commonplace view of the Buddha among urban Hindus
whose convictions are strongly influenced by modem Gurus like
Vivekananda.

**10.7. Sages of old eclipsed by the Buddha**

A point only raised in passing by Vivekananda, but quite fundamental to
an understanding of the position of Buddhism vis-à-vis Hinduism,
concerns the centrality of the Buddha’s person.  That the Buddha
"refused worship"^([55](#55)) sounds good to us anti-authoritarian
moderns, but it is hardly unique, and presenting it as unique is unfair
to Hindu tradition.  In pre-Buddhist scripture, we find very little
"worship" of human religious figures, e.g. we never find Rama
"worshipping" his Guru Vasishtha.  Fact is that the focusing of a
religious tradition in a single person (who was subsequently deified,
with the Gods as his servants) is not attested in Vedic literature,
which is *apaurusheya*, "impersonal", part of a hoary tradition not
attributed to any single individual.  Symbols of the Vedic religion
include fire, the starry sky, the Aum sound, the swastika, but not any
individual; by contrast, the central symbol of Buddhism is the Buddha.

Buddhism is, in spite of its claims to universalism and rationality, a
pioneer of the *paurusheya*, "person-centred" traditions; in this
respect, it is a forerunner of Christianity, which deifies Jesus, and of
Islam, where Mohammed as the *mard-i-kâmil* (Persian-Urdu: "accomplished
man", model man) eclipses the entire earlier history of his people
(denounced as *jâhilîya*, "age of ignorance"). in fact, Buddhism does
one better, for while Christianity and Islam still present their own
divinely revealed messages against the background of the tradition of
Biblical prophets, Buddhist scriptures carry practically no references
to the Vedic or any other preexisting traditions, except negative ones. 
Their world starts with the Buddha’s awakening and his
*dharma-chakra-pravartana* ("setting in motion the wheel of Buddhism"),
and what little of earlier history Buddhists admit into their
intellectual horizon (e.g. the stories of the Buddha’s previous lives)
serves exclusively as prefiguration or preparation of these strictly
Buddhist events.

It is quite possible that the followers have done injustice to the
Buddha by worshipping him, that they have disobeyed him by making him
the exclusive horizon of their religious consciousness.  At that point,
we are faced with limitations of historical knowledge similar to those
surrounding the genesis of Christianity (did Jesus intend to found a new
religion separate from Judaism?), and there is no point in making
unverifiable claims about "what the Buddha *really* said". In the eyes
of his followers at any rate, Siddhartha Gautama, more thoroughly than
Jesus and Mohammed, eclipsed all sources of inspiration anterior to his
own mission.^([56](#56))

In all three cases, the doctrines and ethics (in the case of Islam even
the civil law system) by which their followers live are entirely linked
with the founders, whether historically springing from them and their
immediate associates or unhistorically attributed to them by later
authorities.  This is not to deny that the positions of the Buddha, the
Christ and the Prophet are different ones within their respective
traditions, merely to draw attention to the near-monopoly of these three
individuals on the ethical and spiritual horizons of their followers, an
individual monopoly quite without parallel in the Vedic or in the
ancient Greek religion.  It is only in post-Buddhist Hinduism that
historical figures (or even metahistorical Gods) acquire a remotely
similar monopoly, e.g. the pre-Buddhist characters Rama and Krishna only
become objects of worship in the post-Buddha period if we accept the
modern dating of Ramayana and Mahabharata which presents both Rama and
Krishna as Avataras of Vishnu.

On the other hand, the worship of the Buddha admits of a different
interpretation, in keeping with the Hindu tradition of
Gurudom.^([57](#57)) "Guru worship" is usually disparaged as the
ultimate in idol worship and cultism, but informed Hindus reject this
criticism.  The Guru is venerated in his impersonal capacity as an
embodiment of the realized Self; it is not the person but the universal
Brahman which is venerated through him.  Likewise, the Buddha who is
venerated is not the individual Siddhartha Gautama, but the "Buddha
nature" which Gautama, like other Awakened individuals before and after
him, had realized.

Guru worship is expressive of that which, in the Hindu view, makes
Hinduism superior to other religions: its tradition of techniques which
make the "realization" of the Brahman in an individual possible.  Most
religions simply do not have ways to achieve this, do consequently not
have *enlightened* masters through whom one can venerate the living
Brahman; they can only talk about the divine but not bring it alive in a
human being.  All this, of course, on the Hindu-Buddhist assumption that
what yoga achieves is not just some "funny feeling"^([58](#58)) but a
state of consciousness which really is radically superior to the
ordinary.  If this state of consciousness is indeed venerable, it is
normal that lesser mortals, in preparation of their own ascension to
this state (in this or a future life) venerate it through individuals
who have realized it.

There is nothing exclusive about this "Guru worship": it is agreed that
the Absolute Consciousness or Brahman is present in everyone, in the
pupil or worshipper and in all sentient beings as well as in the Guru,
and that it has been "realized" by numerous masters.  At this point,
however, the difference between Hinduism and.  Buddhism resurfaces. 
Hindus may hold it against the Buddha that he disturbed the world order
by focusing exclusively on the "liberation from suffering" through
meditation (implicitly disparaging the validity of all non-spiritual
pursuits), but very few Hindus would deny the Buddha’s genuine yogic
realization and hence his rightful place in the pantheon of genuine
Gurus.  By contrast, judging from Buddhist scripture and from modern
Buddhist publications, Buddhists whose horizon of realized spiritual
masters includes non-Buddhist sages are rare.^([59](#59))

The Hindu pantheon of sages is open-ended, and Hindu claims about the
genuine self-realization of this or that particular Guru imply
absolutely no denial of the spiritual merits of any other sage, whether
Hindu or non-Hindu.^([60](#60)) This may be true in theory for Buddhists
as well, but in practice, Buddhists are less open to any input from
outside their own tradition, less explicit in acknowledging the validity
of other paths. in the Hindu endeavour of seeking and verifying any
common ground between Hinduism and Buddhism, theory may be more
important than practice: the Buddhist practice of isolating the Buddha
from his historical context, viz. the Hindu institution of Gurudom, may
simply be a temporary historical development which can be reversed by a
closer study of the philosophical basis of Buddhism.  It seems that in
this respect, Hindu-Buddhist unity is a theoretically arguable
proposition, but the de facto state of affairs suggests a more separate
identity for Buddhism.

**10.8. Vivekananda on Buddhist non-theism**

A closer reading of Vivekananda merely confirms his veneration for the
Buddha and his agreement with the Buddhist rejection of dualist theism. 
About the latter point, his Buddhist contemporaries themselves were not
all in agreement, and Vivekananda’s view that the Buddha was an
“agnostic" was criticized by his friend Dharmapala (of the Lanka-based
Buddhist missionary organization, the Maha Bodhi Society, founded in
1891 and closely linked with the Theosophy movement), whom he is said to
have helped with his speech at the Parliament of Religions.  The two got
estranged and by 1897 they were accusing each other of "undue
malice".  While Vivekananda remained a Buddha fan, the Maha Bodhi
Society turned anti-Hindu and even rewrote its version of Buddhist
history to minimize the role of Islam and maximize the role of Hinduism
in the elimination of Buddhism from India.^([61](#61))

Regardless of his personal relations with Buddhists, Vivekananda
explicitly goes along with what he understands to be the Buddhist
argument against the reliance on a personal God: "Ay, the Buddhists say
that ninety per cent of these vices that you see in every society are on
account of this idea of a personal God; this is an awful idea of the
human being that the end and aim of this expression of life, this
wonderful expression of life, is to become like a dog.  Says the
Buddhist to the Vaishnava, ‘If your ideal, your aim and goal is to go to
the place called Vaikuntha where God lives, and there stand before Him
with folded hands all through eternity, it is better to commit suicide
than do that.’ (…) I am putting these ideas before you as a Buddhist
just for the time being, because nowadays all these Advaitic ideas are
said to make you immoral, and I am trying to tell you how the other side
looks.”^([62](#62))

In this case, the claimed Buddhist objection against the theistic goal
of eternally being *with* God in Heaven is also the Advaitic objection:
both Buddhism and Advaita Vedanta aim for total emancipation from the
relative and fleeting world, and refuse to settle for a lesser goal such
as being "with" (i.e. still separate from) the Divine.  It must be
admitted that the vast majority of Hindus have no conception of
spiritual achievement beyond being "with" their chosen deity.  The same
is true for popular devotional Buddhism, where the agnostic yogic
radicalism is replaced with reliance on quasi-deities (Amitabha, Guan
Yin, etc.). Here again, what may superficially seem as a contrast
between Hinduism and Buddhism is in fact an internal contrast within
both Buddhism and Hinduism, viz. between radical philosophies of
liberation and popular devotional attitudes.

Vivekananda also reiterates the atheist argument against the doctrine of
Creation by a divine Person: "We have seen first of all that this cannot
be proved, this idea of a Personal God creating the world; is there any
child that can believe this today?  Because a Kumbhakara creates a
Ghata, therefore a God created the world!"^([63](#63)) In other words:
from the fact that all phenomena within the cosmos have been caused or
created, it doesn’t follow that the cosmos as a whole was likewise
caused or created by an external agent.

This atheist skepticism forms a bridge between ancient non-theist
philosophy and modern rationalism: "Has ever your Personal God, the
Creator of the world, to whom you cry all your life, helped you?-is the
next challenge from modem science." And back to ancient non-theism: "And
we have seen that along with this idea of a Personal God comes tyranny
and priestcraft.  Tyranny and priestcraft have prevailed wherever this
idea existed, and until the lie is knocked on the head, say the
Buddhists, tyranny will not cease.”^([64](#64)) Here, Vivekananda
fulfils his self-appointed role as herald of modernity and of the
implicit modernity avant *la lettre* (universalism, non-theism,
rejection of irrational belief) of ancient philosophies including
Vedanta and Buddhism.

Few modern Hindus follow Vivekananda in this radical rejection of
theism: usually they snake a superficial compromise between their
families’ traditional theistic beliefs and veneration for non-theistic
thinkers including the Buddha, without thinking through the inherent
contradiction.  Thus, we can see Gandhiji’s inclusion of Buddhism in
Hinduism (as he understood it: Vaishnava theism) falters on this point:

"I have heard it contended that Buddha did not believe in God.  In my
humble opinion such a belief contradicts the very central fact of
Buddha’s teaching.  He undoubtedly rejected the notion that a being
called God was actuated by malice and like the kings of the earth could
possibly be open to temptations and bribes (animal sacrifice) and could
possibly have favourites.  He emphasized and redeclared the eternal and
unalterable existence of the moral government of the
universe.”^([65](#65))

This is an unconvincing way to paper over the stark difference between
Gandhi’s own devotional theism and the Buddha’s self-reliant approach
which had no place for devotions to or speculative discourse about
God.  Though the Buddhist canon seems to take for granted the existence
of the Vedic Gods (plural!-monotheism was totally foreign to
Buddhism)^([66](#66)), they were not accorded any importance whatsoever
in the Buddhist spiritual path.  The Buddhist law of Karma, or what
Gandhi calls "the moral government of the universe", is conceived as a
Natural Law, not as the doing of a Divine Person.

It is true that devotional theism has crept into Buddhism at a later
stage, but Gandhi’s claim is not about these later trends but about the
Buddha himself.  Gandhi’s approach is quite typical of the rather
hurried way in which anglicized Hindus try to dismiss doctrinal
differences as peripheral and nonessential, without bothering to offer a
proper analysis.  The same superficial approach is in evidence in the
Sangh Parivar, which is quite akin to Gandhi in its understanding of
Hinduism.

**10.9. Coomaraswamy on Hindu-Buddhist unity**

When surveying the modern Hindu opinion on Buddhism, we cannot skip the
contribution of Ananda Kentish Coomaraswamy.  As he stayed aloof from
politics and from Hindu activism, we do not want to include him in the
Hindutva movement, yet we do choose to include him in this survey for
the following reasons.  Firstly, he was definitely an apologist of
Hinduism, a defender of Hindu values and traditions (including the caste
system) against the numerous misconceptions and prejudices common among
the Western and anglicized-Indian audiences.^([67](#67)) Secondly, his
observations on the sameness and difference of Buddhism and Hinduism are
so lucid and accurate, that we do not want to be without them when
evaluating the often rather simplistic evaluations of a Vivekananda or a
Savarkar.

We need not postpone a judgment on the question whether, or to what
extent, Buddhism is part of Hinduism, as it is rather simple to solve;
or so, at least, Coomaraswamy teaches us.  For an initial general
judgment: "There is no true opposition of Buddhism and Brahmanism, but
from the beginning one general movement, or many closely related
movements.  The integrity of Indian thought, moreover, would not be
broken if every specifically Buddhist element were omitted; we should
only have to say that certain details had been less adequately
elaborated or less emphasized. (…) \[The Buddha\] in a majority of
fundamentals does not differ from the Atmanists, although he gives a far
clearer statement of the law of causality as the essential mark of the
world of Becoming.  The greater part of his polemic, however, is wasted
in a misunderstanding."^([68](#68)) The "misunderstanding" concerns the
seeming opposition between the Upanishadic notion of Self (âtman) and
the Buddhist doctrine of Non-Self (*anatta/anâtman*).

Coomaraswamy explains that "the distinction appeared clear enough to
Gautama and his successors; but this was largely because the Brahmanism
against which they maintained their polemic was after all merely the
popular aspect of Brahmanism.  From a study of the Buddha’s dialogues it
would appear that he never encountered a capable exponent of the highest
Vedantic idealism, such a one as Yajnavalkya or Janaka (…) It appeared
to Gautama and his followers then and now that the highest
truths-especially the truth embodied by Buddhists in the phrase
*Anatta*-lay rather without than within the Brahmanical
circle".^([69](#69)) To Coomaraswamy, however, the same truth was
present in the Upanishads, "where the truth was held, that the Atman is
‘not so, not so’”.^([70](#70))

A misunderstanding arises when people are using the same word but with a
different meaning: "At first sight nothing can appear more definite than
the opposition of the Buddhist *An-atta*, ‘no-Atman’, and the Brahman
*Atman*, the sole reality.  But in using the same term, *Atta* or
*Atman*, Buddhist and Brahman are talking of different things, and when
this is realized, it will be seen that the Buddhist disputations on this
point lose nearly all their value. (…) There is nothing, then, to show
that the Buddhists ever really understood the pure doctrine of the
Atman, which is ‘not so, not so’.  The attack which they led upon the
idea of soul or self is directed against the conception of the eternity
in time of an unchanging individuality; of the timeless spirit they do
not speak (…) In reality both sides were in agreement that the soul or
ego (*mânas, ahamkâra, vijñâna*, etc.) is complex and phenomenal, while
of that which is ‘not so’ we know nothing.”^([71](#71))

The Self being pure subject, it cannot be the passive object of
knowledge, and in that sense it is unknowable, but in a state of
*kaivalya* ("isolation \[of consciousness from its objects\]", to use
Patanjali’s term) or *enstasis*, it is subject and object at the same
time.  By contrast, any specific functions of consciousness, such as
sensorial perception, memory, imagination and ratiocination are-and this
is what one comes to realize pretty early in meditation
practice-*objects* of consciousness, arising and passing away, parading
before the eye of consciousness like clouds in a windy sky.  All these
mental phenomena can be dismissed as fleeting phenomena, but sheer
consciousness cannot: it is the sea on which the waves appear as
temporary shapes, necessary as the permanent basis to make the momentary
waves possible.

The classical Buddhist position that the Self is as temporary and
"unreal" as the modifications of its contents (its ever-changing
objects), can only be taken by someone who doesn’t know the established
meaning of the term "Self”, one who doesn’t know that consciousness
itself is the Self, and that it underlies *any* state of consciousness
including Bodhi, the Awakened state.  But, Coomaraswamy observes, there
was no dearth of people who had mistaken or non-Upanishadic notions
about the Self (equating it with the body, or the brain, or the sense of
individual identity, or a transmigrating personality complex called
soul), and it is from such people that the Buddha acquired a mistaken
understanding of the Self too:

"Either Gautama was only acquainted with popular Brahmanism, or he chose
to ignore its higher aspects.  At any rate, those whom he defeats in
controversy so easily are mere puppets who never put forward the
doctrine of the unconditional Self at all.  Gautama meets no foeman
worthy of his steel, and for this reason the greater part of Buddhist
polemic is unavoidably occupied in beating the air.  This criticism
applies as much to modern as to ancient exposition.”^([72](#72))

The confusion need not be blamed on the followers, but may be traced to
the Master himself: "The ‘further shore’ is a symbol of salvation used
by both parties; in the *Tevijja Sutta* Gautama suggests that it is
employed by the Brahmans to mean union with Brahma (in the masculine \[=
as a theistic conception of a Divine Person\]), whereas he himself means
Arahatta \[= Enlightenment\]. if he really understood the Atmanist
position in this manner, it proves that he spoke without knowledge; if
he assumed that this was the Brahman position for the purposes of
argument, he was guilty of deliberate dishonesty.  The latter view
should not be entertained.  But it is undeniable that Gautama’s dialogue
is largely determined by controversial necessity.  The compilers of the
*Dialogues* had to represent the Buddha as victorious in argument, and
they succeed by setting up a dummy which it is easy to demolish, while
the object of nominal attack, the Atman theory, is never
attacked.”^([73](#73))

Coomaraswamy describes the Non-Self doctrine as essentially a knot into
which Buddhist debaters got themselves entangled by being too clever:
"Gautama constantly accuses others of eel-wrigging, but in the Dialogues
he adopts the same method himself. (…) words are interpreted in new
senses.  In particular, the word *atta* (Atman) is used in a different
sense from that of the Brahman Atmanists, and thus an easy victory is
secured by ‘thinking of something else’.  The coining of the term
*An-atta* to imply the absence of a perduring individuality is a triumph
of ingenuity, but it should not blind us to the fact that the perduring
Atman of the Brahmans was not an individuality at all.”^([74](#74))

Coomaraswamy concedes the greater systemic perfection of Buddhism as
compared to the inspired poetry of the Upanishadic seers, but this does
not decide the question of who is right and who is wrong: "It may
readily be granted that Buddhist thought is far more consistent than the
thought of the Upanishads.  The Upanishads are the work of many hands
and extend over many centuries; amongst their authors are both poets and
philosophers.  The Buddhist Dhamma claims to be the pronouncement of a
single rationalist, and to have but one flavour.  Gautama propounds a
creed and a system, and it is largely to this fact that the success of
his missionary activities was due. (…) No one will assert that the
Upanishads exhibit a consistent creed.  But the explanation of their
inconsistencies is historical and leaves the truth of their ultimate
conclusions quite untouched. (…) we find in point of fact that the
essential thought of the Upanishads is never grasped by the Early
Buddhists, and, is sometimes but obscurely apprehended by modern
exponents."^([75](#75))

It is not doubted that the Buddha attained the highest state of
consciousness, or what he called Awakening; what is doubted, in fact
confidently rejected, is that this state automatically confers other
qualities, such as intellectual knowledge about rival philosophies and
their jargon.  As Agehananda Bharati wrote: "To be a mystic is one
thing; to be perfect in the moral or any other field is quite a
different thing; and these perfections are not learned by yoga
techniques (…) any more than you learn loving your neighbours by playing
poker or cello.”^([76](#76))

So, in spite of an intellectual misunderstanding concerning the notion
of Self, the substance of the Upanishadic and Buddhist spiritual paths
remains essentially the same.  The central point of agreement is the
value and discipline of *non-attachment*:

"Implicit in Brahman thought from an early period (…) and forming the
most marked features of later Indian mysticism-achieved also in the
Mahayana, but with greater difficulty-is the conviction that ignorance
is maintained only by attachment, and not by such actions as are void of
purpose and self-reference; and the thought that This and That world,
Becoming and Being, are seen to be one by those in whom ignorance is
destroyed.  In this identification there is effected a reconciliation of
religion with the world, which remained beyond the grasp of Theravada
Buddhists.  The distinctions between early Buddhism and Upanishadic
Brahmanism, however practically important, are thus merely
temperamental; fundamentally there is absolute agreement that bondage
consists in the thought of I and Mine, and that this bondage may be
broken only for those in whom all craving is extinct.  In all essentials
Buddhism and Brahmanism form a single system.”^([77](#77))

However, Buddhism is merely a single discipline, whereas Brahminism is
conceived as all-encompassing.  Buddhism is exclusively concerned with
*moksha*, whereas Brahmanism has a vision concerning the other goals of
life (*purushârtha*) as well: sensuous enjoyment (*kâma*), worldly
success (*artha*), and playing one’s part in the larger scheme of things
(*dharma*).  The latter notion means both doing the duties befitting
one’s status, qualities and station in life, and participating in the
cosmic cycles through ritual (e.g. participating in the year cycle by
celebrating the seasonal festivals, a cornerstone of every religion). 
There is no Buddhist Dharma-Shastra or Artha-Shastra, much less a
Buddhist Kama-Sutra.

Thus, eventhough Buddhist art developed certain typical conventions,
these were largely borrowed (e.g. the classic hairdo of Buddha statues
was apparently adopted from Bactrian Indo-Greek art)^([78](#78)), for
there is no specifically Buddhist aesthetics springing from a Buddhist
worldview.  If "all is suffering", then beauty too is not worth
pursuing, and aesthetics is of no concern to pure Buddhism.

As Coomaraswamy observes: "In comparing Buddhism (the teaching of
Gautama, that is) with Brahmanism, we have then to understand and take
into account the difference of the problem to be solved.  Gautama is
concerned with salvation and nothing but salvation: the Brahmans
likewise see in that *summum bonum* the ultimate significance of all
existence, but they also take into account the things of relative
importance; theirs is a religion both of Eternity and Time, while
Gautama looks upon Eternity alone. it is not really fair to Gautama or
to the Brahmans to contrast their *Dharma*; for they do not seek to
cover the same ground.  We must compare the Buddhist ethical ideal with
the (identical) standard of Brahmanhood expected of the Brahman born; we
must contrast the Buddhist monastic system with the Brahmanical orders;
the doctrine of Anatta with the doctrine of Atman, and here we shall
find identity. (…) Buddhism stands for a restricted ideal, which
contrasts with Brahmanism *as a pars contrasts with the
whole*".^([79](#79))

**10.10. Coomaraswamy on Hindu-Buddhist differences**

Ananda Coomaraswamy concedes that Buddhism developed a more satisfactory
systematization of certain Upanishadic ideas than the Upanishads
themselves: "Gautama repudiates the two extreme views, that everything
is, and that everything is not, and substitutes the thought that there
is only a Becoming. (cfr.  *Samyutta Nikaya*, xxii:90:16) it is due to
Gautama to say that the abstract concept of causality as the fundamental
principle of the phenomenal world is by him far more firmly grasped and
more clearly emphasized than we find it in the early Upanishads;
nevertheless the thought and the word ‘Becoming’ are common to both, and
both are in agreement that this Becoming is the order of the world, the
mark of organic existence, from which Nibbana, or the Brahman (according
to their respective phraseology) alone is free.”^([80](#80))

In spite of this common view, a difference develops in its practical
conclusions: "Where a difference of outlook appears is in the fact that
the Buddha is content with this conclusion, and condemns all further
speculation as \[unedifying\]; and thus, like Sankara, he excludes for
ever a reconciliation of eternity and time, of religion with the
world.”^([81](#81))

Shankara (ca.  AD 800) was the Vedantin who polemicized against Buddhism
but at the same time incorporated a lot of Buddhist thought, so that he
is often described as a "crypto-Buddhist".  Like the Buddha, he founded
an order of monks vowed to celibacy, the act of world-rejection par
excellence, a sin against the Vedic commandment to pay off one’s debt
(*riha*) to the ancestors by raising a family.  In spite of
philosophical differences between Shankara and the Buddhists, Shankara
did introduce the Buddhist rejection of the world into Hinduism:

"The same result is reached in another way by those Vedantins of the
school of Shankara who developed the doctrine of Maya in an absolute
sense (*Shvetâshvatara Upanishad* 4:9-10) to mean the absolute
non-entity of the phenomenal world, contrasted with the only reality of
the Brahman which alone is.  This is one of the two extreme views
rightly repudiated by Gautama, but there is agreement to this extent
that both Gautama and the Mayavadins reject the unreal world of
Becoming, either because it is inseparable from Evil, or simply because
it is unreal.”^([82](#82))

Though Shankara’s influence in medieval and modern Hinduism is enormous,
his position is greatly at variance with the Vedic and Upanishadic
worldview:

"But the interpretation of the term Maya to signify the absolute
nonentity of the phenomenal world, if it belongs to the Vedanta at all
(which is to be doubted: the conception of the absolute nonentity of the
phenomenal world is entirely contrary to many passages in
*Brhadârânyaka* and *Chândogya*, as well as to the *Brahma Sûtra* 1:2,
which asserts that ‘Everything is Brahman’ (…)), is comparatively late;
and even in the Rigveda (10:90) we find another thought expressed, in
which the whole universe is identified with the ‘Eternal Male’ \[=
*Purusha*\], afterwards a recognized symbol of the Atman.  The same idea
finds many expressions in the Upanishads, notably in the saying ‘That
art Thou’.”^([83](#83))

This, then, is the proper and original understanding of Upanishadic
monism: that the relative and the absolute, the world of form and the
formless, the sensorial world and the Brahman, are somehow two states of
a single essence, both equally real.  The distinctive Vedic vision,
setting it apart from Shankara’s or the Buddha’s view, is that the world
itself is also an expression of the Absolute state:

"There is thus asserted from two points of view an irreconcilable
opposition of Becoming and Being, Samsâra and Nirvâ?a, This and That. 
Over against these extremes there appears another doctrine of the Mean,
entirely distinct from that of Gautama which merely asserts that
Becoming, and not either Being nor non-Being is the mark of this world. 
This other Mean asserts that the Sole Reality, the Brahman, subsists,
not merely as non-Becoming, but also as Becoming (…). In truth, there
are two forms of Brahman, that is to say-‘The formed and the unformed,
the mortal and the immortal, the abiding and the fleeting, the being and
the beyond’. (*Brhadâranyaka Upanishad* 2:3:1) The Brahman is not merely
*nirguna*, ‘in no wise’, but also *sarvaguna*, ‘in all wise’; and he is
saved-attains Nirvana, knows the Brahman-who sees that these are one and
the same, that the two worlds are one. (…) Here the phenomenal world is
not without significance, but has just so much significance as the
degree of our enlightenment allows us to discover in it.”^([84](#84))

The similarity with the Mahayana-Buddhist Heart Sutra is more than
superficial: "Emptiness is not different from form, form is not
different from emptiness.  What is form that is emptiness, what is
emptiness that is form.”^([85](#85)) Here, Mahayana absorbs the Vedic
vision, transcending the Buddhist dualistic view pitting emptiness
(Nirvana) against form (equated with suffering).  As in some other
respects, Mahayana appears here as a partial return of Buddhism to its
Vedic roots.

**10.11. Coomaraswamy on Buddhist world-negation**

A practical consequence of the respective attitudes to involvement in
the world is that Brahmanism values family life as the locus of the
continuation of worldly existence, while Buddhism rejects it as merely a
factor of more suffering.  Like Saint Paul saying that the married state
is but a way out for weak people, definitely inferior to celibacy ("to
marry is better than to burn")^([86](#86)), Buddhism extols celibate
monkhood above the state of the householder, and makes the latter the
*ancilla* of the former, viz. for providing novices and food to the
monastic order.  Actually, "the use of the term *kulapati* (‘head of a
family’, householder) for a monk was considered to be an
insult.”^([87](#87)) So, Coomaraswamy frowns upon this Buddhist value
standard, which "is not really a middle path, and (...) remains, in
contrasting the bright state of the Wanderer with the dark state of the
Householder, if not all morbidly ascetic, nevertheless unmistakably a
rule of abstention, rather than moderation.”^([88](#88))

Coomaraswamy protests against this fundamental trait of Buddhism:
"Gautama hardly contemplates the possibility that freedom may also be
attained by those who are still engaged in worldly
activities".^([89](#89)) The aesthetician Coomaraswamy may
understandably not be inclined to world-renunciation, but he ought to
consider the possibility that achieving liberation through meditation is
a full-time job, one which just happens to be factually incompatible
with a worldly career.  The latter may be worthwhile in a relative
sense, and Coomaraswamy could certainly wax eloquent about the refined
mental states needed for and developed by an artist’s creative activity,
but that is just not the same thing as the liberation achieved by silent
meditation.

On the other hand, Coomaraswamy acknowledges that the institution of
celibate monkhood was by no means a Buddhist innovation; it already
formed part of India’s pre-Buddhist religious landscape.  He quotes
Hermann Oldenberg to support the view that the Buddhist institution of
celibate monkhood, though certainly non-Brahmanical, was already a
traditional and well-known institution in the Buddha’s own day: "There
was nothing in Buddha’s attitude generally which could be regarded by
his contemporaries as unusual, he had not to introduce anything
fundamentally new; on the contrary, it would have been an innovation if
he had undertaken to preach a way of salvation which did not proceed on
a basis of monastic observances."^([90](#90)) Such an "innovation" was
preached in the Bhagavad-Gita, though on the basis of "the already old
doctrine of the identity of This and That, Becoming and not-Becoming.(…)
its essential thought is the recognition of Karma Yoga and Bhakti Yoga
side by side with Jnana Yoga as ‘means’ of salvation."^([91](#91))

I venture to doubt that Karma Yoga (work free from attachment to the
fruits of the work) and Bhakti Yoga (devotion) can yield the same
spiritual results as Jnana Yoga (meditation).  There is not necessarily
*equality* between the different paths acknowledged as legitimate.  On
the other hand, the recognition of Karma and Bhakti as spiritual paths
strengthens the ethical pluralism typical of Hinduism.  As Coomaraswamy
puts it:

"This Religion implies that each individual has to pursue a *dharma*
determined by his station in life.  This is the concept of *swa-dharma*
(own-dharma) emphasized with great vigour in the Bhagavad Gita.  The
concept is based on the rejection of an absolutist standard of morality
(…): ‘In this conception of own-dharma there appears at once the
profound distinction of Hindu from all absolutist moralities, such as
the Mosaic or Buddhist.’ The own-dharma is a form of morality
appropriate to the individual according to his social and spiritual
position.”^([92](#92))

This way, Hinduism contrasts with Buddhism by having room for worldly
pursuits along with the spiritual pursuit: "Thus it is that even laymen
may attain to perfect freedom, in a life obedient to vocation, if only
the activity be void of motive and self-reference.(…) Bondage and
deliverance are alike to be found in the home and in the forest, and not
more nor less in one than the other; everything alike is Holy (in terms
of Buddhism, ‘Void’), and men and women are not less so than mountains
or forests.  Above all, this reconciliation of religion with the world
is but a Becoming, it has a meaning which cannot be fathomed by those
who turn their backs upon it in order to escape from its pains and elude
its pleasures.”^([93](#93))

Here, the cleavage is not only between Buddhism and Brahmanism, but runs
through Brahmanism itself: "Precisely the same crisis that we here speak
of as distinguishing of Brahmanism itself (…) it has been held by
Brahmans, as it had been also for a time assumed by Gautama, that
salvation must be sought in penance (*tapes*) and in the life of the
hermit.  Gautama introduced no radical change in merely insisting on the
futility of carrying such disciplines to a morbid extreme. (Perhaps we
ought to say no change at all, for it would be difficult to point to any
early or important Brahmanical text advocating a mental and moral
discipline more severe than that of the Buddhist Brethren; on the
contrary, the Upanishads constantly insist that salvation is won by
knowledge alone, and that all else is merely preliminary.)”^([94](#94))

The extremism in discipline against which the Buddha reacted is better
sought in Jainism, where it is well-attested: Mahavira Jina sought out
the most extreme circumstances to live in, and till today Jain sadhus
are known for their extreme penances.  The difference between the two
sects is perhaps best illustrated by the fact that Buddhists shave off
their hairs while Jains pluck them out. Jainism claims to be much older
than Buddhism, and unlike the neo-Buddhists, its apologists do not see
their religion as a reaction against Brahmanism, but as an entirely
original religion equally old as, if not older than the Vedic
religion.^([95](#95)) Fact is that Shramanism as a broader category
predated Buddhism by centuries, and it must have included sects
practising a severe asceticism, against which the Buddha reacted by
establishing a more moderate path.

The Shramanic tendency was generally characterized by a rejection of the
world, certainly of worldly responsibilities.  This, then, certainly
sets it apart from the Vedic worldview, with its celebration of worldly
joys and its assumption of worldly responsibilities.  Though both
doctrines have borrowed from one another, as exemplified most sharply by
the case of Shankara, and though they cannot be simply equated with
Jainism and Buddhism on the one hand and Hinduism on the other, they
certainly remain as two antagonistic poles in India’s religious
landscape.

**10.12. Aurobindo on Buddhist pessimism**

On the philosophical differences between Buddhism and Hinduism, Ananda
Coomaraswamy has done the homework which the Hindu thinkers failed to
do, or only did in a very sketchy way.  On the other hand, he merely
articulated in some detail a view which many Hindus vaguely subscribe
to, and which they do not consider worthy of much exploration because it
is just so obvious.

One Hindu thinker who gave the matter some thought and expressed himself
along the same lines as Coomaraswamy, is Sri Aurobindo.  He blames
Buddhism for its negative attitude to the world, and Shankara for
importing the same into Hinduism and thereby transforming the Vedic
message beyond recognition: "Ancient or pre-Buddhistic Hinduism sought
Him both in the world and outside it; it took its stand on the strength
and beauty and joy of the Veda, unlike modern or
post-Buddhistic Hinduism which is oppressed with Buddha’s sense of
universal sorrow and Shankara’s sense of universal illusion,-Shankara
who was the better able to destroy Buddhism because he was himself half
a Buddhist.”^([96](#96))

Because of Shankara’s Mayavadi views, most outsiders identify Hinduism
as a "world-denying" religion.  Aurobindo, however, contrasts
Shankara-cum-Buddhist asceticism with Vedic life-affirmation.  "The
ancient Aryan culture recognised all human possibilities but put this
\[*viz. the spiritual life*\] highest of all and graded life according
to a transitional scale in its system of the four classes and the four
orders.  Buddhism first gave an exaggerated and enormous extension to
the ascetic ideal and the monastic impulse, erased the transition and
upset the balance.  Its victorious system left only two orders, the
householder and the ascetic, the monk and the layman, an effect which
subsists to the present day.  It is this upsetting of the Dharma for
which we find it fiercely attacked in the Vishnu Purana under the veil
of an apologue, for it weakened in the end the life of society by its
tense exaggeration and its hard system of opposites.”^([97](#97))

It is, indeed, often overlooked by modern Hindus claiming Buddhism as
part of their own religion that there is a tradition of Hindu (or at
least Brahmanic) polemic against Buddhism.  Even the inclusion of the
Buddha in the list of Vishnu’s incarnations is not that innocent, as
admitted here in one of the better manuals of Hindu doctrine:

"The Buddha is mentioned as one of the ten incarnations in several
Puranas including Matsya, Varaha, Padma, Agni and Bhagavata.  The
Bhagavata Purana (1:3:24) says: ‘When Kaliyuga sets in, the Lord will be
born in Magadha as Buddha, son of Ajana, in order to weaken the enemies
of the gods.’ The Agni and Varaha Puranas state that the Lord was born
as Mayamoha.  Taking the form of a shaven-headed naked mendicant, the
Lord deluded the demons so that they would give up the Vedic rituals and
thus became poweriess."^([98](#98))

So, his incarnation was only to deceive evil people, to weaken them by
teaching them a false doctrine.  The inclusion of the Buddha in the list
of incarnations was only a way of rationalizing evil, viz. of explaining
the success of a false doctrine as somehow useful in God’s larger
scheme.  The falsity of Buddhism does not reside in its yogic aim and
method, but in its depreciation of all non-yogic pursuits.

Aurobindo advocates a return to the spirit of pre-Buddhist Hinduism:
"Ancient Hinduism aimed socially at our fulfilment in God in life, modem
Hinduism at the escape from life to God.  The more modem ideal is
fruitful of a noble and ascetic spirituality, but has a chilling and
hostile effect on social soundness and development; social life under
its shadow stagnates for want of belief and delight, *shraddhâ* and
*ânanda*. If we are to make our society perfect and the nation is to
live again, then we must revert to the earlier and fuller
truth.”^([99](#99)) He asserts that the genius of Vedic civilization was
to see the divine dimension also in the world of form, in lay society,
in arts and sciences; and that Buddhism was part of a movement of
world-renunciation which over-emphasized the spiritual pursuit to the
detriment of these other dimensions.

In defence of Buddhism, then, one could argue that a temporary
over-emphasis on the pursuit of Liberation was necessary, simply because
there are technical aspects to it which require specialization.  The
science of yoga could never have been developed but for the work of
people who dropped everything else and totally immersed themselves in
this pursuit.  If the belief that the world is nothing but suffering
helped them to concentrate on their yoga practice, we could see that as
at worst a useful mistake.  And hopefully, the pioneering exploration of
yoga by people like the Buddha may lead to the development of more
efficient (less life-consuming) methods for achieving the same result.

That is more or less how modern Hindus justify the incorporation of the
Buddha: he was a specialist of one discipline, viz. meditation up to the
point of Liberation, just as others were specialists of grammar,
astronomy, statecraft, temple-building or poetry.  Neither his nor any
of the other specialisms exhaust the essence of Hindu civilization, but
they have all contributed indispensable elements to it.

**10.13. Savarkar on Buddhist defeatism and treason**

After these stratospheric philosophical observations, let us now move on
to the down-to-earth political comments by Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, who
devoted a few pages of his influential book *Hindutva* to Buddhism. 
Skipping all possible considerations of the Buddha’s spiritual merits,
he attacks Buddhism’s lack of martial involvement in society, and its
lack of nationalist identification with India.  Shocked by his own
candidness, he makes a few genuflections before the Buddha, but then
reverts to his negative judgment.

Savarkar announces that he has the answer to a question which historians
are still debating today: "We fear that the one telling factor that
contributed to the fall of Buddhism more than any other has escaped that
detailed attention of scholars which it deserves.”^([100](#100)) Our
curiosity is aroused, and Savarkar assures us that the usual
explanations, including "Philosophical differences" and the "inanitation
and demoralization of the Buddhistic Church", with Viharas attracting "a
loose, lazy and promiscuous crowd of men who lived on others", are
insufficient.^([101](#101)) They would have been inconsequential "had
not the political consequences of the Buddhistic expansion been so
disastrous to the national virility and even the national existence of
our race".^([102](#102))

So, according to Savarkar, the downfall of Buddhism was due to a healthy
reaction against certain morbid political implications of Buddhism.  By
implication, he joins hands with those secularists who allege that the
downfall of Buddhism was the doing of Hindus rather than Muslims.

Savarkar illustrates the disastrous effect of Buddhism on the polity
with an event from the Buddha’s own life: "No prelude to a vast tragedy
could be more dramatic in its effect in foreshadowing the culminating
catastrophe than that incident in the life of the Shakya Sinha, when the
news of the fate of the little tribal republic of the Shakyas was
carried to their former Prince when he was just laying the foundation
stone of the Buddhistic Church.  He had already enrolled the flower of
his clan in his Bhikkhusangha and the little Shakya Republic thus
deprived of its bravest and best, fell an easy victim to the strong and
warlike in the very lifetime of the Shakya Sinha.  The news when carried
to him is said to have left the Enlightened unconcerned."^([103](#103))

So far, so good: it is undisputed that the Buddha did not strongly
intervene (he made some initial remonstrations but did not insist) to
prevent the destruction of his own tribesmen.  These had angered
Vidudabha, son of Prasenadi, king of Koshala: because of their caste
pride, they had given an illegitimate daughter as a bride to the prince,
withholding their legitimate daughters.  But according to Savarkar, this
unconcern about one’s tribal or national welfare and sheer survival
became the norm when Buddhism won the ruling class over to its own
doctrines in most of India.  The result was that "the woeful fate that
had overtaken the tribal republic of Kapila Vastu befell the whole of
Bharatvarsha itself and it fell an easy prey to the strong and
warlike-not like \[the\] Shakyas to their own kith and kin, but \[to\]
the Lichis and Huns."^([104](#104))

In effect, Savarkar accuses Buddhism of corrupting Indian culture in two
distinct ways: by extolling non-violence, thus making Indians
defenceless before more warlike enemies; and by propagating a
universalist unconcern with the particularise interests of one’s own
family, tribe and nation.  Savarkar contrasts the requirements of
nationalism with Buddhist universalism, and claims history as his
witness that in the past, Buddhism had already paralysed people’s
patriotism to the point of making barbaric invasions possible:

"Thus it was political and national necessity that was at once the cause
and the effect of the decline of Buddhism.  Buddhism had its centre of
gravity nowhere.  So it was an imperative need to restore at least the
national centre of gravity that India had lost in attempting to get
identified with Buddhism."^([105](#105))

To take up Buddhism’s alleged lack of patriotism first, this allegation
is truly remarkable.  The kings and soldiers of Buddhist countries like
Sri Lanka, Thailand and Myanmar have never lacked in vigour when it came
to defending their sovereignty against foreign invaders; witness the
centuries of repeated wars between the Sinhalese people of Sri Lanka and
invading armies from the several Tamil kingdoms.  If the Buddhists had
not fought, their states would have ceased to exist long ago.

Conversely, non-Buddhist kings in India are not known to have propagated
"patriotism" to the extent of meriting contrastive comparison with the
supposed "universalism" of Buddhist rulers.  Most of them were rulers of
kingdoms which covered only a small part of India, and the kings they
fought were mostly fellow Indians.  Admittedly, a notion of "India"
(*Bhâratavarsh*) as a cultural unit was in the air, but this didn’t keep
them from fighting their neighbours, just like European kings were not
much hampered in their military pursuits by the awareness that their
neighbours belonged to the same Christian religion and cultural space. 
At this point, Savarkar is giving the lead in the Hindutva tendency to
project modem nationalism onto ancient Indian history.

Savarkar hints at historical events involving Buddhism which would give
proof of downright treason: "The reaction against universal tendencies
of Buddhism only grew more insistent and powerful as the attempt to
re-establish the Buddhist power in India began to assume a more
threatening attitude.  Nationalist tendencies refused to barter with our
national independence and accept a foreign conqueror as our overlord. 
But if that foreigner happened to be favourably inclined towards
Buddhism, then he was sure to find some secret sympathisers among the
Indian Buddhists all over India, even as Catholic Spain could always
find some important section in England to restore a Catholic dynasty in
England.  Not only this but dark hints abound in our ancient records to
show that at times some foreign Buddhistic powers had actually invaded
India with an express national and religious aim in view.”^([106](#106))

One of these dark hints is explicitated: "We cannot treat the history of
this period exhaustively here but can only point to the half symbolic
and half actual description given in one of our Puranas of the war waged
on the Aryadeshajas by the Nyanapati (the king of the Huns) and his
Buddhistic allies.  The record tells us (…) how the Buddhistic forces
made China the base of their operations, how they were reinforced by
contingents from many Buddhistic nations, and how after a tough fight
the Buddhists lost it and paid heavily for their defeat.  They had
formally to renounce all ulterior national aims against India and give a
pledge that they would never again enter India with any political end in
view."^([107](#107))

It would be wrong to dismiss a testimony simply because it is given in
the Puranas, a notorious mixture of fact and fiction.  All the same, the
testimony cited by Savarkar is meagre, and the question remains to what
extent even genuine facts have not been reinterpreted *post factum* in
terms of the (possibly irrelevant) religious adherence of the parties
involved.

In another book, *Six Glorious Epochs of Indian History*, Savarkar gives
other instances of Buddhist treason.  Starting with the well-known fact
that the Greco-Bactrian and Kushana invaders adopted Buddhism, he
speculates that they thereby attracted the loyalty and collaboration of
native Buddhists.  It would have been interesting if he had documented
this allegation.

Along the same lines, but with decreasing credibility, he accuses the
Buddhists of the same treasonous collaboration with non-Buddhist
powers.  He alleges that when Mohammed bin Qasim marched on Sindh in the
early 8th century, "these Indian Buddhists were elated to see the Muslim
foreigners march against the Hindu kingdom.  These Buddhists, who bore
malice towards the Hindus, perhaps thought that these new Muslim
aggressors might embrace their Buddhist cult, as did their forerunners,
the Greeks under Menander or the Kushans under Kanishka, and establish a
Buddhist empire over India.  So they went and greeted the Arabian-Muslim
leader when he captured Port Deval from the hands of King
Dahir.”^([108](#108))

Savarkar then imagines what the message they brought to Qasim sounded
like: "We have nothing to do with Dahir and his Vedic Hindu cult.  Our
religious faith differs very widely from theirs. (…) Never suspect for a
moment that we shall even enlist ourselves in King Dahir’s armed forces
or help him in any way.  So we pray that the Buddhists should not be
subjected to any indignities or troubles at your hands." And Qasim’s
reaction to this request "which amounted to complete surrender" was that
he "gave them temporary assurance of safety".^([109](#109))

King Dahir fought but was killed and his army put to flight.  Savarkar
asks and answers the question: "But what were the Buddhists doing in
this national catastrophe?  At the news of the fall of King Dahir and
the victory of the Muslims, these Buddhists began to ring bells in their
vihars to greet the Muslim conquerors, and prayed in congregations for
the prosperity of the Muslim rulers!"^([110](#110))

The translator, S.T. Godbole, has taken the trouble of authenticating
Savarkar’s claims in well-reputed history books.^([111](#111)) Though
some of these histories and translations are a bit quaint and could do
with an update, they may be considered essentially trustworthy.  At any
rate, one cannot expect an amateur-historian like Savarkar to improve
upon what was an accepted version of the facts among the professional
historians of his day.  These sources do give a semblance of
confirmation to the allegation of a Buddhist role in acts of
capitulation and collaboration, e.g. Al-Baladhuri mentions that "two
Samanis, or priests" (apparently Shramanas, Buddhist monks) went all the
way to Qasim’s employer Hajjaj "to treat for peace".^([112](#112))
However, the full sentence says that Qasim "went to Nirun, the
inhabitants of which had already sent two Samanis, or priests, of their
town to Hajjaj to treat for peace", meaning that the “Samanis" were
representatives of the general will, not merely of Buddhist interests.

To complicate matters further, the exact meaning of the Arabic rendering
of Indian terms is ambiguous, starting with the meaning of
*budh/budd/but*.  As the Buddhists had been the first big producers of
ornate sculptures for veneration, viz.  Buddha statues, the word *but*
became the standard Persian term for "idol", so an idol-worshipper was
called *But-parast*, and an idol-breaker *But-shikan*, even when the
idol was not a *Buddha statue*.  Al-Baladhuri says that "the Indians
give in general the name of *budd* to anything considered with their
worship or which forms the object of their veneration.  So, an idol is
called *budd*.”^([113](#113)) Moreover, Al-Baladhuri also used "Budha"
as a toponym: when an emissary of Hajjaj perished in the Indian frontier
region, it was claimed that "he was killed by the Jats of
Budha".^([114](#114)) Likewise, is anything Buddhist involved when,
according to a sub-title in the *Chach-Nâmah*, "Budhiman comes to
Muhammad Kasim, and receives a promise of protection"?^([115](#115)) In
the circumstances, is it likely that the freshly arrived Arab chronicler
could distinguish a category of "Buddhists" in the general population of
Hindus?

Nevertheless, it is the established opinion among modern historians that
the Buddhists did commit treason, e.g.: "His \[Qasim’sl work was greatly
facilitated by the treachery of certain Buddhist priests and renegade
chiefs who deserted their sovereign and joined the
invader.^([116](#116)) On the other hand, even if specific cases of
Buddhist treason can be substantiated, it is not excluded that
non-Buddhist citizens were equally eager to be on the best possible
terms with the probable victor.  That much is indeed related by the
Arabic sources pertaining to the period *after* the conquest: Hindus
coming to Qasim’s court to offer their surrender.^([117](#117)) There is
of course a difference between surrendering before the battle is joined
and surrendering after the battle is lost; still, the Hindus who
surrendered could instead have opted for emigration, civil disobedience,
guerrilla warfare or plain martyrdom.

Here again, there is a semantic problem: the "one thousand Brahmans" who
came to surrender are described as having "shaven heads and beards" and
being "dressed in yellow clothes", the typical look of Shramanas.  At
that stage, the Arab-Muslim newcomers simply couldn’t distinguish
between Brahmins and Buddhist monks, all *But-parasts*,
"idol-worshippers".

The explicitly religious hostility to the Hindus which Savarkar claims
as the Buddhists’ motivation is not in evidence in these sources.  Even
if Buddhists committed treason, the reason may have been opportunism and
unwillingness to join the fight on any side (draft-dodging, so to
speak), without implying any animus against their non-Buddhist
compatriots.  Yet, Savarkar puts all his cards on the hypothesis of an
intense Hindu-Buddhist antagonism, coinciding with a
nationalist-internationalist conflict of loyalties.  
Whether historical or not, this view hardly fits in with the usual
"Buddhists are Hindus" line of the organized Hindutva movement.  On the
contrary, it plays into the hand of a certain anti-Hindutva polemic,
which pictures Buddhism as a movement of anti-Hindu revolt then groaning
under Hindu oppression, and the Muslim invaders as liberators of those
whom the Hindu regime oppressed, including the Buddhists.

One of the trend-setters of this view was M.N. Roy, founder of the
Communist Party of India, who wrote: "Brahminical orthodoxy having
overwhelmed the Buddhist revolution, India of the eleventh and twelfth
centuries must have been infested with multitudes of persecuted heretics
who would eagerly welcome the message of Islam.".^([118](#118)) He does
nothing to document this sensational claim, but it has become very
popular nonetheless.  Along the same lines, the leading Marxist
historian Romila Thapar has said: "In an often horrible way, religious
forms of expression like Buddhism and Jainism have been persecuted and
even exterminated \[by Hindus\]. (…) The trauma for the Brahmins was
that, in the time of the Moghuls, they were counted among ‘the rest’,
i.e. the non-Muslims.  Bad for them was also that Islam was more able to
have a dialogue with the inheritors of Shramanism.”^([119](#119))

When you consider that the establishment of Islam in the entire area
from Iran to Ningxia and from Kazakhstan to Malaysia, including India,
was followed by the complete disappearance of living Buddhism in each of
these regions, you may wonder what Prof. Thapar’s definition of
"dialogue" could be.  Even Moghul Emperor Akbar, who invited
representatives of many religions to his court for discussion, did not
invite any Buddhist representative simply because Buddhism did not exist
in India at that time.  Perhaps Prof. Thapar had the collaboration of
the Jain merchants and jewellers with the Sultans in mind.  The Jains,
indeed, were better survivors than the Buddhists under Muslim rule.

Whatever the facts of history, Savarkar plays into the hand of the
anti-Hindu polemicists by confirming their claim that Buddhism was
hostile to Hinduism to the extent of collaborating with the Arab
invasion.  Fortunately, there is still some justice in this world, or at
least in Savarkar’s world, for the "Buddhist traitors" did not escape
their karmic reward: "in spite of their traitorous solicitations of the
Muslims, these ‘Buddhaprasthees’-the idol-worshipping Buddhists who
preached extreme non-violence-were violently exterminated from Sindh by
the Muslim aggressors under Kasim, owing to their innate hatred for that
sect.”^([120](#120))

Savarkar links Buddhist non-resistance to the destruction of Buddhism:
"But what they thus asked for as a boon proved to be an inexorable curse
for them.  After winning the final battle, when the Muslims rushed
violently, like a stormy wind, through Sindh, they went on beheading
these Buddhists even more ruthlessly than they did the Vedic Hindus. 
For, the Vedic Hindus were fighting in groups or individually at every
place and so they struck at least a little awe and terror in the minds
of the Muslims.  But as there was no armed opposition in Buddhist Vihars
and Buddhist localities, the Muslims cut them down as easily as they
would cut vegetable.  Only those of the Buddhists who took to the Muslim
faith were spared".^([121](#121))

This development is vaguely hinted at in the Arabic sources (to be read
with the semantic reservations outlined above), e.g. the *Chach-Nâmah*
reports off-hand: "Muhammad Kasim built at Nirun a mosque *on the site
of the temple of Budh*, and ordered prayers to be proclaimed in the
Muhammadan fashion".^([122](#122))

Savarkar generalizes this explanation of the extermination of Buddhism
in Sindh to explain its disappearance from India as a whole: "For the
same reason and in the very same manner the Muslims went on liquidating
the Buddhist pockets of influence as they advanced conquering province
after province in India. (…) As most of the Buddhists showed, through
fear of death, willingness to embrace Islam, they were all converted. 
Not a single Buddhist remained alive in the northwestern provinces like
Gandhar, Kamboj and others (…) On seeing Bakhtyar Khiljee march on
Bihar, several Buddhists took their religious books and fled to Tibet
and China.  The rest were polluted and taken over into the Muslim fold.
(…) Nowhere can one find evidence to say that some Indian Buddhist army
or some Buddhist organization fought with the Muslim invaders any battle
worth the name.”^([123](#123)) The Buddhist establishment at that time
consisted exclusively of monasteries, there was no Buddhist king left in
India who could have made a distinctively Buddhist contribution to the
military defence of India.

**10.14. Savarkar on Buddhist non-violence**

Veer Savarkar particularly disliked the glorification of non-violence,
practised in his own day by Gandhiji, and attributed retrospectively to
the Buddha as well:

"Buddhism has conquests to claim but they belong to a world far removed
from this our matter-of-fact world, where feet of clay do not stand long
and steel could be easily sharpened, and *trishna*/thirst is too
powerful and real to be quenched by painted streams that flow
perennially in heaven.  These must have been the considerations that
must have driven themselves home to the hearts of our patriots and
thinkers when the Huns and Shakas poured like volcanic torrents and
burnt all that thrived. (…) So the leaders of thought and action of our
race had to rekindle their Sacrificial Fire to oppose the sacrilegious
one and to re-open the mines of Vedic fields for steel, to get it
sharpened on the altar of Kali, ‘the Terrible’, so that Mahakal, the
‘spirit of the time’, be appeased.  Nor were their anticipations
belied.  The success of the renovated Hindu arms was undisputed and
indisputable.  Vikramaditya who drove the foreigners from the Indian
soil and Lalitaditya who caught and chastised them in their very dens
from Tartary to Mongolia were but complements of each other.  Valour had
accomplished what formulas had failed to do.”^([124](#124))

This is not meant to sound like naked militarism and glorification of
armed struggle, so the cultural fruits of this martial spirit are also
highlighted: "Once more the people rose to the heights of greatness that
shed its lustre on all departments of life.  Poetry and philosophy, art
and architecture, agriculture and commerce, thought and action felt the
quickening impulse which consciousness of independence, strength and
victory alone can radiate.”^([125](#125)) This statement would imply
that all these disciplines had been in a state of decay during the reign
of Ashoka and other Buddhist rulers, a claim which we leave entirely to
Savarkar’s responsibility.

Sometimes, this attack on Buddhist non-violence is combined with a bit
of polite lip-service to the Buddha: "As long as the law of evolution
that lays down the iron command: ‘immobile forces are the easy prey of
the mobile ones, those with no teeth fall prey to those with deadly
fangs; those without fangs succumb to those with hands, and the cowards
to the brave’ (Manu), is too persistent and dangerously imminent to be
categorically denied by the law of righteousness whose mottos shine
brilliantly and beautifully, but as the stars in the heavens do, so long
as the banner of nationality will refuse to be replaced by that
of Universality and yet, that very national banner hallowed as it is by
the worship of gods and goddesses of our race, would have been the
poorer if it could not have counted the Shakyasimha under its
fold.”^([126](#126)) This, then, represents a fairly common attitude in
Hindutva circles: to disparage Buddhism as a corrupting force through
its promotion of non-violence, and at the same time praise the Buddha as
a spiritual giant.

It is nowadays commonly assumed that the rise of the ideal of
non-violence (*ahimsâ*) in the Indian scale of values is due to the
influence of Buddhism.  You find this belief not merely in vulgarizing
history books, but also in Veer Savarkar’s seminal book *Hindutva*, as
quoted, and other like-minded publications.  Yet, the doctrine of
non-violence definitely precedes Buddhism by centuries.  It is in the
Mahabharata that we repeatedly find the famous formula: *Ahimsa paramo
dharmah*, "non-violence is the highest
value/norm/duty/religion".^([127](#127)) Then already, vegetarianism was
a central application of the Ahimsa doctrine: the Mahabharata discusses
18 kings who have banned meat-eating and lists 30 kings who have
refrained from taking meat themselves.^([128](#128)) In that respect,
Buddhism was a step backwards from ahimsa, for the Buddhist monks were
allowed to accept meat if it was offered to them.

Centuries before the Buddha, in distant Afghanistan, the Iranian
reformer Zarathushtra already preached non-violence (towards people,
towards the cow, towards Mother Earth), and in this he was quite
possibly only one spokesman of a trend that was catching on in various
centres of Aryan culture.^([129](#129)) The most extreme form of ahimsa,
losing all sense of proportion, was to be found in Jainism, a tradition
which by its own account is much older than the Buddha.

To be sure, the ahimsa motive in this trend is more complex than we
modems might think.  It is mixed with a new concept of purity:
vegetarianism not only avoids killing, it also avoids taking dying
substances into your body.  Zarathushtra’s prohibition of animal
sacrifice not only avoided killing the animal victim, but also kept the
sacred fire pure from the defilement which a dying victim brings. 
Ahimsa has a ritual and even a kind of hygienical aspect apart from its
ethical aspect of compassion with all sentient beings.  Certain inside
observers explain both the ethical and the ritual valuation of ahimsa as
a consequence of the spread of yogic practices, which develop people’s
sensitivity.^([130](#130))

Moving closer to the thought current to which Buddhism is most closely
related, we find various notions of ahimsa in the Upanishads.  One
scholar mentions "an important but apposite passage in the
*Brihadâranyakopanishad* (5:2:1-3), which uses three debased
expressions: *dâmyata* (have self-control), *datta* (give), *dayadhvam*
(have compassion).  The foundations for formulating *ahimsâ* as positive
compassion (*dayâ*) have been laid here.  There are good reasons for
believing that this and other Upanishadic texts pre-date Buddha and
Mahavira, so that the grounds of their insight have already been
laid.”^([131](#131))

Similarly, the *Chhândogya Upanishad* mentions ahimsa in several places,
one of them being a list of virtues to be practised, including
asceticism (*tapes*), generosity (*dânam*), uprightness (*arjavam*) and
truth-speaking (*satya-vâchanam*): these virtues are said to be as
necessary for the sacrifice as the fees given to the priests.  Here, we
are already close to the Buddha’s "five precepts", one of which is
ahimsa.^([132](#132))

The notion of ahimsa has even been traced to the Vedic sacrificers who,
all while killing sacrificial animals, tried to do so with a minimum of
suffering for the victim and with a specious explanation that this
particular form of killing was not really killing.^([133](#133)) Even in
the performance of a violent act, the ideal of non-violence was already
present.  This unease about committing violence is already recognizable
in the custom among primitive hunters to appease the spirit of the
animal which they are about to hunt down.  At any rate, it has been
argued that the Shramanas "seem to have adopted nonviolence from
Brahmanic circles".^([134](#134))

The Buddha, a latecomer on the ahimsa scene, prescribed non-violence as
one of the rules to which his followers should adhere.  But he did not
introduce it in secular affairs, the way Mahatma Gandhi introduced it as
a technique of moral and political pressure.  He never said that it was
better to get killed than to kill; he simply stayed away from secular
situations where killing took place.  It is related several times that a
king on his way to the hunting-ground or the battle-field took the
occasion to meet the Buddha who was staying on his way to the
battlefield at that time, but never did the Buddha admonish him to
cancel his programme of violence, though he did preach against animal
sacrifice, i.e. against violence in the *religious* sphere.  Nor did he
prescribe strict vegetarianism to his monks, because "beggars can’t be
choosers" and have to accept what generous laymen offer
them.^([135](#135))

On the other hand, "right livelihood", one of the elements of the Noble,
Eightfold Path, is definitely an injunction against professions in which
the Buddhist rules of conduct are systematically violated.  The
permission for monks to accept meat is limited by the requirement that
the animal must not have been slaughtered for the specific purpose of
offering it to the monk.  On the whole, we can say that the Buddha saw
non-violence as a condition for his spiritual path, but not as a new law
with which to govern the world; governing the world was a business which
he as a prince had abandoned when he took up the search for Liberation. 
Moreover, he applied this principle with moderation, unlike the Jain
monks who took it to absurd lengths (and even the Jains did not expect
their kings to live by the rules of non-violence imposed on the monks).
In Buddhist history, we don’t see non-violence interfere with the normal
exercise of power.  Buddhist kings have not felt constrained to
non-violence when it came to repelling invaders, and some have even
waged wars of conquest.

Buddhism started as a Kshatriya religion and in a number of countries it
has remained just that.  In China, Buddhist monasteries like Shaolin
were famous as centres of martial arts practice, particularly the “hard”
variety (the gentler styles being more associated with
Taoism).  Bodhidharma, pioneer of Chan/Zen Buddhism, belonged to a
martial caste from Kerala and is traditionally credited with bringing
the Keralite martial arts to China.^([136](#136)) In Japan, the Samurai
class found in Zen Buddhism the best psychological basis for a life on
the brink of death, a life of total obedience to the master who could
send his men into slaughter and suicide missions at any
time.^([137](#137)) Buddhist non-violence remained an optional
discipline for spiritual seekers and seldom interfered with the way of
the world.

It is therefore too simplistic, if not simply untruthful, to say that
Buddhism robbed India of its fighting capability by imposing an ethic of
non-violence.  Even Jainism with its more extreme concept of
non-violence has been the adopted religion of kings who were as harsh
and aggressive as any.  Rulers were left to practise the duty of the
ruler, which could well include the use of force, along with amorous
pursuits and other activities not befitting the monk.  In this respect,
Buddhism has abided by the Hindu tradition of separate duties and
privileges according to station of life and status in society.

**10.15. Savarkar on Ashoka**

Like the Buddha, Ashoka is exempt from criticism in the official history
books.  Savarkar correctly observes that this is an innovation under
Western influence: “We know that it could be easily pressed against this
statement that the greatest and even the most powerful Indian Kings and
Emperors known, belong to the Buddhist period.  Yes, but known to
whom?-to Europeans and those of us who have unconsciously imbibed not
only their thoughts but even their prejudices.”^([138](#138))

Effectively, before Orientalism and English education, most Hindus had
never heard of Ashoka.  He does not figure in popular stories as do
Vikramaditya or Prithviraj Chauhan.  It is the European glorification of
Buddhism and the Christian sympathy for his conversion story (appalled
at the slaughter in his own Kalinga war) which introduced Ashoka into
the Hindu consciousness.  As usual, Hindutva spokesmen don’t try to beat
the dominant school of thought, but readily join it. In this case,
Savarkar joins the chorus of praise for Ashoka:

“There was a time when every school history in India opened from the
Mohammedan invasion because the average English writers of that time
knew next to nothing of our earlier life.  Lately the general knowledge
has extended backwards to the rise of Buddhism and we too are apt to
look upon it as the first and even the most glorious epoch of our
history.  The fact is, it is neither.  We yield to none in our love,
admiration and respect for the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha.  They are
all ours.  Their glories are ours and ours their failures.  Great was
Ashoka, the Devapriya, and greater were the achievements of the Buddhist
Bhikkhus.”^([139](#139))

The only amendment to the dominant view which Savarkar proposes, is to
restore the perspective, viz. of similar non-Buddhist kings in far
larger number and of no lesser merit: “But achievements as great if not
greater and things as holy and more politic and statesmanly had gone
before them and indeed enabled them to be what they were.  So, we do not
think that the political virility or the manly nobility of our race
began and ended with the Mauryas alone-or was a consequence of their
embracing Buddhism.”^([140](#140)) This is certainly a welcome
corrective to Jawaharlal Nehru’s highly selective and partisan vision of
Indian history, which exalts Ashoka (along with Akbar) beyond all
proportion.

In a later work, *Six Glorious Epochs of Indian History*, Savarkar has
sharpened his criticism of Ashoka.  He blames him for causing a
degeneration of the martial qualities of the Indian people, illustrated
by their declining capacity to deal with foreign invaders, from
Alexander (327 BC) to Demetreos (ca. 200 BC):

“How very strange it is that brave Indian Kshatriyas, their republics,
and soldiers and common populace had all defeated and repulsed (…) the
aggressive Greeks under Alexander and Seleucos and drove them back,
should now be overrun so very easily by the much weaker and degenerated
Bactrian Greeks!  Owing to the constant dread of the brave fighting
warriors of India, Alexander and Seleucos could not sleep soundly in
their military camps But these second-rate Bactrian Greek military
leaders could sleep soundly in the royal palace of Ayodhya (…) This
Greek invasion took place within thirty to forty years of Asoka’s
adoption of Buddhism. (…) the reason why these inferior and weaker
Greeks should conquer the Indians so very easily, was (…) that the
Indian heroism and the Indian capacity to resist aggression must have
deteriorated to a horrible extent.”^([141](#141))

It seems that Ashoka’s policies of non-violence have taken on mythical
proportions in the minds of both his fans and his critics.  It is
unlikely that “heroism” and “the capacity to resist aggression” in the
outlying northwestern provinces could have been affected this badly by
the policy of an emperor in distant Pataliputra.  It is not impossible
that new research into this epoch of Indian history may discover a grain
of truth in Savarkar’s sweeping allegation, but this criticism of Ashoka
remains illustrative of Savarkar’s disproportionate focus on martial
qualities, obviously related to his own youthful involvement in the
armed fringe of the Freedom Movement.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a)Quoted by Praful Bidwai: “Hindutva’s fallacies and fantasies”,
*Frontline*, 21-11-1998.

[²](#2a)Report in *The Telegraph*, 7-11-1998, quoted in Praful Bidwai:
“Hindutva’s fallacies and fantasies”, Frontline, 21-11-1998.

[³](#3a)Praful Bidwai: “Hindutva’s fallacies and fantasies”,
*Frontline*, 21-11-1998.

[⁴](#4a)Christian Lindtner: “From Brahmanism to Buddhism”, *Asian
Philosophy*, 1999, p.22. It could be argued that belief in an
extra-cosmic Creator is but a clumsy interpretation of certain instances
of Vedic poetry, and not strictly Vedic (even the neo-Vedic monotheist
Swami Dayananda was arguably a pantheist, who located his one God within
the universe).  Hindu reformists would probably say the same of caste
pride, which by Dharmakirti’s day seems to have been established well
enough as a cornerstone of Hindu society.

[⁵](#5a)Christian Lindtner: “From Brahmanism to Buddhism”, *Asian
Philosophy*, 1999, p.22. *Tad ekam*: “That One”.  *Sat/asat*:
being/non-being, e.g. many Buddhist texts assert that of the Self, one
cannot really say that “it is” nor that “it is not”, an idea which
Lindtner (p.26) traces straight to Yajnavalkya’s dictum *neti neti*.

[⁶](#6a)Christian Lindtner: “From Brahmanism to Buddhism”, *Asian
Philosophy*, 1999, p.5.

[⁷](#7a)David Kalupahana: *Buddhist Philosophy*, p.44-45. Reference is
to S. Radhakrishnan: *Indian Philosophy* (Allen & Unwin, London 1962),
vol. 1, p.360, and to EJ.  Thomas: “Buddhism in Modern Times”,
*University of Ceylon Review*) (Colombo), 9 (1951), p. 216.

[⁸](#8a)David Kalupahana: *Buddhist Philosophy*, p.44-45. Kalupahana
locates the Buddha’s uniqueness in the fact that he “personally
verified” the law of *karma* through his own “clear paranormal
clairvoyant vision”.  The occultish terminology does injustice to the
Buddha and hurts the Buddhist claims of rationality, but more
importantly, Kalupahana’s assertion implies the improvable claim that no
one had achieved that state of consciousness before Gautama did.

[⁹](#9a)*Milinda-Panha* 10:44, see e.g. Bhikkhu Pesala: *The Debate of
King Milinda*, p.62.

[¹⁰](#10a)To use the formulation of Edwin Arnold: *Light of Asia*.

[¹¹](#11a)The high-brow debates between the two are presented in N.N
Bhattacharyya: *Buddhism in the History of Indian Ideas*; Chitrarekha V.
Kher: *Buddhism as Presented by the Brahmanical Systems*; and V.
Subramaniam, ed.: *Buddhist-Hindu Interactions*.

[¹²](#12a)The term is heard regularly; one who has gone in print with it
is BHU Prof. Kedar Nath Mishra, interviewed by John Feys: “Christians? 
Not an Issue”, *Studia Missionalia* 1993, p. 290.

[¹³](#13a)J. Nehru: broadcast to the nation, 26-3-1964, reproduced in
*Mainstream*, 24-5-1986.

[¹⁴](#14a)Whether Ashoka really was a Buddhist is still a matter of
dispute, quite comparable to the question whether the pro-Christian
Roman Emperor Constantine really converted to Christianity.  In both
cases, the claim is known only through sources belonging to the religion
which benefited.  His references to “Dharma” may have a broader meaning
than just Buddhism, and his reverence for things Buddhist may simply
have been part of the larger Hindu attitude, like that of the Shaiva
king Harsha who looked well after the Buddhist site Bodh Gaya.

[¹⁵](#15a)Quoted in B.K. Baranjia: “Emperor Ashoka rides again”, *Sunday
Observer*, 18 March 1990.  Nehru had borrowed the glorification of
Ashoka as the greatest ruler in history from H.G. Wells’ book *An
Outline of History*, written just after World War 1, when pacifist
sentiment was at its strongest and Ashoka’s reputed renunciation of
violence after the Kalinga war counted as an example for all rulers to
emulate.  It goes without saying that Nehru was 100% ignorant of primary
sources on Buddhism and Ashoka.

[¹⁶](#16a)D.C. Ahir: *India’s Debt to Buddhism*, p.40. Note that no
modern Buddhist ever writes about “Buddhism’s debt to India”,-their
whole line of Buddhism’s absolute originality militates against
admitting it.  Kanishka was a Kushana, one of the semi-nomadic
Central-Asian peoples collectively known *pars pro toto* as Scythians or
Shakas, hence “Shaka Era”.  If Nehru had known anything about Buddhism,
particularly its other-worldliness, he would have dropped it like
Hinduism which stank in nostrils because it had been presented as
superstition and caste oppression by Islamic and Christian missionaries
and some leading Western thinkers of his days.

[¹⁷](#17a)Thus, for the mildest of examples, Thomas Cleary (*Buddhist
Yoga*, p.vii) introduces “the subtle metaphysics and refined methods of
spiritual development characteristic of Buddhist Yoga” by contrasting
them with “the elaborate psycho-physical exercise routines of Hindu
Yoga”.  That could have been worse, but still, Dr. Cleary, how about
acknowledging “the subtle metaphysics and refined methods of spiritual
development” like Samkhya and Patanjala Yoga extant in Hindu Yoga too?

[¹⁸](#18a)A brief history of Ladakh’s relation with the state of
Kashmir, including the 1947 request for a partition of Kashmir to avoid
passing under Muslim dominance, is given in P. Stobdan: “Overlooking
Ladakhi aspirations”, *Indian Express*, 15-3-1995.

[¹⁹](#19a)“Zanskar youth to join BJP”, *Organiser*, 12-2-1995.

[²⁰](#20a)Tundup Tsering and Tsewang Nurboo, in: “Ladakh visited”,
*Pioneer*, 4/12/1995.

[²¹](#21a)Dh. Keer: *Ambedkar*, p-334, with reference to B.R. Ambedkar:
*Pakistan or the Partition of India*, reprinted as vol.8 of *Dr.
Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches*.

[²²](#22a)B.R. Ambedkar: *Writings and Speeches*, vol.3, p.267 (in the
Chapter: “The triumph of Brahminism: regicide or the birth of
counter-revolution”).  To this sweeping statement, he adds: “So
neglected is this truth that no one will be found to give it his ready
acceptance.” In fact, this non-acceptance need not be a sign of neglect.

[²³](#23a)B.R. Ambedkar: *Writings and Speeches*, vol.3, p.229 (in the
Chapter “The decline and fall of Buddhism”).

[²⁴](#24a)B.R. Ambedkar: *Writings and Speeches*, vol.3, p.229-230.

[²⁵](#25a)B.R. Ambedkar: *Writings and Speeches*, vol.3, p.232.

[²⁶](#26a)Praful Bidwai: “Hindutva’s fallacies and fantasies”,
*Frontline*, 21-112001.  While accusing L.K. Advani of history
falsification, Bidwai himself does just that, and restates
long-discredited myths such as the arrival of Christianity with Saint
Thomas, all while denying solid facts such as the Christian missionary
intention to convert (restated unambiguously by the Pope himself in
Delhi 1999).  In the West, secularism implies pinpricking religious
fraud and arrogance, but in India, secularists are the most eloquent
defenders of myth and theocracy.

[²⁷](#27a)*Bahujan Samâj*: “Society of the masses/majority”. *Bahujan*
is used by casteist parties as a term for all non-“upper” castes, i.e.
Scheduled Castes and Tribes plus Other Backward Castes

[²⁸](#28a)An Ambedkarite publication summarizing Ambedkar’s case against
Islam is Surendra Ajnat: *Ambedkar on Islam* (1986), published in an
earlier version as “Why did Dr. Ambedkar not embrace Islam?”, *Outcry*
(organ of the Ambedkar mission, Canada), April 1984.  It is a Buddhist
reply to musings in Dalit circles that Ambedkar’s choice in favour of
Buddhism was a mistake because Dalit mass conversion to Islam would have
frightened the Hindus more.

[²⁹](#29a)On Buddhist epistemology, see Dayananda: *Light of Truth*,
p.512-520.

[³⁰](#30a)Dayananda: *Light of Truth*, p.516-517.

[³¹](#31a)This may be compared to the pre-Socratic idea of reducing all
different substances to jut one of them, e.g. “everything is water”,
meaning that air or fire are somehow watery at bottom,

[³²](#32a)The affirmation that bliss is the fundamental experience of
the cosmos is the central message of the *Taittirîya Upanishad*, esp.
2:7-8.  Bliss is the most fundamental layer in the Upanishadic view of
personality as five-layered (body tissue, vital energies, mind, higher
intelligence, and “bliss”), the most intimate layer around the
impersonal Self.

[³³](#33a)*Nîti*, ‘policy’, is the central value taught in the fable
collection Panchatantra, conceived as a manual to teach statecraft to
princes.

[³⁴](#34a)M. Eliade: *Yoga*, p. 37; enstasis is a translation of
*samâdhî*.

[³⁵](#35a)Agehananda Bharati: *The Light at the Center*, p. 128.

[³⁶](#36a)As decribed by the British convert Sangharakshita:
“Religio-nationalism in Sri Lanka”, *Alternative Traditions*, p.69 ff.

[³⁷](#37a)When I met Arya Samaj president Vandematharam Ramachandra Rao,
he was in his eighties but looked about fifty; he attributed his
splendid condition to the daily practice of yoga.

[³⁸](#38a)Pandit Nardev Vedalankar: *Basic Teachings of Hinduism*, p.43.

[³⁹](#39a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.35-37.

[⁴⁰](#40a)See R.K. Payne: *The Tantric Ritual of Japan.  Feeding the
Gods: the Shingon Fire Ritual*.

[⁴¹](#41a)I thank Kedar Nath Mishra, my philosophy professor at BHU, for
pointing out how the distinctive features of Hindu ethics and social
philosophy can be deduced from the central value of responsibility,
which sets Hinduism (along with Confucianism) apart from Jainism and
Theravada Buddhism.

[⁴²](#42a)John Woodroffe (originally under pseudonym Arthur Avalon):
*Shakti and Shakta*, p.5.

[⁴³](#43a)D.D. Kosambi: *Ancient India*, p. 179.

[⁴⁴](#44a)*Tabligh* = “propaganda”, viz. of pure Islam among nominal
Muslims to eliminate their lingering Pagan customs.

[⁴⁵](#45a)Speech delivered in Colombo in 1927, quoted by Gurusevak
Upadhyaya: *Buddhism and Hinduism*, p. iii.

[⁴⁶](#46a)Radhakrishnan: *Indian Philosophy*, vol.2, p.469.

[⁴⁷](#47a)T.W. Rhys-Davids: *Buddhism*, p.116-117, quoted in D. Keer:
*Ambedkar*, p.522.

[⁴⁸](#48a)Vide Heinz Bechert, ed.: *When Did the Buddha Live?  The
Controversy on the Dating of the Historical Buddha*, and Sriram Sathe:
*Dates of the Buddha*.

[⁴⁹](#49a)In Gurusevak Upadhyaya: *Buddhism and Hinduism*, Foreword,
dated 8 Nov. 1956.

[⁵⁰](#50a)Interview in *Organiser*, 22-11-1992.

[⁵¹](#51a)Lise McKean: *Divine Enterprise*, p. 104.  She comments:
“Whatever his political motivation, the Dalai Lama’s appearance on this
platform supports the VHP’s assertions concerning its embrace of Jain,
Sikh and Buddhist groups.”

[⁵²](#52a)“Bhikkhu Jnana Jagat: "Contribution of Buddhism to Indian
Culture", *5th European Hindu Conference* (conference souvenir volume),
p. 57.

[⁵³](#53a)Sister Nivedita: *The Master as I Saw Him*, p. 210-211.

[⁵⁴](#54a)Sister Nivedita: *The Master*, p. 215.  *Sannyâsa*: vow of
renunciation.

[⁵⁵](#55a)Vivekananda quoted by Sister Nivedita: *The Master as I Saw
Him*, p. 21 0.

[⁵⁶](#56a)This observation was suggested to me by Prof. Kedar Nath
Mishra of the Philosophy Department at BHU.

[⁵⁷](#57a)I thank Mrs. Yamini Liu for pointing this out to me.  See also
Swami Dayananda Saraswati (of Arsha Vidya Gurukulam, Coimbatore, no
relation with the founder of the Arya Samaj): *The Teaching Tradition of
Advaita Vedanta*.

[⁵⁸](#58a)This is how the effect of yoga was described by an American
Jesuit acquaintance, according to Ram Swarup: *Hindu View of
Christianity and Islam*, p.45. Ram Swarup was describing what the Jesuit
had said to Sita Ram Goel when he took the latter for a retreat. 
"Christian experience is not a funny feeling given by Yoga," he said.

[⁵⁹](#59a)At this point, *sages*, who have earned spiritual merit by
practising a yogic method (which, if non-Buddhist, would undermine the
superiority if not unicity of the Buddha’s method), must he strictly
distinguished from Gods: the inclusion of Vedic and other Gods in the
Mahayana Buddhist pantheon is well-attested, see *Louis Frédéric: Les
Dieux du Bouddhisme* (French: "The Gods of Buddhism").

[⁶⁰](#60a)The point can be argued further with reference to China:
Taoist and folk-religions lore has absorbed many Buddhist characters and
notions, while Chinese Buddhism (though having implicitly interiorized a
certain Taoist *attitude*, esp. in Chan/Zen Buddhism) is much less
hospitable to recognizably non-Buddhist inputs.

[⁶¹](#61a)Related in Amiya P. Sen: *Hindu Revivalism in Bengal*,
p.333-335.

[⁶²](#62a)Vivekananda: *Lahore Address* (1897), p.33. The part about
Advaita being linked with immorality seems to be referring to the
Christian missionary polemic which derives morality from belief in a
personal God Who rewards and punishes, and which equates non-dualism
(from modern materialism to Upanishadic monism: *Aham brahmâsmi*, "I am
Brahma") with hubris and the refusal to submit to "God-given" rules of
morality.  The equation between belief in God and subjection to
standards of morality was also made explicitly in 19th-century
*anti-Christian* polemic in Europe, e.g. vulgarly in the motto "*ni Dieu
ni maître*" (French: "neither God nor master"), or in Friedrich
Nietzsche’s deriving the demise of morality from the "death of God".

[⁶³](#63a)Vivekananda: *Lahore Address*, p.33. *Kumbhakâra* = "potter”;
*ghata*=“pot".

[⁶⁴](#64a)Vivekananda: *Lahore Address*, p.34.

[⁶⁵](#65a)"Speech in Colombo quoted in Gurusevak Upadhyaya: *Buddhism
and Hinduism*, p.iii. Gandhi had not studied Buddhism from its primary
sources.  He had a strong tendency to project his own beliefs on other
faiths.

[⁶⁶](#66a)In the 19th century, Westerners who contrasted Buddhism
positively with polytheist Hinduism tried to force Buddhism into the
mould of monotheism, a tendency strongly and rightly criticized by T.W.
Rhys-Davids: *Buddhist Suttas* (vol. 11 of F. Max Müller, ed.: *Sacred
Books of the East*), p. 164.

[⁶⁷](#67a)For a radical example: in *The Bugbear of Literacy* (first
published two years after his death, in 1949), A.K. Coomaraswamy
questions the supreme importance which Western educationists attach to
literacy.

[⁶⁸](#68a)A. K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism*, p. 2
20.

[⁶⁹](#69a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p. 198.

[⁷⁰](#70a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p. 198.

[⁷¹](#71a)"A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p. 199-200.  *Mânas* = "mind",
*ahamkâra* ="ego", *vijñâna* = "highest intelligence".

[⁷²](#72a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.200.

[⁷³](#73a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.205-206. The relevant passage
of the *Tevijja-Sutta* can be found in T.W. Rhys-Davids: *Buddhist
Suttas*, p. 170 ff.

[⁷⁴](#74a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.206.

[⁷⁵](#75a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.206-207.

[⁷⁶](#76a)Agehananda Bharati: *Light at the Center*, p. 179.

[⁷⁷](#77a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.221.

[⁷⁸](#78a)This is at least the generally accepted view: Buddhism was
initially aniconic, then used non-anthropomorphic icons (the wheel, the
Buddha’s feet), and only started depicting the person of the Buddha when
in contact with the Bactrian Indo-Greeks (3rd century BC), hence the
borrowing.  Others argue that Buddhism did use Buddha statues since its
very beginning, as the evidence of various types "casts doubt on the
practice of deliberate avoidance of Buddha images", according to art
history Professor Susan L. Huntington: "Early Buddhist art and the
theory of aniconism", *Art Journal*, winter 1990, p.401; this does not
exclude borrowing of specific iconographic conventions.

[⁷⁹](#79a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.219. Emphasis mine.

[⁸⁰](#80a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.208. *Nibbâna* (Pali) =
*nirvâna*.

[⁸¹](#81a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.208.

[⁸²](#82a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.208-209. Mâyâ is the magic
force by which the Gods create the world, or, in Shankara’s view, the
*illusion* of the world.

[⁸³](#83a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.208-209. The translation
"Eternal Male" for *Purusha* is rejected by some Hindus as yet another
Western (perhaps even Freudian) imposition.  As a Vedic term, *Purusha*
means both "person" or "human being" and "male person", eventhough in
modern Hindi usage it does mean specifically the male; the confusion
between "male" and "human" is admittedly widespread, vide French *homme*
or English *man*.

[⁸⁴](#84a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.209-210.

[⁸⁵](#85a)*Prajñâ-Pâramitâ-Hridaya-Sûtra*, in E.B. *Cowell*, ed.;
*Buddhist Mahayan Texts p. 153*.

[⁸⁶](#86a)Corinthians 7:9.  Taking a lead from Christian Lindtner’s
thesis (briefly referred to in his "From Brahmanism to Buddhism", *Asian
Philosophy*, 1999, p.37) that many of Jesus’ sayings can be traced to
still-extant Buddhist sources, we may speculate that the Christian
introduction of an ideal of celibacy in the Jewish and Hellenistic world
was another borrowing from Buddhism.

[⁸⁷](#87a)Latika Lahiri: *Chinese Monks in India*, p. 55. 

[⁸⁸](#88a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.211. 

[⁸⁹](#89a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p. 211.

[⁹⁰](#90a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.211-212, with reference to
Oldenberg: *Buddha*, English translation, 2nd ed. (1904), p.119.
Coomaraswamy notes, however, that the *Anguttara Nikaya* (iii:451)
mentions twenty-one lay Arhats, and that Gautama’s father Suddhodana
also counts as one.

[⁹¹](#91a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.212. The date of the Gita is
uncertain, but the dominant scholarly opinion puts its final version at
several centuries after the Buddha.

[⁹²](#92a)P.S. Shastri: *Ananda K. Coomaraswamy*, p.33, quoting
Coomaraswamy: *Myths of the Hindus and the Buddhists*, p.10.

[⁹³](#93a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.213.

[⁹⁴](#94a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Buddha*, p.213.

[⁹⁵](#95a)T.K. Tukol: *Compendium of Jainism*, p.10-20

[⁹⁶](#96a)Sri Aurobindo: *India’s Rebirth*, p.88.

[⁹⁷](#97a)Sri Aurobindo: *Foundations of Indian Culture*, p.71.

[⁹⁸](#98a)Sunita & Sundar Ramaswamy in Irene Schleicher, ed.: *Vedic
Heritage Teaching Program*, vol.3, p.92.

[⁹⁹](#99a)Sri Aurobindo: *India’s Rebirth*, p.88.

[¹⁰⁰](#100a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.18.

[¹⁰¹](#101a)It is well-established that Buddhist monasteries did acquire
such a reputation, both in India and abroad, see John Stevens: *Lust for
Enlightenment: Buddhism and Sex*.  Thus, the caption under a sexually
explicit Japanese painting (opp. p.93) reads: *"Buddhist monks and a nun
misbehaving themselves*.  In the Far East, Buddhist monks and nuns had a
perhaps not undeserved reputation for lascivious behaviour."

[¹⁰²](#102a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.18.

[¹⁰³](#103a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.19. Shakya Sinha: "lion of the
Shakya tribe", i.e. the Buddha.

[¹⁰⁴](#104a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.19.

[¹⁰⁵](#105a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.28.

[¹⁰⁶](#106a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.25.

[¹⁰⁷](#107a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.25-26. The ancient source
quoted for this story is the *Bhavishya Purâna*, Pratisarga Parva.

[¹⁰⁸](#108a)V.D. Savarkar: *Six Glorious Epochs*, p.133-134. Savarkar
wrote this book in Marathi: *Bhâratiya itihâsâtîla sahâ sonerî pâne*, it
was translated into English by S.T. Godbole.

[¹⁰⁹](#109a)V. D. Savarkar: *Six Glorious Epochs*, p. 134.

[¹¹⁰](#110a)V.D. Savarkar: *Six Glorious Epochs*, p. 136.  Vihâra =
Buddhist monastery.

[¹¹¹](#111a)Notably those by C.V. Vaidya, S.N. Dhar, A.L. Srivastava,
Henry M. Elliot, M. Titus, and the original testimonies, the
*Chach-Nâmah* and Al Baladhuri’s *Kitâb Futûh-ul-Baldân*, both in
English translation in H.M. Eliot & John Dowson: *History of India as
Told by Its Own Historians*, vol.1.

[¹¹²](#112a)Quoted in Elliot & Dowson: *History of India*, vol.1, p.121.

[¹¹³](#113a)Reproduced in Elliot & Dowson: *History of India*, vol.1,
p.120.

[¹¹⁴](#114a)Or at least that is how Elliot & Dowson understood it:
*History of India*, vol.1, p.119.

[¹¹⁵](#115a)Quoted in Elliot & Dowson: *History of India as Told by Its
Own Historians*, vol.1, p.157.

[¹¹⁶](#116a)R.C. Majumdar, H.C. Raychoudhary, Kalikinkar Datta: *An
Advanced History of India*, p. 172.

[¹¹⁷](#117a)E.g. in *Chach-Nâmah*, in Elliot & Dowson: *History of
India*, vol.1,p.182.

[¹¹⁸](#118a)M.N. Roy: *Historical Role of Islam*, p.81.

[¹¹⁹](#119a)Interview with Romila Thapar by Marc Colpaert in
*Wereldwijd*, March 1986.  There is no information about this "dialogue"
in Romila Thapar: *A History of India*, vol.1, which covers the period
when these religions encountered each other.  On the contrary: "Buddhism
and Islam, both being institutionalized, proselytizing religions,
attracted the same potential following.  This led to a strong antagonism
between the two and the attacks on the monasteries resulted in an exodus
of Buddhists from eastern India to south-cast Asia." (p. 263-264)

[¹²⁰](#120a)V.D. Savarkar: *Six Glorious Epochs*, p.143.

[¹²¹](#121a)V.D. Savarkar: *Six glorious Epochs*, p.136.

[¹²²](#122a)In Elliot & Dowson: *History of India*, vol.1, p.158;
emphasis added.

[¹²³](#123a)V.D. Savarkar: *Six Glorious Epochs*, p. 143.

[¹²⁴](#124a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.20-22.

[¹²⁵](#125a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.22.

[¹²⁶](#126a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.38.

[¹²⁷](#127a)Adiparva 11:13, Anushasanaparva 115:1, 115:25, 116:38,
Ashwamedhaparva 43:21.  The subject-matter of the Mahabharata precedes
the Buddha by centuries, but its final editing took place only centuries
after the Buddha; as material kept on being added, it is admittedly
difficult to date the historical information given in the epic, even to
merely divide it in "pre-Buddhist" and "post-Buddhist".

[¹²⁸](#128a)Anushasanaparva 115:59-67.  In that context, Vyasa (or
whoever wrote the epic) also claims that meat-caters had introduced
animal sacrifice into the Vedic *yajña*, so that this practice was not
the original tradition but a degenerative trend.  This may well be an
ancient case of back-projection of contemporary values onto ancestral
tradition.

[¹²⁹](#129a)“Earth is good, Zoroaster thought. (…) Already, with
Zoroaster, the outline of an ecological ethic was being sketched",
according to Cyrus R. Pangborn (*Zoroastrianism*, p.114-115), who also
notes among Zoroastrian duties "nurture of plants \[and\] animals",
"social peace" and "moderation" (*ibid*.). I consider the theory that
Zarathushtra lived in the 6th century BC (by common chronology roughly
contemporaneously with the Buddha, in Karl Jaspers’ mythical Achsenzeit
or Axial Age), as sufficiently disproves, see e.g. Pangborn: *op.cit.*,
p.4.

[¹³⁰](#130a)E.g. the late Ekkirala Krishnamacharya from Visakhapatnam,
of the Theosophy-related World Teacher Trust, explained it this way in a
lecture in Mechelen (Belgium) in 1982.

[¹³¹](#131a)John G. Arapura: "Ahimsa in Basic Hindu Scriptures",
*Journal of Dharma*, 1991/3, p.197-210, spec. p.199-200.

[¹³²](#132a)*Chhândogya Upanishad* 3:17:4, 8:15:1.  The five precepts
(to which you are still expected to commit yourself when you take a
Buddhist meditation course) are: truthfulness, non-violence,
non-stealing, chastity, non-intoxication.

[¹³³](#133a)Discussed in detail in Herman W. Tull: "The killing that is
not killing: men, cattle and the origins of non-violence (*ahimsâ*) in
the Vedic sacrifice", *Indo-Iranian Journal* 39 (1996), p.223-244,
building largely on Hanns-Peter Schmidt: "The origin of Ahimsâ”, in
*Mélanges d’Indianisme à la Mésmoire de Louis Renou* (Paris 1968).

[¹³⁴](#134a)Herman W. Tull: "The killing that is not killing",
*Indo-Iranian Journal* 39 (1996), p.223.

[¹³⁵](#135a)As I had the occasion to notice at the Tibetan Institute
(deemed university) in Sarnath, Tibetan monks living in India, where
(unlike in Tibet) vegetarian alternatives to meat are available in
plenty, habitually eat meat.

[¹³⁶](#136a)Vide Red Pine, tra.: *The Zen Teachings of  Bodhidharma*,
introduction.

[¹³⁷](#137a)Vide e.g. Taisen Deshimaru: *The Zen Way to the Martial
Arts*.

[¹³⁸](#138a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.20.

[¹³⁹](#139a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.20.

[¹⁴⁰](#140a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.20.

[¹⁴¹](#141a)V.D. Savarkar: *Six Glorious Epochs*, p.68-69.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------


