+++
title = "05 The Tree in American History"

+++





Eureka, the largest town along northern California’s redwood coast, boastfully displays a love of ornate wood in its multicolored gingerbread houses. Built during the late Victorian era and the early twentieth century, when the jigsaw first came into prominent use in home decoration, the exteriors drip with carved wood that the builders nailed onto every balustrade, window, door, and porch. Rococo wooden embellishments so completely cover whatever they decorate that an onlooker can scarcely decide just what architectural function it obscures. The same building could just as easily be a home, a funeral parlor, a restaurant, a boutique, an insurance office, a museum, or a boardinghouse, and at some point in its life cycle, it may have been any of those.

The stretch of highway between Eureka and Trinidad, California, runs between a series of large sawmills. Adjacent to them, large stacks of logs await their turn on the saw belts. The stacks of logs reach up to fifty feet, and some of them run along the side of the road for over a mile, a wooden wall of logs stretching as far as a person can see. Much of the timber came from the nearby Hoopa Valley Indian reservation, which contains some of the most beautiful and valuable lumber in the world.

If perfection can be measured in size, longevity, density, and tenacity, then the California redwood is the most nearly perfect form of life on this planet. Humans and cottonwoods live a mere seventy-five years; tortoises and elephants can survive a century; the oak can live three hundred years; but the redwood lives thousands of years. It has a natural resistance to most insects and can withstand most fires. The largest of the giant redwoods surpass eighty-three feet in circumference, tower over three hundred sixty feet into the air, and weigh more than twelve million pounds, about thirty times as much as the largest animal, the blue whale.

In mere statistics, the redwood taxes our ability to imagine, for it is the tallest, the widest, the densest, and one of the oldest living things on earth. In the statistics of modern life, a single redwood supplied enough wood to build twenty-two homes. Another was wide enough to cut a car tunnel through; one was hollowed to make a mobile home. The stump of yet another found use as a stage for forty dancing couples.

Animal life on land reached its greatest size with the dinosaurs, but they seem to have been unable to withstand subsequent environmental changes. The plant kingdom reached its largest size millions of years ago in the redwood, and the redwood has maintained the same size and appearance to the present day. The tree survives as a direct link between modern industrial America and the era of the dinosaurs. This longevity prompted John Steinbeck to write, in *Travels with Charley*, that the redwoods stand as “ambassadors from another time.”

A restful silence shrouds the redwood forest as pervasively as the fog. The trees have wrapped themselves in thick layers of fibrous bark, and they have littered the ground with a dense insulating layer of needles that muffle the cries of animals and small children, leaving the forest in an eerie silence even when large families picnic or huge, churning machines belch diesel fumes into the moist air.

The hard trees radiate a mammalian warmth when touched. The massive trunk and branches absorb the sunlight at the top of the forest and convey it throughout the tree like a giant solar conductor, keeping the tree warmer than the air around it in the dark groves.

The redwood forests of the northern Pacific Coast stretched for some 450 miles from Monterey, California, to the Oregon border. Never stretching much more than thirty miles inland, the redwoods hug the foggy coast like a small, delicate ribbon, a ribbon now moth-eaten with little towns, farms, and factories that have nibbled away at it during the last century. At one time the redwoods covered much more of North America, as well as large parts of Europe, China, and even Greenland. The entire genus *Sequoia* has been reduced to the coastal redwoods of northern California and the giant redwoods of the western slope of California’s Sierra Nevada mountains. The giant redwoods now survive in one of the smallest habitats of any tree in the world.

Some of the redwoods standing today began growing at the beginning of recorded history. They had already grown large before the Roman Empire emerged on the world scene, before the Aztecs raised up their pyramids or the Incas built Machu Picchu. A seedling planted today will not mature until the year 2400, and it will not reach its climax stage until the year 3000. We will have to wait until the year 4000 and beyond for one of today’s seedlings to replace these antique giants of today.

Individual trees reach back several thousand years in time, but each grove and even the forest as a whole is more than a collection of trees; it is an organism in its own right, a macro-organism that comes to life, flourishes, and can die. As such a living creature, the California redwood forest goes back into time for around 20 million years, long before the emergence of the first human. The redwood forest predates humanity itself.

By the time the settlers and pioneers of America reached the West Coast, they had gone through many dramatic landscapes, but nothing quite prepared them for the size of the California redwoods. The giant trees led to many disputes, including the very name that should be applied to them. In 1853, British botanists proposed to name the trees *Wellingtonia gigantea* and called them “Wellingtonias” in honor of the Duke of Wellington, who defeated Napoleon at Waterloo. They justified the name on the grounds that the greatest tree in the world should bear the name of the greatest general in the world.

Fortunately, the Americans resisted this choice and supported instead a native American name. Conservationists felt that so great a tree should not be named for a military general. They proposed instead the name *Sequoia sempervirens*, “evergreen Sequoia,” in honor of the man who invented a way of writing the Cherokee language and worked hard to promote literacy among his people. Both the coastal redwoods and the giant redwoods of the Sierra Nevada bear the genus name *Sequoia*, in honor of one of the greatest Indian intellectuals and leaders of the nineteenth century.

The settlers who arrived from Europe learned from the natives how to utilize the food and medicinal resources of the forest. The settlers had some knowledge of forests, but the North American forests offered new plants. The Indians taught the settlers to gather pecans, hickory nuts, pine nuts, acorns, and walnuts, as well as wild fruits such as pawpaw and maypop. The Indians introduced the settlers to the uses of sassafras and cranberries. The European settlers already knew about honey, but they had no experience with maple syrup and its by-products, which quickly became important parts of the colonial economy and cuisine.

The Indians used these resources for subsistence, but the settlers came to America for much more than mere subsistence. They wanted a profit. In addition to living from the forest products, they wanted to turn the forest into a marketable commodity. They wanted to sell the products of the forest, but the settlers had problems finding something to export from America. Despite the vast size and luxuriant condition of American forests, the world did not want to buy more nuts and berries, particularly not unknown ones.

Settlers found two of their first marketable commodities in sassafras and ginseng. The Indians used sassafras as a medicine by applying the leaves directly to wounds. The most important uses came from the root, which they used as a dye, and from the bark of the root, which they used to make tea and as flavoring for bear fat. Because the Indians used the medicine so effectively in some areas, the Europeans thought that sassafras was something of a miracle drug and could cure many other ailments, including the dreaded sexual plague of syphilis. In 1602 and 1603, well before the first British settlement in North America, British ships came to northern Virginia and Massachusetts to trade with the Indians for this new medicine and flavoring, which produced a stiff profit on the London market \(Sauer\).

Ginseng had already achieved popularity as a medicine in Asia before its discovery in America by the new settlers. It attracted the commercial attention of traders, who found the Indians using it from southern Canada down through the Appalachian Mountains as far as Cherokee territory in the Carolinas. French Jesuits organized the ginseng trade in Canada when they sent the first shipment to China in 1718. The Indian root sold in the markets of Canton for an astronomical five dollars a pound, making it one of the most valuable exports America had to offer in the eighteenth century \(Sauer\).

Because herbs could be sold in small quantities, they were cheap to transport and highly profitable, but no matter how profitable herbs such as ginseng and sassafras proved to be on the international market, they could not form the basis for a whole economy. To make more profitable use of the forests, the British began tapping them for resources such as resin, tar, and pitch, as well as lumber for building and shingles for roofing. Even though these items could not be considered exotic commodities on the world market, they were so plentiful in America that they could be easily harvested and transported in bulk. European attention quickly turned from harvesting the plants of the forest to finding ways to harvest the forest itself by cutting down and exporting the massive trees growing over most of North America.

The British found a special commercial use for New England’s tall trees; they made excellent masts for ships. White pines grew in a wide belt along the coast, as far north as Penobscot Bay in Maine and extending south to just below Massachusetts. The trees reached inland along the Connecticut River valley, which divided Vermont from New Hampshire almost to the modern Canadian border. The largest of the giant white pines soared to an incredible two hundred fifty feet, with a diameter of five feet \(Cronon\).

The British had no such trees in their island nation, but needed them desperately for the masts of their rapidly growing mercantile and naval fleets. To make their masts, the British had to buy special firs at great expense from the Baltic nations. Even these trees had to be spliced together in order to make a single mast, which was then vulnerable to breaking.

After the English discovered the giant white pines of New England, they wanted to harvest the trees, but lacked the technology. They had never transported anything so large across such a large expanse as the north Atlantic. The British navy solved the problem by constructing a new type of cargo ship especially for transport of the giant pines.

Because the white pines of America grew taller than any other trees known to the Europeans at that time, the British navy experimented with ever-larger masts. This made possible the construction of larger commercial ships that could carry more cargo, and of warships that carried larger guns and more men over longer distances. The commercial and military might of the English nation grew according to the growth in size and the increase in the number of its ships. The New England forests supplied Britain with an abundance of raw materials to build as many ships as they could without depending on the Scandinavians, the Dutch, or the Russians for access to the Baltic coast. In addition to freeing the British from foreign dependence, the new masts caused a rapid sequence of major technological changes that produced great economic and political benefits for England and helped it gain international naval superiority.

The white pine masts provoked one of the most dramatic technological changes in British naval history, and the harvesting of the American forests produced a wide variety of products that helped to make new fortunes and propel other technological innovations.

The French proved slower to realize the importance of the American forest, and by then the English had claimed much of the best forestlands. King Louis XVI of France dispatched the father-son botanist team of André and François Michaux to America to assess the value of the American forests in comparison with those of France. After exhaustive study and collection of species in America, they found that while France had nine species of tree suitable for carpentry, America had fifty-one. Their research also indicated that while France had only thirty species of trees that exceeded thirty feet in height, the United States had more than one hundred forty \(Perlin\).

Since the French did not control most of the American lands where these trees grew, they sought to remedy this imbalance by wholesale reforestation of France with American trees. François Michaux sent home enough seeds to start a quarter of a million new trees, from which millions of descendants have since flourished in the estates, parks, and forests of France and throughout Europe. Had the French Revolution not intervened, France might have been able to produce for itself a much larger forest industry, but the forests of France, even when planted with exotic American trees, never rivaled the forests of the British colonies in North America.

The New England settlers conducted a brisk business selling lumber and firewood to European ships. In 1770, shortly before the colonists finally declared independence and took over management of their own forests, the British imported fourteen thousand tons of American timber at a cost of approximately thirty thousand pine, oak, and cedar trees felled to meet this growing trade \(Perlin\).

The Europeans, with their steel and iron tools, hardly needed Indian technology for lumbering; they had already learned the trade well enough to strip their own continent. Frequently they used Indian labor. Even in colonial New England, some Indian communities, deprived of their farming and hunting lands, had to earn money by cutting wooden shingles for the siding and roofs of settlers’ homes, and to make staves for the barrels needed by the Spanish to ship Madeira wine \(Cronon\). Still today, many Indians may be found working in lumbering operations throughout the forests of the United States and Canada, but essentially the lumbering industry, quite unlike the fur industry, operated as a European enterprise, with European technology and organization. The labor of the Indians could just as easily have been done by any other group that happened to be there and needed to earn money.

As more settlers arrived from Europe, they needed wood to build their homes and the extensive fences with which they surrounded their farms, and for fuel. In less than two hundred years after the arrival of the Puritans, the settlers of New England consumed an estimated 260 million cords of firewood \(Cronon\).

After the American colonies gained independence from Europe, their economies expanded as the wealth of their trade remained in the coffers of Boston, Philadelphia, Charleston, and New York rather than going into the royal treasury in England or into the pockets of British merchants. Using the rich timber resources of New England, the merchants made their area into an international center for shipbuilding. They could build larger ships more cheaply than anyone else because they had vast resources of cheap, good lumber. They built ships in New England, but they also sent them out to exploit the rich fishing waters of the North Atlantic and to hunt whales. Because they had cheaper ships, the whaling expeditions of New England became some of the most profitable in the world.

New England’s ships also supplied massive amounts of fish and firewood for the peculiar needs of the Caribbean market. The New Englanders shipped to the Caribbean the wood from a quarter of a million trees between 1771 and 1773. The sugar mills of the Caribbean boomed in this period, but the Caribbean settlers had already consumed their own forests to feed the high-temperature fires needed to extract sugar from the cane. The West Indians needed massive amounts of firewood to continue making sugar, and to distill their molasses into rum. The West Indians sold sugar to Europe, but they bought timber from New England to operate these industrial plantations.

The New England merchants sold timber and fish in the Caribbean, and in turn received much larger amounts of molasses and rum than they could utilize in the North American Indian trade. They carried the rum to Africa, where they traded it for slaves, then they brought back their human cargo to the Caribbean and then to Charleston, Savannah, New Orleans, and Annapolis, where they sold the slaves for new plantations opening on the mainland.

The Yankee merchants of New England, as well as the Quaker merchants from Philadelphia, grew rich on this trade of timber, rum, and slaves, which they plied across the Atlantic. With this newly acquired wealth, they replaced their timber-frame homes with houses and large colonial buildings built of brick, facing onto streets paved with brick.

In the early history of the United States and its trade with Europe, wood filled most of the industrial usages that metal, cement, and plastics have come to fill, and wood provided the primary fuel before its eventual replacement by coal, petroleum, and electricity. Wood served as the basis of industries as varied as liquor distilling, brickmaking, and meat drying, and was used in making potash, pitch, tar, turpentine, and charcoal. All of this could be done more cheaply in America than in Europe because of the abundance of inexpensive firewood for use as fuel. This abundance of firewood raised the standard of living of settlers in America, and made it possible for them to undercut the prices of trade goods made elsewhere.

The settlers who arrived from Western Europe came from a stone-oriented society. For Europeans, stone made the building material of highest prestige. They built their palaces, mansions, temples, cathedrals, and universities of stone. Brick, a sort of artificial stone, came next in prestige, followed by wood. Only straw and mud rated lower than wood as a building material in Western Europe, but in Scandinavia, Russia, and other parts of Eastern Europe, wood played a much more important role.

The European settlers in America found that wood was not only plentiful in America, but that it provided a building material that was superior in many regards. It proved easier to use than stone, a characteristic of particular importance to people needing to build in a hurry, without benefit of expert stonecutters or masons. In addition to being easier to use, wood proved to be a much better insulator in America, where winter temperatures dropped far below those common in Europe, and where summer temperatures rose well above those in most of Europe.

Wood furnished the primary building material for the American frontier, as the settlers used wood to build their homes and barns as well as their extensive systems of fences. In the small towns that sprang up, merchants and government officials also used wood to build their stores and offices. The lack of wood on the plains and prairies slowed settlement there, since homes had to be made of sod, and the settlers had to burn buffalo and cow dung for fuel. Settlement of the great American plains did not boom until the introduction of the railroads, which brought large shipments of cheap timber to the plains for use in building and as firewood.

In the early phases of the Industrial Revolution, craftsmen made most machine parts from wood. They used wood to construct waterwheels and mills for grinding grains and sugarcane, as well as for pressing oils. Windmills and even the paddlewheels of ships were made of wood.

As late as 1880, all but a half-dozen of North America’s nearly forty thousand boats were wooden. Even the early toll highways relied on wooden plank roads before the development of modern roads based on concrete and asphalt. People riding over these wooden roads traveled in carts or carriages also made of wood. In addition to using river and ocean boats made of wood, the early railway cars were made mostly of wood, rode on rails made of wood, and crossed rivers on wooden bridges \(Perlin, 347\). In time, iron and steel replaced much of the wood, but the ties connecting the rails continued to be made of wood until concrete replaced them in the twentieth century.

With the invention of steam engines for both trains and ships, wood supplied the primary fuel for several decades before its gradual replacement by coal. Water traffic along the Mississippi River system as well as on the Great Lakes depended exclusively on wood fuel, and the early railroads that passed through large forests also burned wood for fuel. In this way the trains could live off the land as they crossed it, consuming the seemingly limitless forests of America.

Today our civilization has turned to plastics made from petrochemicals, and to metals, but the people who settled America created a civilization based on wood. They were able to do this because the Indians of America had nurtured such large and luxuriant forests that proved to be an easily harvested and exploited resource on national and international markets.

The redwoods evoke varied responses from different people. Some people show a bizarre hatred and envy of the trees. Steinbeck suggested that we resent knowing that the trees will be here thousands of years from now, after we are long gone. Through their seeming immortality they remind us of our mortality.

When writing or talking about the redwoods and other large trees, some people use religious metaphors and almost whispered tones as they compare the groves to outdoor cathedrals. The light streams down among the redwood branches in slanted rays like the light filtering through stained-glass windows in a medieval cathedral, and the pathway between trees looks like an aisle through the pews.

I never quite understood the comparison of trees to cathedrals, since I had never seen a building, no matter how grand, that compared to a forest. I understood the comparison better only after spending time in the treeless Sahara and then visiting the Temple of Karnak just outside Luxor in Egypt. The now roofless temple’s massive columns of limestone tower over a mere mortal. The large number of massive pillars resemble a petrified forest, but the builders of that temple would have never seen a forest, since none existed in Egypt. Instead of making the columns look like trees, they tried to make them look alive through the vegetative motifs of papyrus and lotus they used to decorate the pillars.

The ancient Egyptians had no forests. They could see only a mere hint of a forest in their cultivated date groves. Today a few exotic trees such as eucalyptus and other drought-resistant trees have been imported into Egypt, but for all of recorded history Egypt has been one of the most treeless places on earth. Yet we see in Egyptian architecture a strange phenomenon. In the earliest temple rooms around the step pyramid built for King Zoser at Saqqara, near Memphis, during the Third Dynasty, the limestone is carved to resemble wood. The ceiling, of pure stone, appears to be of logs fastened in a line. The columns of stone rising to support the roof also resemble logs twined together.

Humans in ancient Egypt, medieval Europe, and modern America seem to have an instinctual, primitive yearning for the security of the forest in which our protohuman ancestors lived for so long. When they stray too far from this forest or when they destroy it, they try to re-create it, even if they have to make the trees of stone. The first documented case of this occurred in ancient Mesopotamia, in the city of Babylon, where King Nebuchadnezzar II built his famous Hanging Gardens and filled them with exotic trees to remind his Median wife Amytis of her wooded home. The gardens marked one of the first attempts to re-create a forest in the middle of a city. The ancient Greeks and Arabs continued this trend with their small parks and elaborate courtyards. From the ancient Persian word *pairidaeza*, meaning “park,” is derived the Greek *paradeisos*, the Latin *paradisus*, and the English *paradise*, which played a major conceptual role in Western religious and secular thought.

Something of the forest can be seen even in the column clusters of Greek and Roman temples, and in the cathedrals of Europe. After the Europeans destroyed most of their great forests and covered the land with farms, manors, castles, and cities, they built large temples such as the cathedral of Notre Dame at Chartres, which was finished around the year 1300 and bore two large spires that rose over the surrounding community like giant trees. Like the forest of stone in the interior of the Karnak Temple, great columns rise in the middle of the cathedral. The interior of the building reaches toward the sky, and the builders decorated it with multicolored windows that let light stream in as though coming through the trees.

Only after repeated visits to the redwoods as well as to temples in Asia, Africa, and Europe did I realize that the forest does not look like a cathedral or a temple; rather, the temples and cathedrals of the world imitate the primeval forest, the forest of the redwoods. No matter how urban humans have become, something within them still longs for the forest.




