+++
title = "07 How the Fur Trade Shaped the American Economy"

+++





New York City has defined the twentieth century. Sometimes a place so dominates an epoch that the time becomes forever associated with that place, as New York has been with the twentieth century. Seemingly every major event of the century began in New York, ended in New York, passed through New York, or was financed in New York.

In an era when the world focused on the North Atlantic, New York City ruled the transatlantic world. Europe had several major ports, but they all traded with New York, which served as the shipping, communications, and air link between Europe and America. Radio and television grew up in New York during the twentieth century, and the city controlled the international arts and publishing world.

New York served as gateway for the greatest migration known in human history when the poor millions left Europe looking for a better life in America. The Great Depression that rocked the world began with the collapse of New York’s Wall Street in 1929. New York became the port of embarkation as two generations of American soldiers sailed away to fight in two world wars. For many of those young soldiers, the Manhattan skyline became the last glimpse they ever had of their homeland. But for those who survived the second of those wars, that skyline became their welcome home at its end, when New York hosted what was probably the most jubilant celebration of the century.

Broadway dominated theater, Wall Street became the focal point of world finance, and Madison Avenue invented modern advertising and the entire field of public relations. New York captured the crown of international finance much as London had in the nineteenth century; at the same time, New York dominated fashion and the arts much as Paris had during the eighteenth century. With the multiple crowns of finance, art, communications, and advertising, it seemed inevitable that world diplomats would select New York City as the seat of the United Nations, the world’s largest political organization.

New York so encapsulates the modern era that it almost seems to be a city without a history prior to the twentieth century. It seems to be *sui generis* a creation of the electronic world. Even the Statue of Liberty, the Brooklyn Bridge, and the subway system all seem to belong more to the twentieth century than to the nineteenth century, when they originated. Knowing that New York City started as a small Dutch trading post on Manhattan Island seems as irrelevant to what it became as knowing that Paleo-Indians rubbed sticks together to make fire on Manhattan Island ten thousand years ago.

Yet even New York had a beginning and a reason that made it appear and flourish as such an important commercial center; it did not arise by mere accident or at random. New York became the twentieth century. That century did not belong to the warmer city of Charleston, South Carolina, the older city of Boston, or the more historic city of Philadelphia, all of which once outranked New York in both size and wealth. New York took the honors because of its location and its early trade patterns. That trade focused mostly on Indian furs.

As much as any man, John Jacob Astor shaped the early financial history of New York and built the fur industry of the United States. Astor came to America from Germany, where he was born in 1763 to a butcher’s family in Waldorf, near Heidelberg. By the time of his death, in 1848, as a feeble, sickly man unable to chew and forced to take nourishment by nursing at the breast of a young nursemaid. Astor had become the richest man in North America and one of the world’s first men to accumulate over a million dollars, fashioning an estate valued at between sixteen and eighteen million dollars. Astor did not accumulate his massive hoard of money by being an industrialist, a railroad tycoon, or a plantation owner; he made it buying and selling furs through the American Fur Company, which he created in 1808.

Through his American Fur Company and its subsidiaries, Astor operated the first monopoly in United States history, but he had trouble competing with the Hudson’s Bay monopoly in Canada. Because Canada still belonged to England, Canadian furs dominated the London fur market. Astor had to search elsewhere to sell his furs; he had to move outside of Europe and the closed markets of Europe’s colonies.

He found the market he needed in China. For centuries the Chinese had sold their silks and porcelains to the world, but they bought little on the international market, and thus accumulated great reserves of silver and gold. Astor arrived with something they wanted. Furs provided warmth in the frigid Chinese winter, and American furs became more important as the Chinese hunted their own animals to near extinction and chopped down their great forests for fuel. Astor’s ships crisscrossed the Pacific to supply his newly discovered market.

Astor also carried cochineal, the bright red dye produced by the Indians of Mexico, ginseng grown in North America, and sandalwood grown in Hawaii and used as incense in Chinese temples. His ships brought back tea and silks from China, as well as opium, which was still legal on the North American market. Astor expanded his fur business into an international trading empire that presaged what New York City would become on a much larger scale in the century to follow.

The North American fur trade with Indians began with the first explorers and continued as one of the major economic forces until the middle of the nineteenth century, when it declined rapidly in the face of a growing American agriculture and the newly emerging industrial sector. From its start to its decline, the American fur industry depended on Indian hunters and trappers. They knew the land, understood the behavior of the animals, and possessed the skills and technology to capture them. White frontiersmen served mostly as traders who collected the furs and skins in exchange for ammunition, metal goods, whiskey, tobacco, and a few imported foods such as sugar.

The fur trade operated in a similar manner throughout North America. Small groups of Indian men trapped the animals and transported them back to a base camp, where Indian women processed them into marketable skins. Both parts of the enterprise depended primarily on Indian knowledge, skills, and technology.

The animals grew their thickest and finest furs in the coldest part of winter, and thus winter became the primary season for trapping. European transport and technology, which depended largely on horses or other draft animals pulling wheeled vehicles, proved useless in such an environment. Even on the Great Plains, the pioneers had to travel with their covered wagons during the warm months to avoid getting snowed in, and for much of the year their horses proved a useless luxury.

The Indians had already developed the technology for winter travel. For centuries the natives of Canada and the Great Lakes area made and used snowshoes that distributed the weight of the wearer over the top of the snow, preventing him from sinking into it. With the native knowledge of animal habits and their careful application of such knowledge, perhaps they invented these snowshoes after watching Arctic mammals cross the snow so easily with their large, padded feet. One of the most common methods employed wooden frames of spruce laced with rawhide thongs called *babiche,* but native groups developed different kinds of snowshoes depending on the weather and the natural resources of their particular home areas.

Snow glare presented special difficulties for winter hunting. Winter cold fronts that sweep across North America carry very little moisture after crossing the frozen, dry regions of the Arctic or Siberia, where the air picks up little moisture, dirt, or dust. What moisture the air contains quickly falls in the form of snow, leaving the air crisp and clear. The clear air allows pure sunlight to shine down at just the time of year when the sun stays at an oblique, low angle in the south. This creates the notorious snow glare that blinds travelers for the few hours of the day when the sun shines. To protect their eyes while hunting in such areas during the winter, the northern Indians and Inuit used goggles usually made of bone, antler, or ivory, with slits cut in them to admit enough light for vision.

To transport large loads of cargo over the snow, the Indians used toboggans, which were sleds with a curled front end and without runners. They also used the *cariole,* which resembled the toboggan but had bison-hide sides that made it look more like a large, moving bathtub. Humans or dogs pulled the toboggans and the carioles; only in areas with relatively light snows and wide roads could horses or oxen be used. Not until the twentieth-century invention of the snowmobile did anyone find a quicker way to travel freely across the cold northern plains and forests, but the financial and ecological costs of the snowmobile proved particularly high compared to the slower toboggans and carioles.

Weight was as important a consideration for trappers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries as it would become for air transport in the twentieth. Because the trappers or their dogs had to transport almost everything used, the trappers preferred to make simple wooden traps whenever possible, rather than carry heavy European metal traps with them or rely on weighty guns and ammunition. The heavier a trapper’s load, the more his snowshoes sank into the snow. An Indian trapper might be able to make several hundred traps in a year and then leave them where they were used, rather than carry with him several hundred pounds of heavy metal.

Indians used a variety of traps depending on the quarry, the terrain, and even the time of year. The most common types consisted of snares and deadfalls. The deadfall attracted mink, ermine, otters, wolves, or martens with a small piece of meat; when the animal tugged on the meat, it pulled a wooden peg that triggered the fall of a large log, which killed it.

Snare traps contained rawhide loops placed along animal paths in such a way that a rabbit, fox, or lynx might pass through it or inadvertently stick its head through the loop, which then snapped and choked the animal to death, in some cases literally hanging it from a suspended tree branch or sapling. If the initial shock of the trap did not instantly kill the animal, it could chew through the cord or rawhide and free itself. This changed in the late 1700s with the introduction of European snare wire, which could not be chewed by the animals.

The Indians used their weapons to hunt the larger animals such as deer, moose, caribou, bison, and bear, which were generally too large to trap. For muskrat and beaver, they often combined hunting and trapping.

To the Indians’ surprise, the traders preferred to buy old beaver pelts. The Europeans liked the soft undercoat of beaver fur, but disliked the coarse outer coat. If the Indians wore the beaver pelts for a year, the large hairs fell out or rubbed away, leaving a somewhat ragged-looking fur. The European trader paid more for these old furs than for new ones.

Europeans wanted the furs primarily for clothing. In drafty manor houses, wool offered scant protection from the damp European cold. Rich people wore clothes lined with fur, and carried large fur muffs to warm their hands.

Hatters used the soft undercoat of the beaver to make the tricornered hats of the eighteenth century and the top hats of the early nineteenth century. The notion of a fur hat might conjure images of a Russian’s furry head covering, but the hats made from beaver pelts did not resemble a fur pelt. Hatters pressed together the shaved fine hairs of the beaver to make what should more precisely be called felt rather than fur, since it was not cut from the whole pelt. Because the hatters pressed the individual hairs together into a type of fur cloth, the hat could be molded into almost any shape and then brushed to give it a high luster that made the final hat look more like lacquered cardboard than fur.

Rather than pluck the long hairs out one at a time, hatters usually used mercury to facilitate removal of the coarse hairs. This heavy use of chemicals led to the occupational hazard of mercury poisoning and the ensuing mental debilitation that gave rise to the phrase “mad as a hatter.”

When Jacques Cartier sailed up the St. Lawrence River for the first time in 1534, he did not find the Northwest Passage to Asia which he sought, but he did find a land with an abundance of animal life far beyond his European experience. With some irritation, he found evidence that European fishermen had been trading with the Indians of the St. Lawrence River even before he officially “discovered” the area. Not only did he surprise one fishing boat in the river just after he had claimed the river for France, but all along the river the natives, probably Micmacs, paddled out in their canoes and held up furs on the ends of sticks, clear evidence of prior trading experience with European boats. The Indians even knew to hold up their old beaver pelts rather than the fresh ones.

The French made episodic trading trips back to the area, but not until 1603 did the French government send Samuel de Champlain to New France, now Quebec, to establish a permanent trade system between the French and the Indians. From 1627 until 1663 the Company of One Hundred Associates or the Company of New France controlled the French fur trade, but in 1663 the crown assumed direct control of the trade under the king.

The first shipment of American goods sent by the Pilgrims in 1621 back to England to pay the Plymouth Company included two barrels of furs, but most of the cargo in the aptly named *Fortune* consisted of lumber \(Cronon\). During the first half of the eighteenth century, furs accounted for only 0.5 percent of all British imports from their colonies. Tobacco, sugar, and rum from the warmer colonies had already surpassed furs in importance. Even though fur accounted for a small percentage of total British imports, it constituted a major portion of North American exports. Fur exports varied from one-third to one-half of all exports from the colonies of New York and Pennsylvania between 1700 and 1750 \(Axtell 1988\).

While the Pilgrims settled in New England and the French took control of the St. Lawrence River, the Dutch consolidated a claim on the Hudson River. After the St. Lawrence, the Hudson offered the best access into the American continent from the Atlantic Ocean. For the Dutch, the Hudson River seemed like a new Rhine, and just as the Netherlands had profited for centuries by being at the mouth of Europe’s greatest river, they hoped to create, almost literally, a new American Netherlands at the mouth of the Hudson. They bought Manhattan Island in 1598, and by 1614 Dutch traders had ascended the Hudson River as far as Albany, where they erected Fort Orange.

The Dutch named the new settlement on Manhattan Island New Amsterdam. The first known illustration of the settlement that eventually became New York occurs in a Dutch book published in 1651. Under the title *Fort nieuw Amsterdam op de Manhatans,* the artist shows a small fort surrounded by windmills and farms on the tip of Manhattan. Several Indian canoes appear in the water, with Indians paddling their stock of furs toward the small settlement for trade \(Brandon\).

The fur trade attracted English and Scottish traders all along the Atlantic Coast, including the Carolinas and Georgia, where the mild winters did not produce the rich fur pelts of Canada. The southern Atlantic Coast, however, teemed with white-tailed deer, whose skins proved as lucrative in trade as the northern furs. In an era before plastic- and rubber-coated coverings, leather made from deer or cattle hides served myriad uses in Europe. Deerskins could be used in making a softer leather that was particularly good for clothing and accessories.

Charleston, South Carolina, became the primary trading center for the trade in Southern furs and deerskins. The English and the French Huguenots operated trading houses in the city, while Scotsmen went out and lived among the Indians to do the actual trading. The Indians, of course, did the actual hunting and processing of the skins.

The Dutch entered the United States at the Hudson River, the British created the Hudson’s Bay Company and entered through the north of Canada, the Swedish entered south of the Dutch in what is now Delaware, on the mistaken belief that the Delaware River might prove as large and easily navigable as the Hudson. The French came up the Mississippi River from the south and down the St. Lawrence River from the north. The Russians, the last to enter the race for North American furs, crossed over from Siberia into Alaska, and came as far south as northern California, where they met the Spaniards moving northward.

The Spaniards still claimed North America, but the monarchy largely ignored the northern parts of the continent because explorations by Coronado, De Soto, and others had shown little indication of gold or silver. Compared to the wealth buried in the earth in central Mexico and high in the Andes, North America rated poorly, hardly worth the military effort it would have required to keep it out of the hands of the English, French, Swedes, Dutch, and Russians, who sent in traders and claimed various strips and pieces of the continent.

Of the colonial powers, only the Portuguese made no claim in North America, choosing to ignore the fur trade and concentrate on spices instead. They already had enough empire and trade to occupy them in Africa, Asia, and Brazil.

Rivalries over the fur trade underlay most of the European competition and fighting in North America for nearly three centuries. The Dutch and French each had good vantage points from which to pursue their trade, but the British had only Hudson Bay. The British built York Factory as a trading post on Hudson Bay, but despite its high profits, the long Arctic winter froze the bay, leaving it inaccessible by ship for most of the year.

The British moved early to take over the Dutch and Swedish possessions. In 1668, England acquired New York after seizing it in 1664, and then began the century-long rivalry between the two superpowers of the eighteenth century, Britain and France. Britain steadily pushed back the French and, in the long French and Indian Wars, finally routed them from Canada entirely.

In the eighteenth century the Russians moved onto the Pacific Coast of North America and started a fur trade similar to that of the Dutch and French on the Atlantic Coast in the previous century. The Russian fur trade slowly crossed Siberia from Russia to the Pacific Ocean, depleting the native stock of Asian animals as it progressed. In 1741, Vitus Bering discovered the rich fur country of the Aleutian Islands.

Russian *promyshlenniki*—fur traders—descended on the peaceful Aleuts, who proved to be some of the best hunters and trappers in all the Americas. Unlike southern tribes, who could depend at least in part on agriculture or on the gathering of abundant forest products, the Aleuts depended almost exclusively on hunting and fishing to feed and clothe themselves.

The Russians made no attempt to hunt for themselves; instead they seized villages of Aleuts and demanded that the men bring furs, or the traders would kill the Aleut women and children. Until the Aleut men returned with the furs, the *promyshlenniki* kept the hostage women as slaves and concubines.

The Russian government exercised little control or interest over the activities of its traders halfway around the world from the new European capital at St. Petersburg. So long as the traders paid the *yasak,* the royal 10-percent tax on furs, the czars ignored them, leaving them to steal, enslave, and even kill Native Americans at will. As the animal population decreased, the usually peaceful Aleuts began to fight against the *promyshlenniki,* who then waged a war of extinction in 1766 to thin the numbers of Aleuts and leave only enough to serve the sexual and financial needs of the *promyshlenniki.*

In order to exercise better control over the natives, and to resist the intrusion of fur traders from the East Coast, the Russians created forts, settlements, and a few Russian Orthodox missions, beginning in 1784 with Three Saints on Kodiak Island. In 1799, administration for the entire area went to a newly created Russian American Company, and by 1812 the Russians had built Fort Ross in northern California.

Even though they entered the fur race later than others, the *promyshlenniki* moved steadily from island to island across the northern Pacific Ocean and down the Alaskan coastline to California. To deny the Spanish claim to discovery and conquest of the Pacific Coast, the Russians called the area Nova Albion, the early name bestowed on it by Sir Francis Drake, rather than using the Spanish name California.

By 1825 the Russians were working the coast of southern California in the vicinity of Santa Barbara. In a typical Russian fur enterprise, a group of twenty-five Russians and Kodiaks were dispatched to build a base on San Nicolas Island. The Russians exterminated all the men on the island and captured all the women, while they put the Kodiaks to work hunting sea otters. For some reason the supply ship did not return the following year to pick up the pelts, and the native women seized the opportunity to rebel and kill their Russian captors \(Farris\).

Until the Russian sale of Alaska to the United States in 1867, the Russian American Company, the Hudson’s Bay Company, and John Jacob Astor’s American Fur Company dominated the international fur trade.

By the middle of the nineteenth century, the fur trade had started to collapse. The European fashion of the rainproof men’s beaver hat declined as men adopted smaller felt hats and discovered the Asian umbrella, and as the military began to use rubber-lined ponchos.

During these three centuries, the fur trade underlay much of the economic development of Europe and North America. The whole concept of the trading post conjures images of cheap beads, European trinkets, rum, and whiskey. Those items certainly carried great importance in the European side of the trade, but that view also demeans the Indian contribution. The Indians traded millions of beaver pelts, deerskins, bison hides, sealskins, moose hides, bearskins, and otter pelts.

These skins and furs formed the early capital of North America and financed the expansion of Atlantic Coast settlements, and a few on the Pacific Coast, into cities. Montreal, New York, Detroit, and Charleston, as well as Sitka, Alaska, owe their early existence to this supply of Indian goods. Traders in these settlements forwarded the Indian merchandise to Europe for sale at high prices. With the revenues generated by these sales, they bought more cheap goods for the Indians. The traders imported luxury goods for themselves and thus filled their homes with English silver service, Chinese porcelains, French furniture, Italian glassware, and Dutch crockery. More significant than the importation of European luxury goods, however, was the accumulation of vast new capital reserves. Through investment in other companies, land, and entrepreneurial schemes, the fur fortunes financed much of the subsequent development and industrialization of the United States and Canada.

The level of profit earned by the fur traders appears clearly in an account given by the partners of the Pacific Fur Company in 1813. Writing from Astoria, Oregon, a partner explained that the Indians gave him twenty beaverskins for a gun. He in turn sold the twenty skins for about twenty-five pounds, with which he could buy another gun for a little over one pound seven shillings. Similarly, he bought cloth at six shillings a yard and sold it for three or four beaverskins worth four to five pounds \(O’Connor\). The traders received roughly ten times as much money as they paid the Indians for the furs, a high rate of return for any business, in any era.

Profits from the fur trade financed much of the development of the early settlements into national and international cities. Indian furs paid for the building of wharves and docks, and for the expansion of warehouses. The most important source of revenues for the colonial government came from tariffs and taxes on trade, most of which was supported by the Indian fur trade. The Indian trade helped to underwrite the cost of building roads into the wilderness, and later financed construction of canals and dredging of rivers.

The profit and new investments generated by the fur trade did not stay on the frontier; the money moved to the Eastern cities, of which New York benefited more than any other. John Jacob Astor sold his American Fur Company in 1834, when fur sales in Europe began to slide, and when he realized that North America had been nearly depleted. Astor had already accumulated a fortune of several millions from the fur trade, and he invested this money in New York. He invested in virtually every enterprise associated with New York, but, most important, he invested it in land. He bought many of the farms on Manhattan Island. He and his descendants sold and leased parts of this land and also constructed new buildings and houses, making the Astors the landlords of the city.

John Jacob Astor used his fur profits to build the Astor House, a modern six-story building that offered a washbowl and pitcher in every room along with free soap. Astor wisely leased operation of the hotel to others while he continued to own the building and the site. A similar arrangement underlay his ownership of the Park Theatre and the City Hotel. By the time Astor died in 1848, he owned 470 such leases throughout New York, producing over $200,000 in annual rents \(O’Connor\). The majority of his New York lands, however, sat idle, waiting for development by future generations.

Astor concentrated on simple investment strategies for his lands. He leased the land for twenty-one years, with the leaseholder bearing responsibility for paying the taxes and for making any necessary improvements on the land. Most people who leased the land then erected buildings on it, in expectation that after the contract expired in twenty-one years, the lease might be renewed at the same rent. When the lease expired, Astor increased the rents greatly or reclaimed his land. He then gave the owner of the building ten days to remove it, or the building too passed into Astor ownership. In this way, Astor’s capital grew with only minimal effort on his part. Astor’s descendants continued the tradition of investing in New York through extensive holdings in real estate and through creation of hotels such as the Astor and the Waldorf Astoria.

Astor financed some of the earliest efforts to build railroads in the United States. He helped to found the Mohawk & Hudson railway, which eventually became part of the New York Central. He invested a million dollars in the construction of canals through New York, Ohio, and New Jersey. As a merchant who needed to move large amounts of cargo over long distances easily and cheaply, Astor understood the value of good modes of transportation such as canals and railroads. As a landlord, he also understood the value that these new canals and railroads had for his properties in and around New York City. His descendants inherited that understanding, and when the city grew beyond the limits of even their real-estate holdings, they fought hard against the development of the New York subway, because it would alleviate the crowding in the city and thus lower demand for their urban tenements \(O’Connor\).

Astor decendants played key roles in many of the railroad lines of the East, in coal-development projects, in the Westchester Gas Light Company, in the developing telegraph industry that became Western Union, in Niagara Falls Power, in American Telephone and Telegraph, and in other basic services for industry.

The Astor blood and monies commingled with the elite of New York and eventually with European aristocracy as part of the family moved abroad to assume control of such institutions as *The Times* of London. They served in the House of Lords, and Major John Jacob Astor ironically became the mayor of Plymouth, England, the city from which the Pilgrim settlers of Massachusetts sailed.

John Jacob Astor created the Astor Library, the finest research facility in North America, and one of the few public gifts ever made by Astor from his immense fur fortune. He left $400,000 for the library and a set of John James Audubon’s *Birds of America.* The library opened on Lafayette Place in 1854 with 100,000 books, making it easily the largest library in North America, since the Library of Congress had only half that number, Harvard had 72,000, and the Philadelphia public library 60,000 \(O’Connor\). The Astor heirs continued to maintain the library, and only five years after it opened, William B. Astor added another wing to it. Under Astor patronage, the library acquired an unprecedented 235,000 volumes by 1875. It became the basis for the New York Public Library in 1895, when the Astor Library combined with the Tilden and Lenox libraries to make a larger system that catered both to scholarly research interests and to the general public.

Astor invested very little in industry, aside from a single cotton mill, but he left his heirs investments in the Bank of America, the Manhattan Company, the Merchants Bank, The Mechanics Bank, and the New York Life Insurance and Trust Company, as well as in government and transportation bonds. His investments in banks and insurance companies helped to create the financial underpinnings necessary for the industrialization that sprang up in the northeastern United States in the second half of the nineteenth century. Just as the vast earnings from the fur trade helped to make the communications and transportation structure for America, the same monies built the infrastructure that sustained New York at the center of American financial life during the nineteenth century, and at the center of international financing through the twentieth century.

Modern New York, like the rest of America, has changed markedly since the fur trade. The ensuing Industrial Revolution restructured the economic base of the nation and altered the face and function of urban areas. Modern America is a product of the Industrial Revolution, but it is a product financed in large part by the fur trade, and therefore by the technology of the native men and women who trapped and processed the furs that made America rich and created the financial base for subsequent industrial development.




