+++
title = "03  II         The State"

+++
II  
The State

Muslim rule in India has been conveniently divided into two periods, the
Sultanate of Delhi (1206-1526) and the Mughal empire (1526-1707). it
continued up to 1857, though in the later stages only nominally. When
the Sultanate was established, it carried with it the experience gained
by the Arab rule in Sindh and the Ghaznavid rule in Punjab of about two
centuries. Meanwhile a well-developed statecraft had sprung up in Muslim
countries during the seventh to the twelfth centuries. This was mainly
due to the universality of Islamic law. The Ghazni and Delhi sultanates
cannot be isolated from the rest of the Muslim states particularly in
the functioning of their institutions. There were parallel and sometimes
identical institutions under the kingdoms of Ghazni and Delhi. The
Sultanate of Delhi may not have possessed uninterrupted political
continuity; its boundaries also constantly changed. As political entity,
however, the Sultanate received sustenance from the evolution of
institutions abroad and at home. The Mughal empire too in its early
years lacked stability. But from Akbar (1556-1605) onwards there was
undisturbed one dynasty rule. Its geographical boundaries also expanded
and there was further growth of Islamic administrative institutions.

2.1. NIZAM-I-MUSTAFA

For an Islamic state, the Quran, the multiple Hadis collections and the
administrative acts and principles of the Prophet had set up rules for a
'purified' system of governance. Muhammad was not only the founder of a
faith, he was also the ruler of Arabia. He personally participated in
war. He delivered judgements, he executed prisoners of war. He entered
into treaties with tribal leaders within and potentates outside Arabia.
Since everything was done at the behest of Allah which was conveyed to
Muhammad in the form of revelations, his ministration is known as
Nizam-i (Muhammad) Mustafa, meaning a regulated and purified system of
governance based on the commands of God. Nizam-i-Mustafa is rightly
translated into the English language as a theocratic administration both
in letter and spirit.

Thus the state the Muslim invaders and rulers set up in India was a
theocracy. This is the conclusion also arrived at by Jadunath
Sarkar,[1](#1) R.P. Tripathi,[2](#2) K.M. Ashraf,[3](#3) T.P.
Hughes,[4](#4) *The Encyclopaedia of Islam*[5](#5) and many others. "All
the institutions that the Muslims either evolved or adopted were
intended to subserve the law,"[6](#6) observes Tripathi. On the other
hand, I.H. Qureshi says that the "supremacy of the Shara (Islamic law)
has misled some into thinking that the Sultanate was a
theocracy."[7](#7) Qureshi's contention may not be taken seriously,
because he tries to eulogize every aspect of Muslim rule in
India.[8](#8) But when Mohammad Habib declares that "it (Muslim state in
India) was not a theocratic state in any sense of the word" and that
"its foundation was, non-religious and secular",[9](#9) his statement
calls for an appraisal.

Theocracy envisages "direct intervention and authorship of God through
revelations in government of society", or "that constitution of a state
in which the Almighty is regarded as the sole sovereign, and the laws of
the realm as divine commands rather than human ordinances…"[10](#10)
Prophet Muhammad envisaged only a theocratic state for Islam. From the
very beginning it had been so conceived. As P.K. Hitti Points out,
"Hitherto (Battle of Badr 624 CE) Islam had been a religion within a
state; in al-Madinah after Badr, it passed into something more than a
state-religion - it itself became the state."[11](#11) "The history of
the political structure of Islam, its system of government, laws and
institutions, virtually starts from that date."[12](#12) D.De
Santillana, another recognised authority on Islamic law and society,
says that "Islam is the direct government of Allah, the rule of God,
whose eyes are upon his people. The principle of unity and order which
in other societies is called *civitas, polis*, state, in Islam is
personified by Allah: Allah is the name of the supreme power, acting in
the common interest. Thus the public treasury is the treasury of Allah,
the army is the army of Allah", even the public functionaries are "the
employees of Allah."[13](#13) According to Dr. Qureshi himself, the
Shara "is based on the Quran which is believed by every Muslim to be the
word of God revealed to His Prophet Muhammad... on these two rocks - the
Quran and Hadis (the Prophet's interpretations, traditions) is built the
structure of Muslim Law... This law was the actual sovereign in Muslim
lands."[14](#14) "The protection of Shara," writes Ibn Hasan, "has two
aspects: The propagation of the knowledge of Shara and its enforcement
as law within the state. The one implied the maintenance of a class of
scholars devoted to the study, the teaching and the propagation of that
knowledge, and the other the appointment of one from those scholars… as
an adviser to the king in all his acts of state. The scholars devoted to
that knowledge are called Ulama and the one selected from among them is
termed Shaikh-ul Islam."[15](#15) The Shaikh-ul-Islam was the
representative of the ulema and it was his duty to bring "to the notice
of the King what he thought detrimental or prejudicial to the interest
of his religion, and the King had little option in acting upon such an
advice".[16](#16) Their advice was the establishment of the
Nizam-i-Mustafa or a *theocratic* state.

In short, the law which obtained in medieval India under Muslim rule was
the Shara which was based not on human experience but on divine
revelation. It was not a secular law. Muslim state could not be a
secular state. In fact Islam and secularism are mutually exclusive. One
has only to read the Quran and a few Persian chronicles of medieval
times to realise the extent to which the Muslim state in India was
theocratic both in spirit and in action.

The fundamental basis of the Islamic polity is the attainment of
complete religious uniformity, to root out heresy and to extirpate
infidelity. Under it, populations everywhere were to be converted into
true believers.[17](#17) The Quranic injunction is: "And when the sacred
months (Ramzan) are passed, kill those who join other deities with God,
wherever you shall find them. But if they shall convert... then let them
go their way."[18](#18) The prophet of Islam who had accorded some sort
of religious toleration to the Jews of Medina, expelled them afterward
to bring about a complete religious uniformity in that city, while
Caliph Omar I (CE 634-644) expelled the Jews and Christians from the
whole of Arabia.[19](#19)

*Hindu Influence on the Muslim State*

This could not be done in India. The country was too vast and the
resistance of the people against Islamization of the country too
determined.[20](#20) Here Islam could not be forced down the throats of
the people despite persistent desire and efforts of Muslim invaders and
rulers. And so during the twelve centuries of Muslim rule some
compromises had to be made.

Twelve centuries is a long period to have kept the Muslim conquerors and
rulers isolated from the majority population of the Hindus. In every
sphere of life and activity, the Hindu fertile thought and vision
influenced the rigid Muslim attitudes. In art and architecture the
conquerors were inevitably impressed by the achievements of the Hindus
and there came into being what is known as the Indo-Saracenic
architecture. So was the case with painting and music. In classical and
folk music the Hindus were past-masters, and the music that the Muslim
rulers patronized in India was mainly Hindu. Similar was the case with
polity. The concept of the theocratic Islamic state was not unoften
influenced by the secular and tolerant traditions of Indian rules of
governance although this did not change the theocratic nature of the
Muslim state. Side by side the Muslim Sultanate and regional Muslim
Kingdoms, there were Rajput States and the Vijayanagar Empire whose
nature of administration would have been constantly watched by the
Muslim kings. It is well known that Hindu kings on the western coast
built mosques for the convenience of Muslim traders and settlers in
India. In the fifteenth-sixteenth century Vijayanagar rulers treated
their Muslim subjects with a consideration which was alien to the
Islamic Shariat. For instance, Deva Raya II (1419-1449) "gave orders to
enlist Mussulmans (as soldiers) in his service, allotting them estates,
and erecting a mosque in the city of Vijayanagar. He also commanded that
no one should molest them in the exercise of their religion, and
moreover, he ordered a Koran to be placed before his throne on a rich
desk."[21](#21) This policy continued throughout. Under Krishna Deva
Raya (1509-1530), great equity and justice was observed…" During the
reign of Ram Raja (1542, 1556-1570), when, on one occasion, the
Muhammadans sacrificed a cow in a mosque in the 'Turukvada' area, the
excited officers and nobles, led by the king's own brother Tirumala,
made a representation to the king. But he did not yield to them saying
that it would not be correct to interfere in their religious practices
and declaring that he was the master of the bodies of his soldiers, not
their souls.[22](#22)

Many Muslim scholars and rulers did not fail to notice this freedom in
Hindu society and religion. To Babur, a conqueror, India provided a
completely new environment. "Hindustan is a wonderful country," writes
he. "Compared with our (Muslim) countries it is a different world...
Once the water of Sindh is crossed, everything is in the Hindustani way…
people and horde, opinion and custom."[23](#23) This was due to the
traditional Hindu tolerance. In spite of what the Muslims had always
done to the non-Muslims in pursuance of their scriptures, the
Vijayanagar kings allowed, according to Duarte Barbosa "that every man
may come and go, and live according to his own creed without suffering
any annoyance, and without enquiring whether he is a Christian, Jew,
Moor or Heathen. Great equity and justice is observed by all."[24](#24)
Abul Fazl extols the Hindus in his *Ain-i-Akbari* in the following
words: "The inhabitants of this land are religious, affectionate,
hospitable, genial and frank. They are fond of scientific pursuits,
inclined to austerity of life, seekers after justice, contented,
industrious, capable in affairs, loyal, truthful and constant… They one
and all believe in the unity of God, and as to the reverence they pay to
the images of stone and wood and the like, which simpletons regard as
idolatry, it is not so." In a footnote Jadunath Sarkar adds that "the
same things were observed by the Chinese pilgrim Yuan Chwang in the 7th
century: "The ordinary people … are upright and honourable... They are
faithful to their oaths and promises... In their behavior there is much
gentleness and sweetness."' And of the Marathas: "The disposition of the
people is honest and simple... to their benefactors they are grateful;
to their enemies ruthless. If they are asked to help one in distress,
they will forget themselves in their haste to render
assistance."[25](#25) Even Badaoni concedes that freedom and tolerance
existed among Hindus. He writes that "Hindustan is a nice large place
where everything is allowed, and no one cares for another (i.e.
interferes in the affairs of others) and people may go as they
may".[26](#26)

It stands to reason that in such an environment the Muslim mind,
fanaticised by the commands of the Shariat, would have been occasionally
dented by the Hindu spirit of tolerance, to breathe in freedom with a
people who did not believe in one imposed version of God, one Book and
one Prophet. Perhaps the first king who realised what India was, was
Iltutmish, who tackled his orthodox ulema in his own way. Alauddin
Khalji (1296-1316) even thought of founding a new religion which was
believed to be in contravention of Islam (and the Shariat) for the
Muslims were apprehensive that its enforcement would entail slaughter of
a large number of Musalmans. Alauddin was illiterate and lacked the
genius of taking any revolutionary step. But it appears that he
recognised the fact that the rule of the Shariat was not entirely
feasible in India and declared that "I know not whether these laws (his
*zawabits* or regulations) are sanctioned by our faith or not, but
whatever I conceive for the good of the state, that I decree".[27](#27)
His contemporary chronicler confessed that if the Muslim kings followed
the tradition of the Prophet, kingship and governance would be
impossible for them in India. It was probably the experience of such
rulers that prompted Ziyauddin Barani to advocate that if the
enforcement of the Shariat was impossible or impracticable, new laws
should be enacted by rulers. "It is the duty of a king," says he, "to
enforce if he can, those royal laws which have become proverbial owing
to their principles of justice and mercy. But if owing to the change of
time and circumstances he is unable to enforce the laws of the ancients
(Muslim rulers), he should, with the counsel of wise men.... frame laws
suited to his time and circumstances and proceed to enforce them. Much
reflection is necessary in order that laws, suited to his reign are
properly framed, so that *they in no way contravene the laws of Islam"*
(italics added).[28](#28) These laws Barani calls zawabits. Barani does
not necessarily contradict himself. He knows the difficulties in the
enforcement of the Shariat in India. Hence his advocacy of framing new
laws. He also knew that the Shariat could not be superseded by any other
law. Hence on every page of his *Tarikh* and his *Fatawa-i-Jahandari* he
calls upon Muslim rulers to crush the Hindus in every possible manner
according to the tenets of Islam.

Barani wrote in the fourteenth century. But right up to the middle of
the sixteenth century no king made any laws of the kind, and the Shariat
continued to be the supreme law prevalent in the Turkish, Afghan and
Mughal times. They ruled with all the excesses that Islamic theory
envisaged. It was late in the sixteenth century that emperor Akbar
promulgated a number of regulations for "the real benefit of the
people". That is, he removed to some extent the disabilities imposed on
the majority of the population. Akbar was an administrative genius. His
reforms cover all areas of religion and society, and their number runs
into hundreds. However, we shall take note of only those major measures
which were considered to be in contravention of the Shariat and the
Sunnah to see how far his government was secular or theocratic.

*Akbar's Deviation*

The first revolutionary step of Akbar was the abolition of the Jiziyah,
the hated discriminatory tax paid by Hindu Zimmis. The Hindus, as
Zimmis, had become second class citizens in their own homeland and were
suffered to live under certain disabilities. One of them was that each
adult must pay a poll tax called Jiziyah (about this later on in
detail). The Zimmis also had to suffer in respect of their mode of
worship, payment of taxes, and on account of certain sumptuary laws.
Death awaited them at every corner, because, being idolaters, they could
be given a choice only between Islam and death. The state rested upon
the support of the military class which consisted largely of the
followers of the faith. They were treated as the favoured children of
the state while various kinds of disabilities were imposed upon the
non-Muslims.

Jiziyah was an outcome of jihad and was an inalienable part of the
Muslim theory of taxation. It brought great income to the state. But it
was an emblem of inferiority for the Hindus who were held down by sheer
force through this financial burden. All earlier Muslim kings had
imposed it in its true religious connotation. With its abolition in
1564, Akbar brought Hindus on par with Muslims as common citizens of the
state rather than treat them as second class citizens. In an Islamic
state it was prohibited to treat infidels and idolaters as equal to the
people of the faith. But "in spite of the disapproval of statesmen, and
of much chatter on the part of the ignorant, (this) sublime decree was
issued... Which might be regarded as the foundation of the arrangement
of mankind."[29](#29) Akbar removed restrictions on the public religious
worship by non-Muslims. He abolished pilgrim tax on Hindus (1563) and
removed all restrictions on the building of places of worship of
non-Muslims. This led to the building of churches by Christians[30](#30)
and temples by Hindus. A church was built in Agra itself; others were
constructed at Lahore, Cambay and Thatta. Many Rajas built temples
dedicated to their favourite Gods. Raja Mansingh built a temple at
Brindaban at a cost of 5 lakh rupees and another at Banaras.[31](#31)
Christians were People of the Book, but granting permission to build
temples of idolaters was against the injunctions of the Shariat. Akbar
did not stop at that. He allowed his Hindu spouses to perform Hindu
worship inside the palace. A full Hindu temple built in his Allahabad
fort still exists. Apostasy is punishable by death in Islam.[32](#32)
Under earlier kings conversion of Muslims to other faiths was not
allowed. Such apostates paid with their lives for their "falling off
from grace".[33](#33) Akbar issued orders permitting those Hindus who
had been forcibly converted to Islam earlier, to reconvert to
Hinduism.[34](#34) He also prohibited making slaves of prisoners of war.
All this did not conform with the Quran and the Shariat.

Akbar's 'Infallibility decree' also falls under "anti-Islamic" measures.
Although the document was written by the principal ulema and presented
to Akbar for the glory of God and propagation of Islam, it was deemed to
confer on the Emperor final powers of decision over conflicting opinions
of the Mujahids. According to Badaoni, Akbar challenged the doctrines of
Islam itself, and this made the author of *Muntakhab-ut-Tawarikh* rave.
He writes: "At the religious discussion meetings held by Akbar, 'at
which every one... might say or ask what he liked,' the emperor examined
people about the creation of the Quran, elicited their belief, or
otherwise, in revelation, and raised doubts in them regarding all things
connected with the Prophet and the imams. He distinctly denied the
existence of *Jins*, of angels, and of all other beings of the invisible
world, as well as the miracles of the Prophet."[35](#35) In the history
of Muslim rule in India, it was for the first time that freedom of
thought and critical appraisal of Islam was witnessed in the Court
circles. In this atmosphere, the people also got busy collecting "all
kinds of exploded errors, and brought them to his Majesty, as if they
were so many presents... Every doctrine and command of Islam as the
prophetship, the harmony of Islam with reason... the details of the day
of resurrection and judgement, all were doubted and ridiculed."[36](#36)
"Bir Bar...., Shaykh Abul Fazl and Hakim Abul Fateh... successfully
turned the emperor from Islam and led him to reject inspiration,
prophetship, the miracles of the Prophet and of saints and even the
whole law."[37](#37)

There were many factors responsible for such an attitude of Akbar, for
such a change of mind and heart. We need not enumerate all of them here.
But one reason is the most prominent - Akbar's association with Hindu
scholars. His sympathetic and receptive mind willingly accepted the
goodness that Hindus possessed and Hindu men of learning successfully
conveyed to the King. Some earlier monarchs like Muhammad bin Tughlaq
had also associated with Hindu saints and yogis but they had remained
fundamentalists. It was Akbar's genius that grasped the finer points of
Hindu civilization "skilfully represented" by learned Brahmins and he
built up a political edifice on the oft-quoted principle of *Sulehkul*,
or peace with all.

In India, Muslim sultans and padshahs came across a civilization which
was different from theirs in many ways. It is another matter that many
of them were not educated and the goodness of Hindu civilization was
appreciated by only a few savants and kings like Alberuni and Akbar.
About emperor Akbar, Abdul Qadir Badaoni says that he used to invite
learned Hindus for discussion. "As they (the Brahmins) surpass other
learned men in their treatises on morals, and on physical and religious
sciences, and reach a high degree in their knowledge of the future, in
spiritual power and human perfection, they brought proofs based on
reason and testimony.... and so skilfully represented things as quite
self-evident... that no man could now raise a doubt in His
Majesty."[38](#38) Also, "His majesty, on hearing... how much the people
of the country prized their institutions, commenced to look upon them
with affection."[39](#39) He also believed that it was wrong to kill
cows, which the Hindus worship.[40](#40) The custom of Rakhi,
celebration of Diwali for similar reasons, became quite common. Jahangir
also participated in all major Hindu festivals. He describes the Ramlila
and dwells on the Hindu caste system and the four *Varnashrams* without
any criticism. Jahangir even performed the *shraddha* of Akbar.[41](#41)
Akbar was by nature tolerant. But he also felt that the sentiments of
the vast population of the Hindus had to be respected if a strong and
stable national state was to be built up.

What sentiments of the Hindus Akbar respected; what aspects of Hindu
philosophy impressed Akbar? In Islam truth is established by the sword.
"Fight against them (the *mushriks*) until idolatry is no more, and
Allah's religion reigns supreme," says the Quran *Surah* 2, *ayat* 193.
In Islam all dissent is treated as heresy and stamped out as infidelity.
In Hinduism truth is sought to be arrived at through introspection and
soul-searching, through argument and discussion (*shastrarth*). Dissent
is not only tolerated but even encouraged and no one is declared a
heretic. Buddhism and Jainism started as non-conformist movements. But
in course of time Mahavir and Buddha were absorbed in the Hindu pantheon
as their own 'Gods'. On their part, Buddha and emperor Ashoka did not
indulge in any campaign to destroy other sects; they advocated promotion
of all sects.[42](#42) In Hinduism all kinds of ideas are welcome for
reflection, all kinds of gods emanating from these ideas are worshipped.
To call such people by the derogatory epithets of polytheists and Kafirs
is the height of arrogance and ignorance. As Ibn Warraq points out,
"Implicit in all kinds of monotheism is the dogmatic certainty that it
alone has access to true God, it alone has access to truth."[43](#43)
Akbar tried to understand the spirit of India in a spirit of
accommodation. He got the Ramayana and the Mahabharata translated into
Persian. And what did the Mahabharata say on this point? *"Dharmam yo
badhate dharmo na sa dharmah prakirtitah; avirodhat tu yo dharmah sa
dharmah satyavikarmah"* (a religion which opposes another religion is
not a true religion. True religion is that which does not come in the
way of another religion). Akbar subscribed to such a view. As professor
Toynbee has said: "Islam, like the other two religions of the Judaic
family, is exclusive-minded and intolerant by comparison with the
religions and philosophies of Indian origin. Yet the influence of India
on Akbar went so deep that he was characteristically Indian in (his)
large-hearted catholicity."[44](#44)

In short, Akbar's policy of *Sulehkul* (secularism?) could go no
further, looking to the times and exigencies of the state. Jahangir
ordinarily continued Akbar's toleration. His memoirs, the
*Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri*, as a book reveals a nonreligious secular outlook.
Shahjahan may not have been as tolerant as his two predecessors, but it
appears that his ardour for Islam was tampered by the love of his
deputy, son, and heir-apparent Dara Shukoh.

The main principles of Muslim administration are known to all students
of medieval Indian history. They were known to Mohammad Habib. The one
reason why Habib and many others like him say that Muslim rule in India
was not theocratic in any sense of the word and that its foundation was
non-religious and secular, is that when they conjure up the vision of
Muslim rule in India they only think about the one hundred years of
Mughal rule between 1556 and 1658. But one hundred years rule of three
Mughal emperors Akbar, Jahangir, and Shahjahan - does not make more than
a thousand years of Muslim rule in India secular.

*Record of Mughal Secularism*

The first king of the Mughal dynasty was Zahiruddin Muhammad Babur. He
conquered and ruled as a normal Muslim king. He inherited his religious
policy in India from the Lodis. Sikandar Lodi's fanaticism[45](#45) must
have been the norm of officials who continued to serve when Babur came
to power. Babur himself was an orthodox Muslim. His ideas are reflected
in his memoirs. Before engaging in battle with Rana Sanga, he wrote: "I
made public the resolution to abstain from wine. (My) servants... dashed
upon the earth., the flagons and the cups... *They dashed them in pieces
as, God willing! soon will be dashed, the gods of the
idolaters"*[46](#46) (italics added). Babur and his officers broke Hindu
temples in many parts of the country.[47](#47) He raised towers of
skulls of the slain infidels. Babur is said to have been a secular king
on the basis of his alleged Will admonitioning Humayun to behave
liberally towards the Hindus. But the Will has been found to be a
non-genuine document.[48](#48)

In short, Babur was content to govern Hindustan in the orthodox fashion.
Humayun had not much chance of developing any distinct religious policy
of his own, although he was liberal towards the 'heretic' Shias. Sher
Shah Suri too was neither liberal nor fanatic. He devotedly believed in
the Shariat and said that "it behoves kings not to disobey the
commandments of God, to inscribe the pages of their history with the
characters of religion, that their servants and subjects may love
religion; for kings are partakers in every act of devotion and worship
which proceeds from the priests and the people."[49](#49) "If Muslim
chroniclers do not praise him for his religious fanaticism as they do
Alauddin, Feroz Shah (Tughlaq), or Sikandar Lodi, they simply bring him
to the level of the general run of Muslim rulers."[50](#50) The hundred
years (1556-,1658) of Mughal rule comprising the reigns of Akbar,
Jahangir and Shahjahan were a shade different. But for their fits of
rage, Akbar and Jahangir were kind kings. About the former Abul Fazl
says, "The compassionate heart of his majesty finds no pleasure in
cruelties or in causing sorrow to others; he is ever sparing of the
lives of his subjects, wishing to bestow happiness upon all."[51](#51)
But as said earlier a hundred years of religiously less oppressive
administration does not make the twelve centuries of Muslim rule
secular. These three Mughals proved an exception when they, more or
less, left the religious beliefs of their subjects alone. Else
Aurangzeb's militant policy of religious persecution, as advocated by
the Islamic scriptures, was the norm of Muslim rule in India. A Muslim
state could only be Islamic in character. Muslim state could not but be
a theocracy as the ideology of Islam was more important than thoughts
and actions of a few individual 'secularist' kings.

*Shariat a Must*

For, no Muslim monarch including the three Mughals mentioned above,
could move away from the ideology of Islam, from the laws of Islam, from
the practice of the Shariat. Akbar abolished Jiziyah in 1564. In all
probability many of his 'devout' officers in far off regions, did not
care to enforce this anti-Islamic measure. Therefore, ten years later he
once again issued orders for its abolition. Badaoni tells us that it was
customary "to search out and kill heretics" (Shias), let alone
non-Muslims as late as 1574. Hemu's father, when captured, was offered
his life if he turned Muslim. Abdun Nabi executed a Brahman for
blasphemy on the complaint of a Qazi. Husain Khan, the governor of
Lahore (died 983H/ 1575-76) ordered Hindus to stick patches on their
shoulders so that no Muslim could be put to the indignity of showing
them honour by mistake, nor did he allow Hindus to saddle their horses.
Jihad was practised as usual, massacre at Chittor was done in true
Jihadist spirit. "The *Akbar Nama*, the *Ain-i-Akbari* and Badaoni are
all agreed that prior to 1593, some Hindus had been converted to Islam
forcibly." In 1581 some Portuguese captives at Surat were offered their
lives if they turned Muslim. Even iconoclastic zeal did not disappear
under Akbar. Kangra was invaded in 1572-73, and even though Birbal was
in joint command, the umbrella of the Goddess was riddled with arrows,
200 cows were killed and Muslim soldiers threw their shoes full of blood
at the walls and doors of the temple. A Mughal officer, Bayazid,
converted a Hindu temple into a Muslim school. Jain idols in Gujarat
could not escape vandalism. "Such seem to have been and continued to be
the popular prejudices against the Hindus", under Akbar and his
successors as per the obligations of the Shariat and practice of Sunnah,
writes S.R. Sharma.[52](#52) In his letters to Abdullah Khan Uzbek
written in 1586 Akbar definitely declares himself a Muslim and proudly
boasts that on account of his conquests Islam had now spread to
territories where it had not been heard of before and the temples of the
non-believers had been converted into mosques. "He also roundly declares
that the institutes of the Prophet and revelation of God have always be
en his guides."[53](#53) Jahangir, when a prince, at one time intended
demolishing some of the Hindu temples at Banaras but desisted there from
on Man Singh's intervention. In his reign conversions to Islam were
encouraged, conversions back from Islam to Hinduism were punished. When
he visited Kangra, he celebrated the Muslim occupation of the fort by
desecrating its famous temple. At Pushkar he broke the image of Varaha
and a bull was sacrificed to signify the victory of Islam over
idolatry.[54](#54) In his reign Muslims began to behave as bullies once
again.[55](#55) Under Shahjahan, Akbar's *Sulehkul* was almost reversed.
During his reign temples were destroyed in Gujarat, Banaras and
Allahabad, and at Orcha. Like Jahangir he stopped marriages between
Muslim girls and Hindu men. Apostasy from Islam again became a capital
crime in accordance with the tenets of the Shariat. During the reign of
Shahjahan titles in use among Khalifas and Ghaznavids were revived.
Whenever the Muslim state used to show signs of 'secularist' weakness,
the glorious memory of Mahmud of Ghazni used to inject a sense of pride
in its polity. The title of Yaminuddaula (right hand of the state) was
bestowed by the Khalifa al-Qadir Billah on Mahmud of Ghazni. This title
was once again conferred by Shahjahan on Abul Hasan Asaf Khan (IV), the
father of Mumtaz Mahal.[56](#56) Mir Jamaluddin Inju was also promoted
by Jahangir to the title of Azududdaula (arm of the state).[57](#57) The
bestowal of the title of Yaminuddaula on Asaf Khan itself points to the
direction in which the state was reshaping itself. All that Islam
advocated was more or less continued under all the Mughal monarchs.
Akbar and Jahangir, like Babur and Shahjahan, adopted the title of
Ghazi. Muslim nobles and ulema would not let the Muslim kings stray away
from the path of Islam. Any deviation was sought to be corrected at the
first opportunity. Immediately after the death of Akbar, "Mulla Shah
Ahmad, one of the greatest religious leaders of the age, wrote to
various court dignitaries exhorting them to get this state of things
altered in the very beginning of (Jahangir's) reign because otherwise it
would be difficult to accomplish anything later on."[58](#58) Aurangzeb
openly claimed to have fought "the apostate" Dara to re-establish the
law of Islam.

There was nothing new in this. At the close of the Khalji regime,
Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq declared himself as a champion of the faith, because
the ulema had been dissatisfied with Alauddin's rule and Ghiyasuddin
with the activities of the neo-convert Nasiruddin Khusrau. Therefore
according to R.P. Tripathi, "The slogan of 'Islam in danger' so common
yet so effective in the history of the Muslims, was started."[59](#59)
And this slogan helped Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq in winning the throne. The
ulema were equally dissatisfied with Muhammad bin Tughlaq. On his
demise, Shaikh Nasiruddin Chiragh obtained from Firoz a promise "that he
would rule according to the tenets of justice and law". Firoz Shah
Tughlaq proved true to his word and "made religion the basis of his
government".[60](#60) A little later Amir Timur openly claimed to have
attacked Hindustan with the avowed object of destroying idolatry and
infidelity in the country.[61](#61) Akbar's tolerance had exasperated
the Muslim divines, and a promise was obtained from his successor,
Jahangir, that he would defend the Muslim religion. Liberal Muslims like
Shaikh Mubarak and his sons Faizi and Abul Fazl had to pass many years
underground. When they became close to Akbar and were supposed to
influence his ideas, they were squarely abused by the true Muslims.
"Some bastards such as the son of Mulla Mubarak," writes Badaoni about
Abul Fazl, "wrote treatises in order to revile and ridicule our
religious practices. His majesty liked such productions and prompted the
authors."[62](#62) Thus whether we consider the influence of the Muslim
religious class (the ulema), the application of the law of Islam
(*Shara*), or the activities of the kings, it is clear beyond doubt that
the medieval state was a theocratic state. No wonder that many
contemporary and later Muslim writers praise the deeds of Aurangzeb with
great gusto. The name of Akbar is obliterated; it does not find mention
by a single Muslim chronicler after his death.

The law which prevailed in India under Muslim rule was the Shariat.
"This was the actual sovereign in Muslim lands."[63](#63) It was not a
secular law. Muslim state was not a secular state. If in this scenario
two or three individual Muslim monarchs behaved in a less orthodox
fashion, they did not as they could not make the Muslim state in India
non-theocratic. The ideology of Islam does not permit practice of
secularism. It refuses compromise with other faiths. It tries to
dominate over them. It teaches Muslims that they are the rulers, that
they must convert or destroy those who do not accept Islam, that those
who do not subscribe to Islam are enemies of Allah. Islamic
jurisprudence is based on this basic assumption. Islamic economy is
based not on capital formation by multiplication of interest through
investment, but on loot and extortion from non-Muslims through Ghanaim,
Khams and Jiziyah. Islamic Shariat advocates annihilation of all creeds
except that of Islam - 'Islam in its pristine purity'. This phenomenon
has created unsurmountable problems in all countries of the East ever
since the birth of Islam. It is now permeating in the West also. It
stares in the face of those Muslim countries which try to step into
secularism and modernity like Egypt, Algeria, Turkey and some others.
India's problem is unique. It is one country which could not be
converted to Islam, "although there were mass (forcible)
conversions".[64](#64) This phenomenon baffles Indian Muslims to this
day - why could India not be made a Muslim country despite the exertion
of more than a thousand years. The apologists try to explain it by
'discovering' that Muslim state was a secular state. They do not
attribute it to persistent Hindu resistance, nor to the continuance of
the great Hindu civilization to which should go the real credit.

2.2. THE GOVERNMENT

By the quick conquest of the lands of Persia and Egypt the Arabians came
into possession of the earliest seats of civilization in the whole
world. "In art and architecture, in philosophy, in medicine, in science
and literature, in government, the original Arabians had nothing to
teach and everything to learn." The Arabs were an observant race. With
sharp curiosity these Muslim Arabians, with the help of their subject
peoples turned Muslim, began to assimilate, adopt and reproduce the
latter's intellectual and aesthetic heritage. In Damascus, Jerusalem and
Alexandria, they admired and copied the work of the architect and the
artisan. "Throughout the whole period of the Caliphate the Syrians, the
Persians, the Egyptians and others as Moslem converts or as Christians
and Jews, were the foremost bearers of the (Islamic) torch of
enlightenment and learning." Even India acted as an early source of
inspiration, especially in wisdom, literature and mathematics. But
Persian influence pinned down Arab Islam as it were. Gradually Persian
titles, Persian wines and wives, Persian ideas and thoughts won the day.
The Caliphate became a replica of Iranian despotism.[65](#65) In two
fields only did the Arabian hold his own: Islam remained the religion of
the state and Arabic continued to be the official language. Belief in
the paramount superiority of the Arabic language is an article of faith
among Muslims.

*Evolution of Administrative Institutions*

The administrative system of Islam had evolved gradually. In Arabia, in
its earliest stages, the problem was to provide the new converts to
Islam with subsistence. They were indigent and poor, and to help them,
poor tax (*zakat*), voluntary contributions, and war booty (*ghanaim*)
formed the revenue of the state at the start. Muhammad was followed (632
CE) by a succession of Caliphs at Madinah.[66](#66) According to Mawardi
(who wrote in the fifth century of Islam), the Imamate, or Caliphate,
was divinely ordained and the Caliph inherited all the powers and
privileges of the Prophet.[67](#67) The institutions which developed
under the Caliph became models of governance in the world of Islam. The
Caliph Muawiyah (661-89 CE) transformed the republican Caliphate into a
monarchy and created a governing class of leading Arab tribes.[68](#68)
These two institutions - kingship and nobility - became an integral part
of Islamic polity.

After the Umayyad came the Abbasid Caliphs. They established their
capital in the newly built city of Baghdad. The Abbasids came under the
irresistible influence of superior Persian culture and Persian
institutions. The Abbasid dynasty lasted for full five centuries
(752-1258 CE) and under it different branches of administrative
machinery were greatly elaborated and new departments and offices
created. The Quran contained almost nothing that may be called civic or
state legislation. So also is the case with Hadis. There are very few
references to government and administration in the Hadis. This lacuna
was filled by Persian theories and practices. Persian court etiquette,
Persian army organisation and administrative system were all adopted and
developed under the Abbasids.

The Turks brought these institutions into India, adding some more
offices and institutions while keeping the core intact. Muslim
administration had evolved in Muslim lands through centuries and was
highly developed before it was brought to India by the Turkish sultans.
At the head was the monarch or Sultan. He appointed and was assisted by
a number of ministers. A brief list of ministers and officers will give
an idea of the framework of the central administration. At the top were
four important ministers (and ministries) which formed the four pillars
of the State.[69](#69) These were Wazir (Diwan-i-Wazarat),
Ariz-i-Mumalik (Diwan-i-Arz), Diwan-i-Insha and Diwan-i-Rasalat. The
Wazir was the Prime Minister who looked after the revenue
administration. Ariz-i-Mumalik or Diwan-i-Arz was head of the army. He
was known as Mir Bakhshi under the Mughals and was the inspector-general
and paymaster-general of the army. Diwan-i-Insha was incharge of royal
correspondence, and Diwan-i-Rasalat of foreign affairs and pious
foundations. Sadr-i-Jahan, also called Sadr-us-Sudur, was the Chief
Qazi. Under him was placed the justice Department. There were officers
of the royal household like Wakil-i-Dar (Chief Secretary), Amir-i-Hajib
(Master of Ceremonies) and Barbak, 'the tongue of the sultan', whose
duty it was to present petitions of the people to the king. There were
dozens of other officers and hundreds of subordinates both in the
Central administration and in the *Subahs* or provinces.

The Central government was formed on the Persian model As seen above,
the Prime Minister was called Wazir and his ministry Diwan-i-Wazarat.
All Muslim political thinkers attached great, importance to this office.
Abu Daud says that a good wazir is an asset. When Allah wants to destroy
some ruler, he gives him a bad wazir.[70](#70) Fakhr-i-Mudabbir and
Ziyauddin Barani who were scholars of Islamic scriptures, say the same
thing.[71](#71) The main business of the Wazir who presided over
Diwan-i-Wazarat was finance, although he oversaw most of the affairs of
the state. "Agriculture, Building, Charitable institutions, Intelligence
Department, the Karkhanas and the Mint were all directly or indirectly
under the Diwan-i-Wazarat.[72](#72) Next in importance was the
Diwan-i-Arz under the Ariz-i-Mumalik. He was the controller-general of
the military department.[73](#73) Muslim state introduced two new
elements in Indian polity. it brought in a new law - the Shariat law.
Secondly, it was based on military force. Formerly, under Hindu kings,
state power was subject to numerous customary and constitutional
restraints. Muslim state in India found its support solely in military
force. Its Chief Commander was the King; its administrative commander
was the Ariz-i-Mumalik (Mir Bakshi of the Mughals). As said earlier, the
Diwan-i-Insha dealt with the correspondence between the Sultan and the
local governments, including all correspondence of a confidential
nature. The Diwan-i-Rasalat, as the term indicates,[74](#74) looked
after diplomatic correspondence, and as such this ministry was a
counterpart of the present-day foreign office.

The Diwan-i-Qaza, or the Department of justice, was presided over by the
Chief Qazi. Administration of Islamic justice was given a special place
of importance in the Muslim state. We have devoted a separate chapter to
it. One department of considerable importance was that of the
Barid-i-Mumalik who was the head of the State Information Bureau.
Through this department, the centre was kept informed of all that was
happening all over the empire. A network of news agents or
intelligencers was spread out in all localities. They acted both as
secret information agents as well as open news reporters. There were
also a large number of spies in every place and chiefly in the houses of
the nobles to report their affairs to the Sultan. Espionage played a
very important role in Islamic autocracy.

The king's court, palace and household also had an elaborate
administrative set up of its own.[75](#75) The provincial government was
a miniature replica of the central. The governors were called Walis and
Muqtis. An expert in accounts called Sahib-i-Diwan was appointed in each
province. He kept the local revenue records and submitted them to the
Wazir. The army maintained by the governors and garrison commanders was
subject to control and inspection by the provincial Ariz, who was
responsible to the central government. Similarly, administrative
arrangement of *parganas, shiqqs* and later *sarkars* was also clearly
laid down. During the Mughal period, some new offices were created while
nomenclatures of some others were changed.[76](#76) The administrative
system also got the stamping of the Chingezi Yasas and the Institutes of
Timur.[77](#77)

But the core of administration remained Islamic. Just as the
administrative system implanted in India had evolved in Iran and
adjoining Islamic countries, important administrators also came from
these regions to run it. This rendered the administration exotic and
prompted Bernier to declare that the Mughal was a foreigner in India.
The Mughal empire brought into existence and maintained for a century
and a half (1556-1707) a bureaucracy, mainly Mughal, Turk and Afghan,
and partly Rajput, with strong vested interest in Mughal imperialism.
During this period and thereafter, the disparity in standards of living
not only between the higher and lower strata of the ruling class but
also between the higher officials and average citizens, became so
pronounced that a deep gulf yawned between the people and the
bureaucracy, isolating the latter and turning it into a separate class
essentially alien and foreign in outlook from the masses.

*The Sovereign*

The sovereign in the Muslim state was called Amir, Sultan, Badshah or
Shahanshah. He personified the will of the Muslim people, a people who
have been one of the greatest empire builders. It is said that during
the time of the Prophet the word sultan was never used in the sense in
which it is used or understood today. In the Quran the term sultan is
vague and occurs in the abstract sense of "Power, Authority".[78](#78)
Since the institution of sultan or king came from Persia, there is not
much in the Quran about it. But there are quite a few *ahadis* which
mention the institution of sultan and advocate unflinching loyalty to
him. Quoting a hadis from Muslim, al-Khatib-ul-Umari, the author of
*Mishkat-ul-Sharif* writes that "the Rasul said if one obeys me, he
obeys Allah; if he disobeys me, he disobeys Allah; one who was obedient
to the Amir was obedient to me and one who was disobedient to the Amir
was disobedient to me".[79](#79) There should be affection and respect
between the Hakim and his subjects. Those who create dissensions between
the community and the ruler and between ruler and ruler should be
killed.[80](#80) No community can remain coalesced without a leader.
Such was the importance given to the leader by the Prophet that he
ordained that if three men were going on a mission, they should choose
one of them as the leader.[81](#81) In course of time as the numbers of
Muslims increased, obedience to the leader became an imperative
necessity and there are many *ahadis* advocating unflinching loyalty to
the sultan who alone could be leader of warriors engaged in expansionist
wars (glorified as the Holy jihad). The idea of this loyalty is
elaborately expounded in many *ahadis*. It is laid down that even if a
Habshi *ghulam* is appointed as the Hakim, even if he be a mutilated
*ghulam* whose ears and nose have been cut off, is appointed as the
ruler, he is to be given unflinching obedience. A *hadis* says: "One who
obeys me (the Prophet) obeys God; one who shows insubordination to me
shows disobedience to Allah."[82](#82) Such declarations frightened the
poor, ignorant Muslims. "Badshah is the shadow of God on earth." Every
oppressed person looks to him for justice. He is responsible for the
well-being of his subjects. When the king is unjust and he commits a
sin, his subjects should be patient towards him. They should not curse
him but obey him without demur.[83](#83) Because if a Muslim strays away
from the community even a wee bit, he will be destroyed. The Muslims
should stay together as a group (*Jamaat*), as a community, under the
leadership of the king.[84](#84) For a Muslim king was not only expected
to be a true Muslim himself; he was required to see that all his
subjects were true Muslims and the dignity of Islam and Islamic laws was
upheld by them.

When this model of sultan came in contact with Persian Sassanid polity,
writes K.A. Nizami, "many servile forms of Sassanid court were adopted
as legitimate substitutes for the earlier democratic practice of
*bay't*". But the fact is that contrary to the assertion of Nizami,
ahadis were not "manufactured to cast a halo round the person of the
sultan."[85](#85) The idea of Commander, Leader, Hakim or Sultan is many
times given by all collectors of Hadis. Besides, there is no democracy
involved in *bay't*. It is true that early Muslims ate with Muhammad,
they prayed with him in the mosque. However, the relationship thrown up
throughout the works of Hadis, is that of master and suppliant; there
was not to question why; there was but to do as directed. There is no
word for 'democracy' in Islam. In modern times the Arabs use the Greek
word *dimuqraatiya*. Following upon the Muslim tradition the monarch was
known as sultan during the early Muslim rule in India. This appellation
was continued till it was replaced by Babur who took the title of
Padshah. Thus sultan was the accepted title when the Turks conquered and
set up a Muslim state in Hindustan. Before this Muslims had set up
empires in many parts of the world. Empire building and ruling
effectively in accordance with the precepts of the Shariat was in the
logic of the history of Islam and this could be accomplished only by a
sultan. The sultan was usually a strong warrior, often without a peer in
strength. He gathered a strong army, collected taxes and contributions
and was surrounded by counsellors. They bestowed upon him attributes of
divinity, upon his subjects those of devilry, thus making his presence
in the world a sort of a benediction necessary for the good of mankind.
Once man was declared to be bad and the king full of virtues, there was
hardly any difficulty for political philosophy and religion to recommend
strict control of the people by the sultan.[86](#86)

In the *Siyasat Nama*, Nizm-ul-Mulk Tusi stressed that since the kings
were divinely appointed, "they must always keep the subjects in such a
position that they know their stations and never remove the ring of
servitude from their ears."[87](#87) Alberuni, Fakhr-i-Mudabbir, Amir
Khusrau, Ziyauddin Barani and Shams Siraj Afif repeat the same
idea.[88](#88) As Fakhr-i-Mudabbir puts it, "If there were no kings, men
would devour one another."[89](#89) Even the liberal Allama Abul Fazl
could not think beyond this: "if royalty did not exist, the storm of
strife would never subside, nor selfish ambition disappear. Mankind (is)
under the burden of lawlessness and lust…".[90](#90)

In this context it would be pertinent to point out that there were
monarchs both in the West and the East and in both autocracy reigned
supreme. Still in the West they could wrest a Magna Carta from the king
as early as in 1215 CE and produce thinkers like Hobbes, Locke,
Rousseau, Montesqueue and Bentham who helped change the concept of
kingship in course of time. But in Islam, a rigid, narrow and limited
scriptural education could parrot-like repeat only one political theory
- man was nasty, brutish and short and must be kept suppressed. So that
when in England they wrested power by executing the king after a long
civil war (1641-49), in India Shahjahan, a contemporary of Charles I,
ruled as an autocrat and his reign is called a 'golden age'. The history
of Islam is witness to the fact that autocracy and Islam are more
natural allies than democracy and Islam. "The glitter of gems and gold
in the Taj Mahal or the Peacock Throne," writes Jadunath Sarkar, "ought
not to blind us to the fact that in Mughal India, man was considered
vile; - the mass of the people had no economic liberty, no indefeasible
right to justice or personal freedom, when their oppressor was a noble
or high official or landowner; political rights were not dreamt of...
The Government was in effect despotism..."[91](#91) Consequently,
medieval Muslim political opinion could recommend only repression of man
and glorification of king.

The king was divinely ordained. Abul Fazl says: "No dignity is higher in
the eyes of God than royalty... Royalty is a light emanating from God,
and a ray from the sun, the illuminator of the universe."[92](#92)
Kingship thus became the most general and permanent of institutions of
medieval Muslim world. In theory Islam claims to stand for equality of
men, in practice it encourages slavery and imposes an inferior status on
non-Muslims. In theory Islam does not recognize kingship; in practice
Muslims have been found to be servile to authority. Muhammadans
themselves were impressed with the concept of power and glamour
associated with monarchy. The idea of despotism, of concentration of
power, penetrated medieval mind with facility, and obedience to the
ruler was advocated as a religious duty.

The duties and obligations of a Muslim monarch were clearly laid out for
him by religious and political works, traditions and precedents. The
Shariat, the four schools of Islamic law, works of political theorist
like al-Mawardi's *Ahkam-us-Sultaniyah* and Nizamul Mulk Tusi's *Siyasat
Namah*, the actual working of the Abbasid Caliphate running into more
than five centuries, and the exploits of Muslims from Prophet Muhammad
to Mahmud of Ghazni, had combined to lay down a code of private and
public conduct for Muslim monarchs. Works of Indian Muslim political
theorists and historians like Fakhr-i-Mudabbir's *Adab-ut-Harb*,
Ziyauddin Barani's *Fatwa-i-Jahandari* and *Tarikh-i-Firoz Shahi* and
later on *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri* and similar other works too constantly
repeat the principles and ideals to be followed by a Muslim king.

In his personal life, the Muslim king was expected to be God fearing and
pious. He was to say his prayers five times a day and observe the fasts
of Ramzan. According to Barani he was expected to live the life of a
common soldier, drawing from the public treasury the same salary as he
gave to his soldiers (elsewhere he recommends him to live with
magnificence and keep a large harem which would add to his dignity). By
his words, acts and movements, his personal qualities and behaviour he
was to appear to live and also enable people to live according to the
laws of the Shariat.[93](#93) In public life, the Muslim monarch was
enjoined to discharge a host of civil, military and religious duties.
The sultan was expected to be the refuge of the suffering and the
oppressed. He was to impart justice in accordance with the requisites of
the Shariat. He was to levy taxes according to the law and appoint
honest and efficient officers "so that the laws of the Shariat might be
enforced through them."[94](#94) At times he was to enact *zawabits*
(regulations) to suit a particular situation, but while doing so, he
could not transgress the Shariat nor "alter the law".[95](#95) His
military duties were to defend Muslim territories, to guard its
frontiers by garrisoning the forts, make preparations for war, and to
keep his army well equipped and ever on the alert for conquest and
extension of the territories of Islam.[96](#96)

Thus religious and political thinkers had gone on multiplying the duties
of a Muslim monarch, presenting him with an unmanageable agenda.
Obviously the king could not possibly follow all their injunctions. In
such a situation there was adjustment and accommodation between precept
and practice. If a sultan could not follow these behests in their
entirety, this in no way compromised his status or weaken his position.
The rulers who tried to live like true Muslims, are highly praised by
their contemporaries. But those who did not, are not blamed or decried.
Often the ulema overlook; many even justify their not-so-Islamic actions
and habits. Ziyauddin Barani is very liberal with regard to such
aberrations. He says: "If the king's faith in the religion of the
Prophet is firm and unshakable, then there is no harm if he is not
excessively given to his religious devotions and cannot fulfil the
supererogatory duties prescribed with regard to fasting and prayer."
Similarly, "If there is no fault or defect in the religious beliefs of
the king, the enjoyments and pleasures in which he indulges as a human
being are forgiven to him out of consideration for his firm faith ...
(and) the sins due to his human nature are erased from the records of
his life."[97](#97) Not only enjoyments and sins due to human nature
were forgiven, the ulema, chroniclers and clericals, indeed all
custodians of medieval publicity media, admired the large harems, the
extravagance, the grandeur and the magnificence of the monarch. This
mode of living raised his stature and strengthened his position in
public eye. But in this the ulema went too far and exhibited a vacuum in
the process of their thinking. While drinking of wine by a monarch was
perhaps rightly overlooked, there was no redressal suggested even when
he turned out to be a tyrant. There was no remedy recommended except to
pray for change of his heart.

In short, the mainspring of Muslim regime was monarchy individual rulers
may have been unsafe, but the institution was permanent; no other kind
of system was envisaged.[98](#98) Since the institution was not
vulnerable, kingship tended to be despotic, and even tyrannical. Within
this framework it had variables. However, by and large, royalty was
autocratic, and imperialistic, tempered only by revolution or fear of
revolution. Cruelty and terror, strength and force, conquest and
annexationism, glory and grandeur were its hallmarks.

What does Barani mean by statements like "If the king's faith in the
religion of the Prophet is firm," or "If there is no fault in the king's
religious beliefs," to earn him immunity from punishment for all sinful
acts? It means *that* Muslim monarch who subserves the interests of his
religion in its true spirit. In the Islamic religion human beings are
divided into two distinct entities - Muslims and infidels. Citizenship
rights are given to Muslims only, non-Muslims at the most can be given
the status of Zimmis or second class citizens. For, Allah raises some
people (*qaums*) and he degrades others.[99](#99) Momins are favoured by
God and infidels are denounced. Muslims should always help one another.
Protection of life and property of one momin is incumbent upon another
momin. Abusing or killing of a Muslim by another Muslim is *kufr*. Hadis
exhort the Muslims: "Do not loot another Muslim". "One who will kill
another Muslim, Allah will throw him in Perdition face down."[100](#100)
But the treatment meted out to an infidel should be just the opposite of
it, because the two are different from one another in the eyes of Allah
and his prophet. The Hadis say to Muslims: If you meet fire-worshippers
and idolaters, do not wish them. If an infidel falls ill, do not visit
him to enquire about his health; if he dies, don't accompany his
bier.[101](#101) A Kafir dies. His heir becomes Muslim. This Muslim is
not to honour the *wasiat* (wish/will) of his Kafir father.[102](#102)
The Zimmi cannot be a witness against a Muslim; he cannot be the
guardian of his child who is a Muslim.[103](#103)

"In the words of the Hanafi jurist Sarakhsi (d. 483/1090) the word of a
dishonest Muslim is more valuable than that of an honest
dhimmi."[104](#104) Muslim religious literature and sufi hagiography
overflow with such ideas. As if this discrimination was not enough,
there are many ahadis and ayats of the Quran asking Muslims to kill
Kafirs outright. Islamic scriptures recommend setting Muslims against
non-Muslims, believers against infidels - to defend Islam and destroy
unbelief. Individual and group killings of Kafirs are encouraged. One
who kills a Kafir is given the latter's property. Khalid bin Walid said
that the Prophet ordained that the property of the killed belonged to
the killer; \[it was not to be taken into account for khams\]. In the
Battle of Hunain, Abu Talha killed twenty Kafirs and got their
goods.[105](#105) There are still more bloody instructions about group
killings of Kafirs, but of this in the next chapter on Jihad.

A Muslim monarch was expected to carry out all these directions of the
Quran and Hadis. In Islamic scriptures the primary duty of every good
Muslim king, indeed of every devout Muslim, is to fight religious war or
Jihad against the infidels. But the duty of propagating Islam and
carrying on Jihad mainly devolved on the sultan. Since there is Jihad
till idolatry is destroyed, Jihad was the monarch's most important
duty.[106](#106) It is a great sin for a Muslim to shirk the battle
against non-believers - those who do will roast in hell. Ziyauddin
Barani had this idea of a good religious Muslim monarch the sultan even
if he was unable to extirpate infidelity he must at least keep the
enemies of God and his prophet dishonoured and humiliated.[107](#107)

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) History of Aurangzib, vol. III, pp. 269-97.

[2](#2a) Some Aspects of Muslim Administration, p. 2.

[3](#3a) Life and Conditions of the People of Hindustan, pp. 138-42.

[4](#4a) Dictionary of Islam, p. 711.

[5](#5a) Luzac & Co., London, 1913-34, vol. I, p. 259.

[6](#6a) Tripathi, op. cit., p. 2.

[7](#7a) The Administration of the Sultanate of Delhi, p. 41.

[8](#8a) Cf. Peter Hardy in Philips, Historians of India, Pakistan and
Ceylon, p. 302.

[9](#9a) Introduction to the English trs. of Ziyauddin Barani's
Fatawa-i-Jahandari, p. vi.

[10](#10a) Concise Oxford Dictionary and Chambers Twentieth Century
Dictionary.

[11](#11a) P.K. Hitti, History of the Arabs, (London, 1951), p. 117.

[12](#12a) Nizami, Religion and Politics, p. 15.

[13](#13a) Arnold and Guillume (ed.), The Legacy of Islam, p. 286.

[14](#14a) Qureshi, op. cit., p. 41.

[15](#15a) Ibn Hasan, The Central Structure of the Mughal Empire, pp.
255-56.

[16](#16a) Ibid., p. 258.

[17](#17a) Quran VIII, 39-40; English trs. by George Sale, p. 172;
Jadunath Sarkar, Aurangzib, vol. III, p. 249.

[18](#18a) Quran IX, 5, 6; Sale, p. 179.

[19](#19a) P.K. Hitti, History of the Arabs, pp. 177, 179.

[20](#20a) This aspect has been discussed by me in some detail in my
Growth of Muslim Population in Medieval India, pp. 187-190.

[21](#21a) Farishtah, trs. Briggs, vol. II, pp. 230-32.

[22](#22a) Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society,
vol. XXII, p. 28.

[23](#23a) Babur Nama, vol. II, p. 484.

[24](#24a) The Book of Duarte Barbosa, vol. I, p. 202.

[25](#25a) Ain., Jarret, vol. III, p. 8 and note by J. Sarkar.

[26](#26a) Badaoni, vol. II, p. 246.

[27](#27a) Barani, pp. 262-64; 295-96

[28](#28a) Barani, Fatawa-i-Jahandari, pp. 39, 64.

[29](#29a) Akbar Nama, vol. II, p. 316.

[30](#30a) Du Jarric, p. 75.

[31](#31a) Sri Ram Sharma, Religious policy of the Mughal Emperors, pp.
19-20.

[32](#32a) Ibn Majah, II, p. 101, ahadis. 307-8.

[33](#33a) Badaoni, vol. II, p. 391; Sharma, p. 21.

[34](#34a) Badaoni, vol. II, p. 317.

[35](#35a) Badaoni, vol. II, p. 273. Also E.D. vol. IV, p. 547 note.

[36](#36a) Badaoni, vol. II, p. 307.

[37](#37a) Ibid., p. 211. This paragraph has been reproduced from my
essay "Akbar's Din-i-Ilahi" published in Lal, Studies in Medieval Indian
History, p. 236.

[38](#38a) Badaoni, Persian text, Calcutta, 1865, vol. II, p. 257.

[39](#39a) Ibid., p. 258.

[40](#40a) Ibid., pp. 261-62, 303.

[41](#41a) Tuzuk, vol. I, pp. 244-45.

[42](#42a) Eg. Ashoka's Twelfth Rock-Edict advocates respect for all
creeds. "King Devanampriya Priyadarshin is honouring all sects...
promotion of essentials of all sects should take place... neither
praising one's own sect nor blaming other sects should take place...
Concord is alone meritorious."

Emperor Ashoka's Eighth Pillar Edict also says, "Persuasion be still
Ashoka's ways... I value inward inspiration."

Quoted in Om Prakash, Religion and Society in Ancient India, p. 10.

[43](#43a) Ibn Warraq, p. 119.

[44](#44a) A. J. Toynbee, One World and India, p. 19.

[45](#45a) For details Lal, Twilight, pp. 190-94.

[46](#46a) Babur Nama, vol. II, pp. 554-55.

[47](#47a) Ibid., p. 340, Also Archaeological Survey Report, XII, pp.
26-27. Sri Ram Sharma. The Religious policy of the Mughal Emperors, p.
9.

[48](#48a) The alleged Will was brought to the notice of scholars by the
Government of Bhopal (Central India) at one of the meetings of the
Indian Historical Records Commission, vide Indian Review 1923 and The
Twentieth Century, Allahabad, January, 1936. The controversy about its
genuineness would require a pamphlet to be written. The latest
information comes from the Librarian of the Sultania Library, Bhopal,
who says that 'no such document was available', vide R. Nath, 'The Lost
Testament', The Times of India, Review, New Delhi, 5 December, 1993.

Dr. Gopi Chand Varma, writing in the Rajasthan Patrika, Jaipur, dated 27
April 1997, on the controversy of Babur's Wasiatnama or Will has raised
some new points and made some fresh suggestions. He writes that Babur's
Will (Wasiatnama) is supposed to have been written on Jamad-ul-Avval 935
H (11 January 1529). From then on up to 1857, for 328 years, it does not
find a mention in any Persian history; Babur too has not referred to it
in his own Tuzuk-i-Baburi. Varma asks: Why did he not say so in his
memoirs? Babur wrote his memoirs in Turki, why is this Wasiatnama
written in Persian? He asks many more such questions.

According to him, "The Wasiatnama was not written by Babur, but by a
group of Muslims during the Khilafat movement. They had realised that if
the Khilafat movement was to succeed, it was possible only through the
cooperation and participation of Hindus. Therefore, in December 1919 the
Muslim League passed a resolution putting a ban on the slaughter of
cows." Babur's supposed exhortation not to destroy shrines of peoples of
other faiths, says Varma, also coincides with the attempt by the League
at Hindu-Muslim cooperation during the Khilafat agitation. "This belief
becomes amply clear from its motives - that the Will was written by
interested Muslims in 1919 and not by Babur in 1529. It was placed in
Sultania State Library of Bhopal where its secrecy and security could be
ensured. But when the Khalifa in Turkey was removed and there the
institution of Khilafat was abolished \[on 3 March 19241, there was no
sense in preserving the document any more. That is why this forged and
supposed (jali aur farzi) Wasiatnama was removed from the Bhopal library
as secretly as it was placed there."

A point has been made by Gopi Chand Varma. What value should be attached
to it is an open question.  

[49](#49a) Abbas Sarwani, E.D. vol. IV, pp. 410-424. Also Rizqullah, p.
549.

[50](#50a) Sharma, op. cit., pp. 10-11.

[51](#51a) Ain., vol. I, P. 164.

[52](#52a) All the above facts have been mentioned by S.R. Sharma in his
The Religious policy of the Mughal Emperors, pp. 7-19, quoting original
Persian sources.

[53](#53a) Ibid., p. 39.

[54](#54a) Tuzuk, vol. I, p. 254.

[55](#55a) Pelsaert, p. 75.

[56](#56a) Ain., vol. I, pp. 398-99 and note; Tuzuk, vol. I, pp. 224-225
note.

[57](#57a) Tuzuk, Ibid., p. 320.

[58](#58a) V.A. Smith, Akbar the Great Mogul, p. 233. Smith writes on
the authority of Du Jarric, vol. III, p. 133. Also Sharma, op. cit., p.
61 quoting Mulla Ahmad, pp. 1, 2, 46.

[59](#59a) Tripathi, op. cit., p. 56.

[60](#60a) Afif, p. 29.

[61](#61a) Sharafuddin Yazdi, Zafar Nama, II, p. 15.

[62](#62a) Badaoni, p. 306.

[63](#63a) Qureshi, op. cit., p. 41.

[64](#64a) Kingsley Davis, The Population of India and Pakistan, p. 191.

[65](#65a) P.K. Hitti, The Arabs, p. 53, 83, 89.

[66](#66a) But as the Muslim empire expanded, Muawiyah founded the line
of Umayyad Caliphs at Damascus (661 CE). The Abbasids who succeeded
them, became Caliphs at Baghdad (750 CE) and Samarra (836 CE). Another
line of Umayyad Caliphs ruled at Cordova or Qurtuba (756 CE). The
Fatamid Caliphs were rulers in Cairo upto 1751 and the Ayyubids up to
1836.

[67](#67a) Ruben Levy, The Social Structure of Islam, p. 284.

[68](#68a) M. Habib, Introduction to Elliot and Dowson's History of
India as told by its own Historians, Aligarh reprint, 1952, vol. II, p.
6.

[69](#69a) Barani, p. 153.

[70](#70a) Sunan Abu Daud, vol. II, pp. 458-591 hadis 1158.

[71](#71a) Fatawa-i-Jahandari, p. 10; Adab-ul-Harb, British Museum Ms.
fol. 52(a).

[72](#72a) Lal, History of the Khaljis, p. 157.

[73](#73a) For qualities of Ariz, see Fatawa-i-Jahandari, p. 24.

[74](#74a) Steingass, Persian English Dictionary, p. 574.

[75](#75a) For its important officers see my Legacy of Muslim Rule, p.
140.

[76](#76a) Ain, I, pp. 5-6.

[77](#77a) Tripathi, R.P., Some Aspects of Muslim Administration, pp.
105-124.

[78](#78a) Arnold, The Caliphate, p. 202

[79](#79a) Mishkat-ul Sharif, vol. II, p. 5,

[80](#80a) Ibid., pp. 5, 7, 9.

[81](#81a) Mishkat, vol. II, p. 56.

[82](#82a) Sunan ibn Majah, vol. I, P. 32, hadis 3.

[83](#83a) Ibid., vol. I, p. 43, vol. II, pp. 190-93, ahadis 637-39,
641, 649; Mishkat-ul-Sharif, vol. II, pp. 5, 15-16 quoting ahadis from
Muslim and Bukhari.

[84](#84a) Mishkat, vol. II, p. 6.

[85](#85a) K.A. Nizimi, Religion and Politics, pp. 95-96 and n. 4.

[86](#86a) Fazl bin Ruzbahan al-Isfani's Suluk-ul-Muluk, Barani's
Fatawa-i-Jahandari and Khusrau's Nub Sipiher as summarised by I.H.
Qureshi, Administration of the Sultanate of Delhi, p. 47. Also Nizami,
p. 110 n.

[87](#87a) Cited in Bosworth, The Ghaznavids, p. 49.

[88](#88a) Alberuni, vol. II, p. 161. Also Barani, Fatawa-i-Jahandari

[89](#89a) Fakhr-i-Mudabbir, Tarikh-i-Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah, p. 13.

[90](#90a) Ain, vol. I, p. 2.

[91](#91a) Sarkar, A Short History of Aurangzib, p. 464.

[92](#92a) Ain, vol. I, pp. 2-3, 6.

[93](#93a) Barani, pp. 293-294.

[94](#94a) Barani, p. 64.

[95](#95a) Barani, Fatawa-i-Jahandari, p. 73.

[96](#96a) Fakhr-i-Mudabbir, Adab-ul-Harb, fols. 132b-133a.

[97](#97a) Barani, Fatawa-i-Jahandari, Advice II, pp. 2-3.

[98](#98a) Babur cites the example of Bengal, which of course was
applicable to all Muslim rulers. "The royal office is permanent and
there are permanent offices of amirs, wazirs (etc.)... Any person who
(even) kills the ruler and seats himself on the throne, becomes ruler
himself; amirs, wazirs, soldiers and peasants submit to him, at once.
(They) say 'we are faithful to the throne; we loyally obey whoever
occupies it'." Babur Nama, pp. 482-83.

[99](#99a) Sunan ibn Majah, vol. I, pp. 88-89, 94; ahadis 205, 208, 224.

[100](#100a) Ibid., vol. II, 468-69, 477; ahadis 1733, 1736-37, 1557.

[101](#101a) Ibid., vol. I, pp. 53, 59-60; ahadis 73-75, 92, 97.

[102](#102a) Abu Daud, vol. II, pp. 440-41, 450-51, hadis 1135.

[103](#103a) Ibn Warraq, p. 182.

[104](#104a) Ibid., p. 239.

[105](#105a) Abu Daud, vol. II, pp. 327, 373, 375, ahadis 944, 948-49.

[106](#106a) Hasan Nizami, Tajul Maasir, trs. by S.H. Askari, Patna
University Journal (Arts), vol. I8, no. 3 (1963), p. 58. Also Ruben
Levy, Social Structure of Islam, Cambridge, 1962, p. 252.

[107](#107a) Barani, p. 72. See also Fatawa-i-Jahandari, p. 40.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books.html)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
