+++
title = "05  IV         Income of the State"

+++
IV  
Income of the State

One of the main functions of the state was collection of taxes. No
scheme of conquest or defence or administration was possible without
regular inflow of revenue. Muslim jurists divide the revenue of a Muslim
state into two categories - religious and secular. The principal
religious tax was Zakat and it was collected from the Muslims only. The
secular taxes comprised Khams, Jiziyah and Kharaj; these were levied on
the non-Muslims. So these were four major taxes - Khams, Jiziyah, Kharaj
and Zakat. Besides these there were a few other sources of revenue. The
importance of sound state finance was widely recognized by Muslim
political thinkers and administrators. The financial system of the
Muslim state was laid down by the Shariat and the Abbasid tradition. By
the time the Muslim state was established in India, its revenue system
had been carefully elaborated and its principles clearly set.

4.1. KHAMS

We shall take up Khams first. For there was conquest before setting up
of any government or administration. In the age of Islamic conquests,
Jihad was the most flourishing industry, and Khams flowed as a reward of
military victory. Khams as the word indicates, was one-fifth share of
the Muslim state of the war-booty (*ghanima*) obtained in Jihad. The
remaining four-fifths was distributed among the warriors. The *mal*
obtained from Kafirs without engaging in war was called *fay*. The law
of one-fifth (*khams*) did not apply to it. The whole benefit of it went
to Muslims at large - the orphans, the poor, travellers etc. The special
thing about Khams *is that it was obtained through war with
Kafirs*.[1](#1) Loot in war is common. It was common in the medieval
period. What is special about Khams is that in Islam robbing of the
infidel enjoys religious legitimacy. It was the command of God. Amir
Timur in his *Mulfuzat-i-Timuri* declared: "Plunder in war is as lawful
as mother's milk to a Musalman."

The early Arab Muslims belonged to the poor, economically 'scum'
sections of the society. They had to be provided for. There were two
ways of doing it. One was to urge the needy neo-Muslims to work hard and
earn livelihood through honest means. The other was to prompt them to
attack non-Muslims and rob them of their possessions, and distribute the
same among the faithful. Muhammad took with him 315 men to the battle at
Badr. They were on foot. They had no clothes and no food. He prayed to
God to give them all these. God gave victory to Muslims. When they
returned from Badr, there was no man who had not brought one or two
camels. They got enough clothes and sufficient food.[2](#2) Khams
provided an easy way of financially benefiting both the poor Muslims and
their rich masters.[3](#3)

Rules about Khams were laid down after the Battle of Badr. The Prophet's
army had collected a motley spoil from the enemy camp. A diversity of
opinion arose about its distribution. The contention was so sharp that
Muhammad interposed with a message from heaven, and assumed possession
of the whole booty. "It was God who had given the victory; and to God
the spoil belonged." Shortly afterwards, the following ordinance which
the Muslim law of prize recognises to the present day was given forth:
"And know that whatsoever thing you plunder, verify one-fifth thereof is
for God and for the Prophet, and for him that is of kin (unto the
Prophet), and for the orphans, and the poor and the wayfarer…"[4](#4)
The procedure about distribution followed was like this. After an
expedition, Muhammad used to ask his slave Bilal to announce three times
to the faithful to bring whatever they had obtained in *ghanaim*. People
brought their booty and Muhammad distributed the loot among Muslims as
per the one-fifth rule. While surrendering the gains, no stealing or
perjury was allowed. The Rasul, Abu Bakr and Umar used to beat the men
who did not truthfully disclose their gains and set fire to their goods.
Even thread and needle was to be surrendered and no embezzlement was
allowed. There was fire of hell for such culprits, say many *ahadis* of
Bukhari. Sometimes Muhammad used to give something extra to a Mujahid
beyond his share, but one who disappeared from the battle got nothing.
According to Abu Daud, no share was fixed for women, *ghulams* or
*bandis*, but they were given something if they happened to be present
at the time of distributions.[5](#5)

In accordance with the divine command, the booty was divided in equal
allotments, among the whole army, after the Prophet's one-fifth had been
set apart. Muhammad obtained the camel of Abu Jahl and also selected the
sword by the name of Zulfiqar, beyond his share according to a custom
which allowed him, in virtue of his prophetic dignity, whatever thing
might please him most before division.[6](#6) In short, in the early
years of Islam, every believer was given a share in the booty accruing
from new religious wars that were becoming the order of the day; they
also had a share in the large revenues coming from a fast expanding
Muslim empire. Every Arab was drafted as a soldier of Islam and his name
was put on payroll. Umar regularized the system. Every Arab was a
partner in the revenues derived from the loot and exploitation of the
newly conquered lands Muslim brotherhood in action. The scales were
fixed according to one's nearness to the Prophet. The widows of Muhammad
received an annual allowance of 10,000 dirhams each every year; the
famous Three Hundred of the Battle of Badr had 5,000 dirhams each; those
of the Pledge of the Tree, received 4,000 each; every one who had
converted to Islam before the Battle of Badr got annually 4,000 each,
and their children 2,000 dirhams a year, and so they graduated downwards
to 200 dirhams. Wives, widows, and children had each their share. Every
Muslim had a share in this classification. Officers of the Arab
Occupation Armies in different cantonment areas of the empire received
yearly from 6,000 to 9,000 dirhams; and every boy, as soon as born,
received 100 dirhams each; every Muslim had the title to be entered on
the payroll, with a minimum allowance of ten pieces, rising with
advancing age to its proper place.[7](#7)

These stipends were hereditary and they created a class of people who
lived on the fat of the land they occupied. It laid the foundation of a
thorough imperialism which was more durable than any other the world had
known in the past.[8](#8)

The legitimacy of loot and provision of a share to the warrior attracted
many volunteers for Jihad. it also encouraged the soldiers to follow
their leaders unitedly through thick and thin. It formed the very basis
on which Muslim brotherhood had been organised from the very beginning.
Besides the soldiers and the rulers, sultans and nobles, the saiyads,
sufis, ulema, poets, mullahs, maulvis, muftis, imams, qazis and hajis,
who had been at one time or the other the warriors of Islam or
sycophants at the courts also lived lavishly on war booty dished out to
them in the forth of *inams*, pensions or *madad-i-maash*. All these
sections in turn prompted their rulers to more and more Jihad to obtain
more and more Khams.[9](#9) As a Zimmi the Hindu soldier had no share in
the booty as he could not wage Jihad. Hindu women and children similarly
had no claim. But Hindu troops were also paid something "in order to
encourage them to fight and inferiority of their station be rendered
manifest to them."[10](#10)

*Khams in India*

The Muslim rulers of Hindustan followed the tenets and traditions of
Islam. The one-fifth share, called Khams, of the Ghanimah obtained as
booty in their campaigns, and one or two articles specially selected by
the Muslim ruler, were also continued to be regarded as the share of the
sultans of India. The rest was distributed to the army. it is another
matter that the sultans tried to appropriate much more than their share
of Khams. Another rule which became the norm in India was the general
disposal of the acquisitions in war. It was also set in Arabia after an
attack on the Jews. The expedition was against the Jewish tribe, the
Banu Quraizah, which was led by Muhammad. The Jews were besieged and
later compelled to capitulate. "Their fate was left to the decision of
the Prophet's companion, Sa'd, whose sentence was that the male captives
should be slain, the female captives and children sold into slavery, and
the spoils divided among the army. The Prophet commanded the cruel
judgement of Sa'd, as a decision according to the judgement of
God..."[11](#11) in most campaigns in Hindustan after victory the Muslim
sultans or their commanders also used to slay male captives, and enslave
women and children. And like in early Islam, the Muslim rulers in India
used the wealth obtained in war and through other means to the best of
their enjoyment. They created a ruling class which lived on the fat of
the land it occupied. They milked the people thoroughly and laid the
foundation of Islamic imperialism which more or less survived for a
thousand years.

In Hindustan, the income from Khams was considerable. An idea of the
profits can be had from the account of the Arab invasion of Sindh by
al-Biladuri. According to him Muhammad bin Qasim had forwarded to Hajjaj
120 million dirhams which represented only one-fifth of the total loot
(of 600 million) which was paid into the Caliph's treasury according to
the rule of Khams.

Economic historians are prone to believe that Muslim invaders of India
were motivated mainly by material gains and they were not enthused by
political motives or with zeal to spread Islam. It must be remembered
that in human mind or human society social, political, and religious
affairs cannot be separated from one another. All act and react upon one
another. In the history of Islam, the three are interrelated and cannot
be divided into watertight compartments. Still let us see how economic
denudation of India led to its people losing their status in society and
drifting into lower classes and castes.

From the sack of Debal to the end of Muhammad Qasim's stay in Sindh, the
invaders had gained 600 million dirhams in money[12](#12) and thousands
in slaves (especially women) and distributed them liberally among the
Muslims from the Caliph to the common soldier.[13](#13) The economic
life of Sindh had got completely unhinged during his campaigns. A large
number of people and merchants had fled "to Hind" and abroad.[14](#14)
Most others had been sucked dry. Such was the erosion of demography and
prosperity that after the capture of Brahmanabad, "all people, the
merchants, artisans and agriculturists were divided separately into
their respective classes, and (only) ten thousand men, high and low,
were counted. Muhammad Qasim then ordered twelve dirhams weight of
silver (i.e., twelve silver coins or their equivalent) to be assigned to
each man (for rehabilitation), because all their property had been
plundered."[15](#15) The Brahmans, "the attendants of the temples were
likewise in distress. For fear of the (Muslim) army, the alms and bread
were not regularly given to them, and therefore they were reduced to
poverty."[16](#16) From the destruction of Debal to the end of the
campaign temples had been broken with the zeal of an iconoclast and
their *purohits* and other dependents had no employment, no income. "It
was ordained (by Qasim) that the Brahman should, like beggars, take a
copper basin in their hands, go to the doors of the houses, and take
whatever grain or other thing that might be offered to them, so that
they might not remain unprovided for."[17](#17)

Mahmud Ghaznavi also collected lot of wealth from Khams. A few facts and
figures may be given as illustrations. In his war against Jayapal
(1001-02 CE) the latter had to pay a ransom of 2,50,000 dinars (gold
coin) for securing release from captivity. Even the necklace of which he
was relieved was estimated at 2,00,000 dinars "and twice that value was
obtained from the necks of those of his relatives who were taken
prisoners or slain..."[18](#18) A couple of years later, all the wealth
of Bhera, which was "as wealthy as imagination can conceive," was
captured by the conqueror (1004-05 CE). In 1005-06 the people of Multan
were forced to pay an indemnity of the value of 20,000,000 (royal)
dirhams (silver coin). When Nawasa Shah, who had reconverted to
Hinduism, was ousted (1007-08), the Sultan took possession of his
treasures amounting to 400,000 dirhams. Shortly after, from the fort of
Bhimnagar in Kangra, Mahmud seized coins of the value of 70,000,000
(Hindu Shahiya) dirhams and gold and silver ingots weighing some hundred
maunds, jewellery and precious stones. There was also a collapsible
house of silver, thirty yards in length and fifteen yards in breadth,
and a canopy (*mandapika*) supported by two golden and two silver
poles.[19](#19) Such was the wealth obtained that it could not be
shifted immediately, and Mahmud had to leave two of his "most
confidential" chamberlains, Altuntash and Asightin, to look after its
gradual transportation.[20](#20) In the succeeding expeditions (1015-20)
more and more wealth was drained out of the Punjab and other parts of
India. Besides the treasures collected by Mahmud, his soldiers also
looted independently. From Baran, Mahmud obtained, 1,000,000 dirhams and
from Mahaban, a large booty. in the sack of Mathura five idols alone
yielded 98,300 *misqals* (about 10 maunds) of gold.[21](#21) The idols
of silver numbered two hundred. Kanauj, Munj, Asni, Sharva and some
other places yielded another 3,000,000 dirhams. We may skip over many
other details and only mention that at Somnath his gains amounted to
20,000,000 dinars.[22](#22) These figures are more or less authentic as
Abu Nasr Muhammad Utbi, who mentions them, was the secretary to Sultan
Mahmud, so that he enjoyed excellent opportunities of becoming fully
conversant with the operations and gains of the conqueror.

Besides gold and silver, the Ghaznavids collected in loot and tribute
and Khams, valuable articles of trade like indigo, fine muslins,
embroidered silk, and cotton stuffs, and things prepared from the famous
Indian steel, which have received praise at the hands of Utbi, Hasan
Nizami, Alberuni and many others. For example, one valuable commodity
taken from India was indigo. From Baihaqi, who writes the correct Indian
word *nil* for the dyestuff, it appears that 20,000 *mans* (about 500
maunds) of indigo was taken to Ghazni every year. According to Baihaqi,
Sultan Masud once sent 25,000 mans (about 600 maunds) of indigo to the
Caliph at Baghdad for "the Sultans often reserved part of this (valuable
commodity) for their own usage, and often sent it as part of presents
for the Caliph or for other rulers."[23](#23)

Khams was collected not only on wealth captured in war but on all items
of loot like animals and humans. Khams on animals was fixed according to
rules of barter and exchange. For example, in the early days of Islam,
according to a *hadis*, twenty goats were considered to be equal to one
camel.[24](#24) Of the humans captured, the policy was to kill all males
who could bear arms and capture their women and children as per the rule
laid down in Quran and Hadis.[25](#25) The non-combatant men were made
slaves and put on sundry duties in the king's palace, distributed among
the nobles or sold in the markets in India and abroad. Women and
children were the prize of the warriors, and as early as the days of
Qutbuddin Aibak "even a poor Muslim householder (who was also a soldier)
became owner of numerous slaves."[26](#26) One-fifth, and often more of
this item, was the share of the state or the monarch.

*Women as Khams*

An important item of Khams was women. "An idea of the number of slaves
flooding the Muslim empire as a result of conquest may be gained from
such exaggerated figures as the following: Musa took 300,000 captives
from North Africa, one-fifth of whom he forwarded to the Caliph, and
from the Gothic nobility in Spain he captured 30,000 virgins; the
captives of one Muslim general in Turkestan alone numbered
100,000."[27](#27) In India from the days of Muhammad bin Qasim in the
eighth century to those of Ahmad Shah Abdali in the eighteenth,
enslavement, distribution and sale of Hindu women and children was
systematically practised by Muslim invaders and rulers of India. A few
lakh women were enslaved in the course of Arab invasion of Sindh. In the
final stages of its conquest, "When the plunder and the prisoners of war
were brought before Qasim... one-fifth of all the prisoners were chosen
and set aside (to be sent to Caliph through his agent Hajjaj); they were
counted as amounting to twenty thousand in number... (they belonged to
high families) and veils were put on their faces, and the rest were
given to the soldiers."[28](#28) In Muhammad Ghauri's invasion of
Gujarat 20,000 prisoners were captured and in 1202 at Kalinjar 50,000
*kaniz wa ghulam*.[29](#29) Under the Khaljis and Tughlaqs thousands of
non-Muslim women were captured in never-ceasing campaigns.

As per the Hadis virgins were to be preferred[30](#30) but if a married
woman with husband still alive was taken captive and introduced into the
sultan's harem, conjugal felicity with her was permitted by law. One
such case is that of Kamla Devi, the consort of Raja Karan Vaghela of
Gujarat, who was captured by Alauddin Khalji's generals and introduced
into his harem. Sexual relations with a married woman whose husband was
living was taboo, but in an *ayat* received by the Prophet from Allah
when women with husbands living are captured in war and "you are their
master," it is allowed to have conjugal relations with them.[31](#31)
Throughout the medieval period in the North, South, East and West
women-capturing or purchasing was a major pleasure activity of the
ruling class.[32](#32) No wonder that mainly through this activity 2,000
women were inducted into the harem of a nobleman (e.g. Khan Jahan
Maqbul, Wazir of Firoz Shah Tughlaq), another 2,000 into the harem of a
prince (e.g. Alam Shah, son of Aurangzeb), and 5,000 into that of a king
(e.g. Jalaluddin Muhammad Akbar). One example of such activity may be
given to end the unhappy story. In the time of Jahangir, his general
Abdullah Khan Uzbeg destroyed, in the Kalpi-Kanauj area alone, all towns
and took all their women and children as slaves. He once boasted: "I
made prisoners of five lacs of men and women and sold them. They all
became Muhammadans. From their progeny there will be crores by the day
of judgement."[33](#33) Kafir women had a special place in the Muslim
psyche. Gloating over the pleasures of Paradise, Ibn Majah writes on the
basis of appropriate *ahadis*, that a Jihadist will be married to
seventy-two beauties in Paradise of whom two will be *hurs* and seventy
Kafir women obtained in miras, transferred from hell for his pleasure's
sake.[34](#34)

Thus the glories of Kufa, of Baghdad and of Ghazni, the glories of the
empires of Islam everywhere like in Agra, Lahore and Delhi, comprising
of magnificent palaces, spacious audience halls adorned with costly
rugs, silken curtains and embroidered cushions, with hundreds of young
charming maidens with shoes studded with precious stones, dancing and
gyrating in unison, thousands of slave girls running about at the
bidding of their master, about which the Muslim historians, poets and
minstrels sing ceaselessly, were gifts of Khams, the state's share of
the loot and plunder of the infidels.

*Wealth obtained through Khams*

Alauddin Khalji wanted to keep his treasury full and people poor. He
disliked people from growing opulent. Therefore, he appropriated
four-fifths of the spoil as Khams. This proportion seems to have become
the norm till Firoz Tughlaq changed this 'illegal' practice, as he calls
it, and reverted to the sanctioned one-fifth of the loot of soldiers as
share for the state treasury.[35](#35) Sometimes to enthuse the soldiers
all the individual plunder from the rebels was left with them to
enjoy.[36](#36) But one-fifth was the norm as per the law. Since Khams
brought lot of wealth to the government and the soldiers it made both of
them greedy. This situation led to many embezzlements and mutinies. The
Prophet had repeatedly commanded the Muslims in the Hadis not to hide
any gains in war and to declare their personal loot honestly.[37](#37)
But human nature asserted itself against the Shariat's demand. Only one
example of this would suffice. Gujarat was invaded by Khalji forces in
1299. The soldiers sacked dozens of towns and looted a number of
monasteries, palaces and temples there. The social practice of the times
and especially the use of various kinds of gold ornaments by the Hindu
families had made gold a household commodity. The Arab traveller
Abdurrazzaq who visited the Deccan in the fifteenth century writes that
"all the inhabitants of the country, whether high or low, even down to
the artificers of the bazars, wear jewels and gilt ornaments."[38](#38)
Farishtah also says that even the poor in the Deccan put on gold
ornaments and the high class people used to eat in gold and silver
plates.[39](#39) This was about the time when people in the North had
already been divested of much of their gold and silver by waves of
invaders and dynasties of rulers. Still the old habits had continued.
The people of Gujarat, a rich kingdom with a flourishing trade, were
continually attacked and robbed. In the words of Abdullah Wassaf "the
Muslim army plundered gold and silver to an extent greater than can be
conceived, and an immense number of brilliant precious stones, such as
pearls, diamonds, rubies, and emeralds, etc., as well as great variety
of cloths, both silk and cotton, stamped, embroidered, and coloured.
They (also) took captive a great number of handsome and elegant maidens,
amounting to 20,000 and children of both the sexes, more than the pen
can enumerate."[40](#40) They also exacted immense booty in bullion,
jewels, and other valuables from the merchants and other rich men of the
port-town of Cambay or Khambhat. Besides, "each soldier had plundered
sufficient wealth for himself."[41](#41) In the course of the return
journey dispute arose regarding the quantum of Khams and various kinds
of brutal punishments were inflicted upon the soldiers to extort
confession from them with regard to their individual gains. They wished
to part with only one-fifth of their loot as required by the rules of
Khams, but Alauddin's orders were for collecting four-fifths.

According to the contemporary chronicler Ziyauddin Barani, harsh
enquiries Were made about the amount and items of loot. The commanders
did not believe in the version of the soldiers and wanted to take the
best out of everything from the lashkar of gold, silver, and other
precious articles. There were many ticklish technicalities involved in
the search operation. The army comprised of many "Hindus, Muslims,
Amirs, and neo-Muslims (Mongols)."[42](#42) According to law there was
no share in the loot for the Mushriks joining the Jihad.[43](#43) Then,
according to Isami, the soldiers besides plundering what they could lay
their hands on, dug out and carried away treasures hidden underground by
the Gujarat people.[44](#44) Khams was due on it if it belonged to
non-Muslims. In Gujarat, however, there were many rich Muslims who had
their hidden treasures ransacked. Khams was also not due if the property
belonged to a person who had been killed by a trooper. In such a case
his whole belongings went to the killer; no Khams was due on
it.[45](#45)

The case of Gujarat shows how loot in war fed the greed of both the
soldiers and the commanders of the king. Resistance of the soldiers
sometimes took the form of rebellion. But during the whole of the
Sultanate period of more than three centuries, immense wealth was
gathered by Muslims through loot and Khams. Rizqullah narrates one
incident which is worth reproducing. During Sher Shah's time Champaran
in Bihar was attacked by his commander. The kingdom had escaped Muslim
visitation during the last two hundred years, and all the riches and
treasures which were amassed during that period were now looted by Mian
Husain Farmuli's men. "The shoes of the infidels who lost their lives in
this action... when melted down no less than 20,000 *mohurs* of gold
were obtained from them."[46](#46)

*Khams during the Mughal Period*

During the Mughal period, the quantum of such gains increased because of
their exceptional success in war. Babur's gains were immense. As will be
seen later on he distributed huge amounts of these to his ladies,
princes and Begs. And if Humayun was not successful in this regard, Sher
Shah and his successors made up for the deficiency. Akbar was victorious
in almost every campaign and the extent of his success determined the
quantity of loot, tribute and Khams during his reign of half a century.
It is not necessary to catalogue all the monetary gains of Akbar through
war. An example alone may suffice to give an idea of the same. In 1564
Asaf Khan I, the governor of Kara under Akbar, invaded the kingdom of
Gondwana of Rani Durgawati on behalf of the emperor. "When the fort (of
Chauragarh) was taken there fell into the hands of Asaf Khan and his men
an incalculable amount of gold and silver. There were coined and
uncoined gold, decorated utensils, jewels, pearls, figures, pictures,
jewelled and decorated idols, figures of animals made wholly of gold,
and other rarities. The coin was said to include a hundred large pots
full of the gold *ashrafis* of Alauddin Khalji."[47](#47) If a small
kingdoms like Gondwana could bring in so much wealth, how much more
would have been collected in loot and Khams from larger kingdoms can
only be imagined. But it is not possible to go into the gains from all
the enterprises of Akbar and his successors.

Khams did not mean just material gain or loss in war. It meant ruination
of the country as a whole as vouched by the Muslim chroniclers
themselves. We have seen how immense were the gains of Muhammad bin
Qasim and Mahmud of Ghazni in their campaigns. And Alberuni who was
eye-witness to Mahmud's exploits in India, writes: *"Mahmud utterly
ruined the prosperity of the country* (emphasis ours)... The Hindus
became like atoms of dust scattered in all directions. This is the
reason, too, why Hindu sciences have retired far away (to Kashmir,
Benaras and other places)... Their scattered remains cherish, of course,
the most inveterate aversion towards all Muslims."[48](#48) Abdullah
Wassaf wrote about the exploits of Alauddin Khalji's generals in Gujarat
campaign (1299) between March 1300 and 1310. He repeats in the beginning
of the fourteenth century what Alberuni wrote in the beginning of the
eleventh. *"The Muhammadan army brought the country to utter ruin and
destroyed the lives of the inhabitants and plundered the cities, and
captured their offspring...* (emphasis added)..."[49](#49) Similar was
the result of Asaf Khan's sack of Gondwana.[50](#50) Collection of
Kharaj was circumscribed by the fear of the peasantry abandoning
cultivation if pressured too far. Collection of Jiziyah was possible
only where non-Muslim residents were too weak to resist. The stream of
income from Khams never got dry as there were always infidel lands to
subjugate and destroy.

*Destruction Wrought by the Islamic Way*

In the seventeenth century Francois Bernier, the French physician-savant
wrote that wherever Muslims went and ruled, ruin followed. In his time
the "present condition of *Mesopotamia, Anatolia, Palestine*, the once
wonderful place of Antioch, and so many other regions anciently well
cultivated, fertile and populous, but (are) now desolate... Egypt also
exhibits a sad picture..." So happened in India. About here, writing in
the glorious days of Islamic Mughal rule, he says that "most towns in
Hindustan are made up of earth, mud, and other wretched material; that
there is no city or town (that) does not bear evident marks of
approaching death."[51](#51) Hindustan reverted to British and Hindu
rule and was by and large saved. But the once wonders of Hindu and
Buddhist regions which remained with Muslims or got demographically
dominated by them like Afghanistan and Kashmir set upon a path of
decline. Once upon a time Afghanistan was a great centre of Gandhara art
and culture. The sculptural art of Gandhara, under Kushan dynastic
patronage, created the Bamiyan colossi of the Buddha carved from the
living rock by nameless Kushan sculptors. The famous Chinese traveller
Hiuen Tsang, passing through Bamiyan, on his way to the court of
Harshavardhan and the University of Nalanda in 629 CE praised it as a
centre of art to which sculptors, architects and painters flocked.
Bamiyan Buddha is the tallest statue in the world. There are (or rather
were) many wonderful pieces of architecture and sculpture strewn all
over Afghanistan. Here flourished poets like Ashvaghosh, physicians like
Charak and philosophers like Nagarjun. Here flourished trade which
provides wealth which in time pipelines facilities into all creative
activity. The violence of Islam destroyed all this in Afghanistan in
course of time. Today Afghanistan is being ruled by the Taliban in
accordance with the Islamic Shariat. And the whole world knows how it is
being ruled.

Kashmir too was a centre of Hindu and Buddhist art and learning in the
ancient period. The background of Muslim penetration is given by
Alberuni. He writes: "In former times, Khurasan, Persis, Iraq, Mogul,
the country up to the frontier of Syria, was Buddhistic,[52](#52) but
then Zarathustra went forth from Adharbaijan and preached Magism in
Balkh (Baktra)... both by force and by treatise... The succeeding kings
made their religion (i.e. Zoroastrianism) the obligatory state-religion
for Persis and Iraq. In consequence, the Buddhists were banished from
those countries east of Balkh..." India, as far as known to Alberuni was
Brahmanic, not Buddhistic."[53](#53) "But then came Islam... Muslims
began to make inroads into their (Hindus') country. Muhammad Ibn Elkasim
Ibn Elmunabbih (Muhammad bin Qasim) entered India proper and penetrated
even as far as Kanauj, marched through the country of Gandhara, and on
his way back, through the confines of Kashmir... All these events
planted a deeply rooted hatred in their (Hindus') hearts... Mahmud
Ghaznavi utterly ruined the prosperity of the country." The process of
ruination of Kashmir was continued. Kashmir was gradually bereft of this
'Science' as sultans like Sikandar Butshikan and sufis of his ilk began
to Islamize the region. By Abul Fazl's time much of Hinduism was gone
and a little of Buddhism remained. For writes he, "The third time that
the writer accompanied His Majesty to the delightful valley of Kashmir,
he met a few old men of this persuasion (Buddhism), but saw none among
the learned \[Brahmans?\]."[54](#54) Emperor Jahangir found near
Srinagar only "the remains of a place of worship for recluses: cells cut
of the rock and numerous caves."[55](#55) Kashmir Valley is today
experiencing the full blast of Islamic cultural tradition. But when all
these regions were first sacked loot and Khams were the motives of
attack. If Khams resulted in ruination, Jiziyah brought in both economic
loss and moral as well as mental degradation to the victims.

4.2. JIZIYAH

The levying of Jiziyah on non-Muslims has been regarded by most of the
Muslim jurists as an important duty of the Muslim state as it was
believed to be one of the most lawful taxes. The Quran prescribes
Jiziyah in a verse revealed in the context of Jihad. Translated in
English it reads thus: "Fight against such of those who have been given
the scripture as believe not in Allah nor the Last Day... and follow not
the religion of truth, until they pay the tribute readily, being brought
low."[56](#56) The Quran recognizes only two communities, viz. Jews and
Christians, as scriptuaries. According to Imam Malik, one of the four
great jurists, the verse of the Jiziyah is applicable to all non-Muslims
excepting apostates. Abu Hanifa applies it even to idolaters excepting
the idolaters of Arabia. In brief Jiziyah is primarily a Jihadic impost,
not a fiscal one, as sought usually to be made out. It is a penalty for
*kufr*, and alternative to killing, plunder, enslavement, ransom,
forcible conversion. It is a badge of humiliation for being a
non-Muslim, of utter servility to Islamdom.[57](#57)

*Spirit of the Tax*

According to the *Encyclopedia of Islam* the Muslim state was a
theocracy in which the non-Muslims were given the status of Zimmis.
"They are not citizens of the Muslim state but are suffered to live
under certain disabilities." One of the chief disabilities was that
"each adult, male, free, sane Zimmi must pay poll tax,
Jaziyah".[58](#58) T.P. Hughes writes: "Theoretically, the inhabitants,
together with their wives and children are considered as plunder and
property of the state, and it would be lawful to reduce them to slavery.
In practice, however, the milder course prevails, and by paying the
stipulated capitation-tax the subdued people become, in the quality of
Zimmis, free subjects of the conquering power, whose condition is but
little inferior to that of their Muslim fellow subjects."[59](#59)
Similar is the opinion of N.P. Aghnides, an authority on Muslim theory
of finance. According to him, "In return for Jaziyah the Zimmi was
entitled to protection for life and exemption from military service. The
Jaziyah was levied as the cash equivalent to the assistance which they
would be liable to give if they had not persisted in their unbelief,
because living as they do in a Muslim state, they must be ready to
defend it... Moreover, the main object in levying the tax is the
subjection of the infidels to humiliations... and... during the process
of payment, the Zimmi is seized by the collar and vigorously shaken and
pulled about in order to show him his degradation."[60](#60) In its
essence thus, Jiziyah was not just a tax. It was an instrument of
humiliation of the non-Muslim. Its spirit kept the non-Muslim reminded
that he was an inferior citizen of the Muslim state. If he felt the
burden too great he could convert to Islam. Jiziyah was thus an
instrument of conversion also.

In short, Jiziyah originated as an offshoot of Jihad. Jihad is to be
fought with all resources, lives, possessions and tongues. It is said to
have four forms - Jihad by heart, Jihad by tongue, Jihad by hand and
Jihad by the sword.[61](#61) Jihad presupposes that the world is meant
for and belongs to the Muslim to the exclusion of all others, and
therefore the Muslims can indulge in virtual liquidation of
Kafirs.[62](#62) But an alternative was offered by Jiziyah. Akida was a
Christian king of the city of Duma. He was caught alive in Jihad.
Muhammad asked him to pay Jiziyah. He paid it but later (because of
economic pressure) converted to Islam.[63](#63) Jiziyah remained an
instrument of conversion and exploitation throughout the history of
Islam.

The Quran gives no guidance about the rate of Jiziyah. It was Umar, the
second Caliph, who settled three grades of Jiziyah - for the rich, the
middle class and the poor (who included cultivators and artisans). He
also exempted women, children, beggars, insane, blind and monks from the
payment of Jiziyah. Many *ahadis* describe the collection of Jiziyah,
for example, from the Persian fire-worshippers.[64](#64) Muhammad's
*'wasiat'* gives the essence of Jiziyah. His command was: Do Jihad in
the name of God and way of God and kill those who are Munkirs. Do not
steal from ghanimat. From those who do not believe demand Jiziyah. If
they refuse, fight them.[65](#65)

A few things are obvious from the above discussion. Jiziyah is a
Jihadist impost. It is penalty for *kufr*, an alternative to forcible
conversion or killing. It was imposed to humiliate the non-Muslim and to
keep him reminded of his inferior status (of Zimmi) in the Muslim state.
From the statement of Qazi Mughisuddin in the fourteenth century to
those of Mulla Ahmad, Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi and Shah Walliullah in later
centuries, the burden of their assertion is the same -Jiziyah is meant
for the humiliation of the non-Muslims. Of course, it is based on
Islamic scriptures, the Quran and Hadis, so that the statement of one is
repeated by the others. Here are some examples. Questioned by Sultan
Alauddin concerning the position of the Hindu as a Khirajguzar, the Qazi
of Bayana expounded the injunction of the Faith thus: "By the
ecclesiastical law the term Khirajguzar is applicable to a Hindu only,
who as soon as the revenue collector demands the sum due from him, pays
the same with meekness and humility, coupled with the utmost respect.
God Almighty himself (in the Quran) declares with regard to their being
subjected to degradation... *and thus he expressly commands their
complete degradation in as much as these Hindus are the deadliest foes
of the true Prophet. Mustafa, on whom be peace, has given orders
regarding the slaying, plundering, and imprisoning of them, ordaining
that they must either follow the true faith, or else be slain and
imprisoned, and have all their wealth and properly confiscated. With the
exception of the Imam-i-Azam* (Abu Hanifa)... *we have no other great
divine as authority for accepting the poll tax* (Jiziyah) *from a
Hindu*; for the opinion of the other learned men is based on the hadis
(Tradition) 'Either death or Islam'."[66](#66)

According to Mulla Ahmad, "the main object of levying of Jiziyah on them
(the Hindus) is their humiliation... God established (the custom of
realising) Jiziyah for their dishonour. The object is their humiliation
and the (establishment of) prestige and dignity of the
Muslims."[67](#67) Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi (1564-1624), who proclaimed
himself as Mujaddid-i-Alf Sani or Renovator of the Second Millennium of
Islam, wrote many books and several letters to the courtiers of Akbar
and Jahangir. In one such letter he wrote that "the honour of Islam lies
in insulting *kufr* and *kafirs*. One who respects the *kafirs*
dishonours the Muslims... The real purpose of levying the Jiziyah on
them is to humiliate them to such an extent that they may not be able to
dress well and to live in grandeur. They should remain terrified and
trembling." So also said Shah Walliullah (1703-1762) and many other
respected Muslim ulema and sufis.[68](#68) Those who blame the ulema for
the cruelty and orthodoxy of Muslim rulers should remember that it was
not possible for the ulema and sufis to give wrong interpretation of the
scriptures before autocrats. They interpreted correctly and rendered
correct advice. Muslim religion and its tenets are responsible for an
iniquitous tax like Jiziyah and not its advocacy by the ulema. The
denial to the entire non-Muslim people of the basic human right of
freedom and equality of every man is internalised with Jiziyah. Muslims
never tire of harping on equality of man in Islam, but this claim is
belied by Jiziyah. This also refutes the claim of modem Muslim
apologists that the Muslim state in India was a secular state.

*Jiziyah in India*

Jiziyah was imposed in India from the day the Muslims set foot in the
country. After capturing Brahmanabad, Muhammad bin Qasim levied Jiziyah
on the population according to three grades. The first was to pay silver
equal to 48 dirhams, the second 24 dirhams and the lowest 12
dirhams.[69](#69) According to Farishtah the Hindu Shahiya king
Jayapala, when defeated by Subuktigin, offered to pay Jiziyah and Kharaj
to him. It was levied under the so-called Slave Kings, "but there seem
good reasons to believe that the term Jiziyah was not used exclusively
in the sense of a capitation tax," says Habibullah.[70](#70)

Curiously enough, Barani himself on two occasions calls land revenue as
Jiziyah.[71](#71) The earliest imposition of the tax in its true sense
was by Firoz Shah Khalji (1290-96).[72](#72) In the time of Alauddin
Khalji the conversation between Qazi Mughisuddin and the Sultan has been
given above and is well-known. The Qazi emphasised that the Hindu is a
Kharaji, that his degradation is necessary, that except for Abu Hanifa
all other jurists say that the choice to be given to such idolaters is
Islam or death. So far as Alauddin is concerned, independently of what
Qazi Mughisuddin or Ziyauddin Barani advocated, he suppressed the Hindus
to the utmost by collecting all legal (and some illegal) taxes from the
Hindus, and earned the approbation of a visiting Maulana - Shamsuddin
Turk. Jiziyah continued to be collected throughout the Sultanate period.
In the reign of Firoz Tughlaq those who paid the Jiziyah were divided
into three classes. The first had to pay 40 *tankahs*, the second 20 and
the third 10. In his reign for the first time Jiziyah was imposed on the
Brahmans also. The Brahmans represented that its incidence weighed
heavily upon them. The Sultan lowered the rate for them, and they were
assessed at ten *tankahs* and fifty *jitals* for each
individual.[73](#73) K.R. Qanungo and R.P. Tripathi write on the
authority of Abbas Sarwani that Sher Shah collected the Jiziyah and the
pilgrim tax. The collection seems to have been continued by Babur and
Humayun. Writing about the abolition of Jiziyah by Akbar, Abul Fazl says
that in spite of its unpopularity it was imposed by Akbar's predecessors
who "were girded up for the contempt and destruction of the opposite
factions". Akbar considered Jiziyah as the greatest hurdle in the way of
Hindu-Muslim integration and so abolished it in 1564. This was done "in
spite of disapproval of the statesmen and of the (loss of) great
revenue, and of much chatter on the part of the ignorant."[74](#74)
Jahangir and Shahjahan continued the policy of Akbar. Akbar gave a
common citizenship to all his subjects, Hindus and Muslims alike. For a
hundred years after this step was taken, the Hindus felt that the Mughal
empire was their own, but after about one century this feeling was once
again shattered. Aurangzeb reimposed Jiziyah in 1679. His
*Fatawa-i-Alamgiri* recognizes two systems of collection of this tax:
(i) Lump sum payment of an agreed upon amount by the ruler of a
territory or the people thereof and (ii) Payment by individual
tax-payers of amounts individually assessed in territories directly
under Muslim rulers, governors etc. Sri Ram Sharma reproduces
Aurangzeb's order about the imposition and collection of Jiziyah dated
26th July, 1696. It says that "Jiziyah lapses on death and on acceptance
of Islam". During the course of the year some people used to die and
some used to convert, but the amount of Jiziyah for the place remained
unaltered. In view of this the first type of payment was disadvantageous
to Hindus. The last paragraph of the order reads: "The nonMuslim should
himself bring the Jiziyah; if he sends it through his deputy it should
not be accepted. At the time of payment the non-Muslim should keep
standing, while the chief should keep sitting. The hand of the
non-Muslim should be below and that of the chief above it and he should
say. 'Make payment of Jiziyah, O! non-Muslim' and should not say, 'O!
infidel'." Aurangzeb thus imposed it in the true spirit and letter of
the tax.

*Resentment against Jiziyah*

Such a hateful tax in which insult was added to economic injury, was
resented by the Hindus more than any other imposition. Originally,
Jiziyah applied to non-Muslim scriptuaries like Jews and Christians. The
bigoted and fanatically inclined jurists hold that the idolaters do not
come within the purview of Jiziyah, and the only alternatives open for
them are either conversion to Islam or death.[75](#75) However, the
Sunni jurists Abu Hanifa and his disciple Abu Yusuf permit its
imposition on the non-Muslims even if they be idolaters.[76](#76) India
was inhabited by idolaters primarily. Application of Jiziyah to them
was, in a way, a matter of kind concession, from the Muslim point of
view. But the Hindus resented it throughout. They knew that it was meant
to humble and humiliate them. When Firoz Tughlaq (1351-1388 CE) levied
Jiziyah on the Brahmans, they represented to the Sultan that they had
never before been asked to pay it land to put up with the indignity
attached to it. The Sultan, writes Shams Siraj Afif, "convened a meeting
of the learned Ulama and renowned Mashaikh and suggested to them that an
error had been committed: the Jiziyah had never been levied from
Brahmans; they had been held excused, in former reigns. The Brahmans
were the very keys of the chamber of idolatry, and the infidels were
dependent on them (*kalid-i-hujra-i-kufr und va kafiran bar ishan
muataqid una*). They ought therefore to be taxed first. The learned
lawyers opined that the Brahmans ought to be taxed. The Brahmans then
assembled and went to the Sultan and represented that they had never
before been called upon to pay the *Jiziyah*, and they wanted to know
why they were now subjected to the indignity of having to pay it. They
were determined to collect wood and to bum themselves under the walls of
the palace rather than pay the tax. The Sultan replied that they might
burn and destroy themselves at once for they would not escape from the
payment. The Brahmans remained fasting for several days at the palace
until they were on the point of death. The Hindus of the city then
assembled and told the Brahmans that it was not right to kill themselves
on account of the *Jiziyah*, and that they would undertake to pay it for
them."[77](#77)

The protest of the Brahmans did succeed in getting some concessions from
the king. He fixed their Jiziyah at a low rate although in status they
belonged to the upper class. Secondly, he permitted other Hindus
(shopkeepers and traders) to pay the tax on their behalf. But Aurangzeb
(1658-1707) was more adamant because he himself knew the law well. His
imposition of the Jiziyah provoked repeated protests. "On the
publication of this order (reimposing the *Jiziyah*) by Aurangzeb in
1679," writes Khafi Khan, "the Hindus all round Delhi assembled in vast
numbers under the *jharokha* of the emperor to represent their inability
to pay and pray for the recall of the edict... But the Emperor would not
listen to their complaints." Thereupon the Hindus resorted to Satyagrah
as it were. One Friday, when Aurangzeb went to public prayer in the
great mosque, a vast multitude of the Hindus thronged the road from the
palace to the mosque, with the object of seeking relief. "Money changers
and drapers, all kinds of shopkeepers from the Urdu Bazar, mechanics,
and workmen of all kinds, left off work and business and pressed into
the way... Every moment the crowd increased, and the emperor's equippage
was brought to a standstill. At length an order was given to bring out
the elephants and direct them against the mob. Many fell trodden to
death under the feet of elephants and horses. For some days the Hindus
continued to assemble, in great numbers and complain, but at length they
submitted to pay the Jiziyah." Abul Fazl Mamuri, who himself witnessed
the scene, says that the protest continued for several days and many
lost their lives fighting against the imposition. People's resentments
against Aurangzeb was also expressed in incidents in which sticks were
twice hurled at him and once he was attacked with bricks but escaped
.[78](#78) There were organized protests against Jiziyah in many other
places like Malwa and Burhanpur. In fact it was a countrywide movement
"and there was not a district where the people... and Muqaddams did not
make disturbance and resistance."[79](#79)

People's demonstrations apart, protests came from higher quarters as
well. During the reign of the stern Sultan Alauddin Khalji, the Hindu
chiefs and landlords often did not care for the summons of the Diwan and
did not call at his office. They were in no way inclined to show an
attitude of servility. They evaded to pay any of the prevalent taxes
including the Jiziyah.[80](#80) In Aurangzeb's time, this odious tax is
said to have evoked a protest from Shivaji in his famous letter to
Aurangzeb.[81](#81) In this letter Shivaji urged the impolity of the
impost and appealed to Aurangzeb to think of the common Father of
mankind and the equality of all human beings. A similar letter is said
to have been written by Rana Raj Singh as well. These Rajas dealt with
the emperor on their own level. Aurangzeb, on his part, became more
stiff and made the collection obligatory. All this led to many awkward
situations. On one occasion a Mansabdar killed the *amin* who had gone
to collect Jiziyah. The only punishment that was meted out to the
Mansabdar was that he was degraded. On another, in a rather comic
incident, the beard and hair of an *amin* were pulled by the people who
sent him back empty-handed."[82](#82)

A tax which created so much agitation in the empire, was bound to create
controversy and flutter in the court circles. References to the times of
Khaljis and Tughlaqs point to an active role of the ulema in persuading
the sultans to impose Jiziyah on the non-Muslims. For the reign of
Aurangzeb the *Mirat-i-Ahmadi* suggests that the theologians as usual
took the initiative in the matter. They represented to Aurangzeb the
anomaly of the non-believers being exempted from the payment of the
Jiziyah under a king of Aurangzeb's piety.[83](#83) But the ulema had a
say during the reigns of weak kings; Alauddin and Aurangzeb were not
weak monarchs. The fact was that Jiziyah was a regular Islamic (Jihadic)
tax. Its importance in a Muslim state was well-known. The problem was
that the Hindus were in such a great majority in India that here some
thought was necessary before insistence on its imposition. That is why
there were many in the court and palace who thought preservation of
peace to be better than the enforcement of an explosive religious
regulation which hurt the feelings of the majority of the population.
Niccalao Manucci writes"[84](#84) that some highly placed and important
persons at court opposed the imposition of Jiziyah. Jahanara Begum
Sahib, the elder sister of Aurangzeb, opposed it. There was an
earthquake some time after and some of the courtiers are said to have
once again urged the emperor to retrace his step. "All the high-placed
and important men at the court opposed themselves to this measure. They
besought the king most humbly to refrain..."[85](#85) But to the
imperial bigot Jiziyah was all important. Besides earning religious
grace, he could also spread Islam through economic pressure.

*Jiziyah as a Means of Spreading Islam*

It was Aurangzeb's intention to use Jiziyah for spreading Muslim
religion among his subjects. Many writers on medieval Indian history
find in the conversion of many low caste Hindus to Islam a hand of the
oppression of Hindu upper castes, or the Hindu caste system itself, and
the attraction of the "democratic spirit of Islamic brotherhood and
equality". The fact is that the Hindus shunned conversion. But many
among the poor classes turned to Islam in order to escape the Jiziyah.
It was imposed on all non-Muslims - rich as well as poor - and collected
in a humiliating manner. The poor sections of Hindus who mostly came
from low castes and who could not afford to pay became Musalmans to
escape both the economic burden and insults of the collectors. This is
borne out by the delight expressed by Sultan Firoz Shah Tughlaq who
writes in his *Fatuhat-i-Firoz Shahi*: "I encouraged my infidel subjects
to embrace the religion of the Prophet. I proclaimed that every one who
repeated the creed and became Musalman should be exempted from the
Jiziyah. A great number of Hindus presented themselves day by day from
every quarter and adopting the faith were exonerated from the
Jiziyah."[86](#86) Similar was the achievement of many other Muslim
rulers. Equally happy was Aurangzeb in his success in this area. As the
contemporary European courtier Manucci observed, "Many Hindus who were
unable to pay (Jiziyah) turned Muhammadan to obtain relief from the
insults of the collectors... Aurangzeb rejoices."

Jiziyah was not a good or bad 'gesture' on the part of Aurangzeb. It was
a regular and important Islamic tax. The problem was that the Hindus had
enjoyed relief from it for more than a hundred years and were not
willing to live with this oppressive imposition once again. The
contention of M. Mujeeb that it was levied for economic reasons does not
make Jiziyah a secular tax. And the question arises: What were the
economic difficulties of Muhammad bin Qasim in Sindh? To sum up: There
is a tendency to plead that people voluntarily converted to Islam
without any resort to force. It would be rewarding to estimate the
numbers who converted only to escape from the payment of Jiziyah. With
Aurangzeb the Mughal empire started on a course of decline and fall. it
would be interesting to make a critical study of how far Jiziyah was
responsible for the fall of the Mughal empire.

*Revenue from Jiziyah*

As mentioned in the beginning, Jiziyah in India was meant to be applied
to the Hindus only. it was imposed on the Hindus from the beginning of
the Muslim rule. Their numbers were so large that the income from
Jiziyah was substantial. But beyond this no further information is
available about the rates applied to various sections of the people and
the amount of revenue collected. Shams Siraj Afif tells us that the
rates during the reign of Firoz Shah Tughlaq were forty, twenty, and ten
*tankahs* from the rich, middle and poor persons respectively.[87](#87)
Under Aurangzeb, the assessees were roughly divided into three classes
according as their property was estimated at not more than 200 dirhams
("the poor") between 200 and ten thousand dirhams ("the middle class")
and above ten thousand ("the rich").[88](#88) Shroffs, jewellers,
money-changers, clothiers, land-owners, merchants, and physicians were
placed in the high class. Tailors, dyers, cobblers, shoemakers and
artisans in a hundred other crafts were counted as poor. Other sections
and vocational groups formed the middle class. Women, children below
fourteen, and slaves were exempted. Blind men, cripples and lunatics
paid only when they were wealthy. But what was the total amount
collected is not known.

What is known, and that in a general way, is that it brought good amount
of revenue into the royal exchequer. Abul Fazl, writing about its
abolition in the reign of Akbar, says that crores of rupees were lost,
although he gives no exact figures. The quantum of Jiziyah according to
Jadunath Sarkar was 4.42 per cent of the provincial revenues. The
*Mirat-i-Ahmadi* suggests that it was 4 per cent in the province of
Gujarat. Surely, its incidence on the people was not inconsiderable. "In
violation of modem canons of taxation the Jiziyah hit the poorest
portion of the population hardest, and annually took away from the poor
man the full value of one year's food... as the price of religious
indulgence. The tax yielded a very large sum. In the province of
Gujarat, for instance, it was 5 lakhs of Rupees a year...".[89](#89) It
has, however, to be admitted that we do not get satisfactory figures
indicating the total amount of income from this source. Stray references
that Gujarat yielded 500,000 rupees and Burhanpur about 850,000 rupees,
do not provide sufficient data to warrant any definite conclusions,
except that whenever it was collected it brought in handsome revenue. It
was a good source of income to the Muslim state in India. However, the
imposition of Jiziyah has not to be judged by the money it brought in.
It is an indication of the nature of Muslim rule in India and an
indictment of the apologists who claim that it was not only secular but
also popular.

4.3. KHARAJ

Kharaj was the land tax. In an agricultural country like India, it
comprised the major source of the revenue of the state. The early Muslim
invaders like the Arabs in Sindh and Turks in Hindustan were mainly
soldiers. They were busy in conquest. They had neither the time nor the
inclination to introduce any changes in the Hindu agrarian system
prevailing in India. For about a hundred years of Muslim rule (c.
1200-1300), the- sultans appear to have continued with the prevailing
land tax system.

*Land tax in pre-Muslim India*

It is difficult to assess exactly the portion of produce taken by the
state during the Hindu period. The country was vast and divided into a
number of states. There could not have been a uniform rate of tax or a
uniform method of collection throughout the country. Modem research,
however, has been able to give us a tolerably correct picture of the
pre-Muslim times. In the early Hindu period the king charged 1/6 of the
produce as land tax. The tax was not rigid but flexible. According to
the Hindu theories of finance as expounded in the Smriti and Niti the
state demand could vary from 1/12 to 1/6 of the produce. Kautilya
advocates even 1/4 if there were irrigation facilities. The king was
entitled to a tax as he protected the people. Thus it was not actually a
tax but a wage (*vetana*) given to the king by the people for protecting
them.[90](#90) But even those who did not pay anything were equally
entitled to protection.[91](#91) One fact to be remembered in this
connection is that in all Dharma Sutras great emphasis is laid on the
duty of the king as a protector of the people.[92](#92)

In later Hindu India, say between the death of Harshavardhan and the
conquest of Muhammad Ghauri (c. 650-1200 CE), again the Hindu theories
and practices of taxation continued to prevail. Medieval writers and
commentators on Smriti and Niti like Medhatithi and Shukra, however,
permit a higher portion of the produce as the share of the state. Shukra
even permitted up to 50 per cent if the lands were irrigated by canals,
tanks and wells.[93](#93) Chandreshwar, another medieval writer, says
that the king should only take such an amount as is necessary for the
needs of the government and may not be felt oppressive by the
subjects.[94](#94) These figures and statements show that the incidence
of taxation on the people seems to have grown with the passage of time,
but 1/6 was the ideal and any divergence from it did not do credit to
the ruler. Alberuni, who had made a thorough study of the conditions in
India, also mentions 1/6 as the revenue of the state.[95](#95)

The theoretical aspect apart, there are some definite data available
about this period. Hiuen Tsang testifies to the low incidence of land
tax in Harsha's time (d. 647).[96](#96) The Rashtrakutas (750-1000 CE)
who ruled over a major portion of the Deccan peninsula and whose sphere
of influence extended into the Malwa country stretching up to Prayag
(Allahabad) in the north, took about 20 percent of the gross produce on
land.[97](#97) This tax included the *uparikara* or *bhogkara* which may
safely be identified with the *khuti* (or collection charges) under the
Sultanate. A refreshing reference in this regard is that 15 per cent of
this revenue was returned to the village for its own needs.[98](#98)
Writing about the Rashtrakutas, al-Idrisi (12th century) says that the
"Kingdom is vast, well-peopled, commercial, and fertile. It pays heavy
taxes so that the king is immensely rich."[99](#99) It is not known
whether al-Idrisi meant the land tax to be high or the customs duties,
as then trade flourished well in the Deccan and we know from Ibn
Battutah that duties in the first half of the fourteenth century were as
high as 25 per cent of the commodity. Farther south, in the Chola
kingdom, the land tax together with tolls and octrois was 4/15 or about
25 percent on the gross produce in Rajadhiraj's time( 1035-1053
CE).[100](#100)

The above discussion focuses on a few salient features of taxation in
the Hindu period. The fundamental principle was that the royal revenues
should be collected diligently and prudently but without harshness,
protecting the people and their welfare in every possible way. In the
ancient or Hindu period there is no mention of peasants forsaking
cultivation, abandoning their fields and escaping into forests because
of excessive taxation as became common during the medieval period. Nor
is there any evidence of people being reduced to such straits as to sell
themselves and their families into slavery as bonded labourers, a
phenomenon which had become common under Muslim rule.

*Kharaj under early Sultans*

The early invaders and rulers like Muhammad Ghauri, Qutbuddin Aibak and
Shamsuddin Iltutmish carried on with the prevailing system of taxation.
Iltutmish, however, divided the newly conquered kingdom into *iqtas* and
distributed most of them among his nobles and soldiers for their
maintenance keeping some portion for his personal expenses and that of
his harem.[101](#101) At this stage of the history of the Sultanate much
wealth was obtained through Khams or the state's share of war booty and
tribute from vanquished princes, and there was hardly any financial
problem.

Sultan Ghiyasuddin Balban (1246-66-86) was faced with the task of
encountering Mongol invasions. This menace on the one hand put a check
on his expansionist ambitions curtailing income from war booty, and on
the other his expenditure on the army was considerably increased. Balban
used to say that "I have devoted all the revenue of my kingdom to equip
my army, and I hold my forces ready and prepared to receive the (the
Mongols)."[102](#102) Even then Balban did not feel the need to tax the
peasants heavily. He followed a moderate policy regarding collection of
land revenue. He ordered that "excessive (tax) should not be tried to be
levied from obedient and submissive *raiyyat*… In collecting Kharaj, a
middle course should be adopted. Neither should the demand be so high
that the agriculturists should become paupers, nor should it be so
little that because of their easy life born of prosperity, they become
prone to recalcitrance and disobedience... The king felt that the army
and the raiyyat should be placed on equal footing so that, year after
year, with the salary of the one class and cultivation by the other,
they could live with frugality and contentment."[103](#103) The
inference is difficult to resist that during the first hundred years of
the Sultanate, "the Muslim was merely a tax receiver and took little
direct part in the production and increase of the country's agricultural
wealth."[104](#104)

According to Muslim law land tax collected from Muslims was called Ushr
and that collected from non-Muslim was Kharaj.[105](#105) The rate of
Ushr was 10 per cent- of the produce and for Kharaj it was 20 per cent.
However, we find very few recorded instances of Muslim cultivators.
Kharaj could be raised up to 50 per cent.[106](#106) Under Qutbuddin
Aibak land tax was 20 per cent.[107](#107) We have no figures for the
reigns of Iltutmish and Balban, but taking into account the rates
prevailing in the times of their predecessor Aibak (20 per cent) and
successor Alauddin Khalji (50 per cent) it may safely be presumed that
it was around 33 per cent in their reigns.

*A Grinding Tax Structure*

The Sultanate of Delhi had completed about a hundred years when Alauddin
Khalji ascended the throne. His problems were many. Most parts of the
country were independent. Hindu Rajas were powerful and unsubdued.
Muslim nobles were rebellious. The Mongols were knocking at the gates of
Hindustan time and again. Alauddin Khalji needed a large army to deal
with these problems. To maintain a large army he needed money and so
this Sultan raised the land tax (Kharaj) to fifty per cent. Under his
predecessors, it does not seem to have been above one-third of the
produce. Furthermore, under Alauddin's system all the land occupied by
the rich and the poor "was brought under assessment at the uniform rate
of fifty per cent". This measure automatically reduced the chiefs
practically to the position of peasants. Since his aim was to strike at
the major source of power, the wealth, of the Hindus,[108](#108) he also
levied many other taxes like house-tax and grazing tax. According to the
contemporary chronicler Ziyauddin Barani, all milk-producing animals
like cows and goats were taxed. According to Farishtah, animals up to
two pairs of oxen, a pair of buffaloes and some cows and goats were
exempted.[109](#109) This concession was based on the principle of
*nisab*, namely, of leaving some minimum capital to enable one to carry
on with one's work.[110](#110) But it was hardly any relief, for
trustworthy persons informed the chronicler Shams Siraj Afif that in
former reigns (obviously a reference to Alauddin's days) if an Amil left
one cow with the peasant (*raiyyat*), another used to take possession of
that also.[111](#111) The payment of Kharaj, however, did not entitle
the Hindu peasant to protection of the state. For protection and safety
he had to pay an extra tax, Jiziyah, as we have seen before. So besides
Kharaj, there were taxes like *kari*, (derived from Hindi word *kar*),
*charai* and Jiziyah. Poll tax, tax on cattle etc. defy classification
because they are entirely arbitrary.

Muslim jurists knew that if the collectors were not satisfactorily paid
they would resort to corrupt practices. Therefore Islamic scriptures
made a provision for a fair payment to them. As per the Hadis an Amil
(collector) could obtain from the *bait-ul-mal* (treasury) expenses of
one wife, one servant if he did not have one of his own and a house (if
he did not already possess one). Besides this if he took anything more
"it is theft, embezzlement."[112](#112) But the Amils in Hindustan
collected much more than was actually due. The land revenue system was
exceedingly complex. There was no uniformity either in the period for
which the tax was assessed or in the basis of assessment. The basis of
assessment in some cases was the "total assets" of an estate; in others,
it was the economic rent, the net produce etc. The local official was
allowed considerable discretion. The rent was always enhanced. It was
common for jagir owners to exact miscellaneous payments and services
from the peasants.

In short, a substantial portion of the produce was taken away by the
government as taxes and the people were left with the bare minimum for
sustenance. For the Sultan had "directed that only so much should be
left to his subjects (*raiyyat*) as would maintain them from year to
year... without admitting of their storing up or having articles in
excess". It is from this point of time that the Indian peasant was made
to maintain himself and his family from one harvest to the next. In the
coming years and centuries, there is repeated mention in the chronicles
about the rulers' directives to protect the peasant from undue exactions
which seems to have become the common practice. Sultan Alauddin's
rigorous measures were taken note of by contemporary writers both in
India and abroad. In India contemporary writers like Barani, Isami and
Amir Khusrau were inclined to believe him to be a persecutor of the
Hindus. Foreigners also gathered the same impression. Maulana Shamsuddin
Turk, a divine from Egypt, was happy to learn that Alauddin had made the
wretchedness and misery of the Hindus so great and had reduced them to
such a despicable condition "that the Hindu women and children went out
begging at the doors of the Musalmans."[113](#113) The same impression
is betrayed in the writings of Isami and Wassaf.[114](#114) While
summing up the achievements of Alauddin Khalji, the contemporary
chronicler Barani mentions, with due emphasis, that by the last decade
of his reign the submission and obedience of the Hindus had become an
established fact. Such a submission on the part of the Hindus "has
neither been seen before nor will be witnessed hereafter". In brief, not
only the Hindu Zamindars, who had been accustomed to a life of comfort
and dignity, were reduced to a deplorable position, but the Hindus in
general were impoverished to such an extent that there was no sign of
gold or silver left in their houses, and the wives of Khuts and
Muqaddams (Zamindars) used to seek sundry jobs in the houses of the
Musalmans, work there and receive wages.[115](#115) The poor peasants
(*balahars*) suffered the most. The fundamentalist Maulana Ziyauddin
Barani feels jubilant at the suppression of the Hindus, and writes at
length about the utter helplessness to which the peasantry had been
reduced because the Sultan had left to them bare sustenance and had
taken away every thing else in Kharaj (land revenue) and other
taxes.[116](#116)

But there was much greater oppression implicit in this measure. it was
difficult to collect in full so many and such heavy taxes. "One of the
standing evils in the revenue collection consisted of defective
realization which usually left large balances,"[117](#117) and
unrealised balances used to become inevitable. Besides, lower revenue
officials were corrupt and extortionate. To overcome these problems,
Sultan Alauddin created a new Ministry called the Diwan-i-Mustakhraj.
The Mustakhraj was entrusted with the work of inquiring into the revenue
arrears, and realizing them.[118](#118) We shall discuss about the
tyranny of this department a little later; suffice it here to say that
in Alauddin's time, besides being oppressed by such a grinding
tax-structure, the peasant was compelled to sell every maund of his
surplus grain at government controlled rates for replenishing royal
grain stores which the Sultan had ordered to be built in connection with
his Market Control.[119](#119)

The contemporary chronicler Ziyauddin Barani writes that Alauddin Khalji
was an ill-tempered and tyrannical king. He had no learning and he did
not associate with the ulema. Sultan Balban respected the ulema and used
to consult them often. After returning from Bengal he went to their
houses personally and informed them of his success.[120](#120) Firoz
Tughlaq also used to visit them in their houses. But Alauddin Khalji did
not associate with the clerics. [121](#121) When necessary, he consulted
with his nobles but not with the ulema.[122](#122) Barani wrote in old
age. Though his memory remained unimpaired, a little confusion with
regard to chronology in his narrative was natural in advanced age.
Alauddin's three most trusted nobles and counsellers, namely, Nusrat
Khan, Zafar Khan and Ulugh Khan had died by 1301, while his draconian
measures, euphemistically called "reforms" were brought into operation
mainly between the siege of Ranthambhor and expedition to Chittor
(1301-1303).[123](#123) Therefore, he surely deliberated with the ulema
in matters of law. A few scholars like Qazi Ziyauddin of Bayana, Maulana
Zahir Lang and Maulana Mushayyad Kuhrami were nominated to be present at
dinner time. Qazi Mughisuddin of Bayana also used to come occasionally.

During the days when taxes were being assessed and collected with great
strictness. Alauddin once inquired of Qazi Mughisuddin about the status
of the Hindus in a Muslim state, whether they were Kharaj-*guzar* of
Kharaj-*deh*, *payers* or *givers* of Kharaj. The Qazi expositioned
their legal status thus: "By the ecclesiastical law the term Kharajguzar
is applicable to a Hindu only, who as soon as the revenue collector
demands the sum due from him, pays the same with meekness and humility,
coupled with the utmost respect... and should the collector choose to
spit into his mouth, opens the same without hesitation, so that the
official may spit into it. The purpose of this extreme humility on his
part and the collector's spitting into his mouth, is to show the extreme
subservience incumbent on this class, the glory of Islam and the
orthodox Faith, and the degradation of the false religion.[124](#124)
God Almighty himself (in the Quran) expressly commands their complete
degradation, in as much as these Hindus are the deadliest foes of the
true Prophet. Mustafa, on whom be peace, has given orders regarding the
slaying, plundering, and imprisoning of them, ordaining that they must
either follow the true faith, or else be slain or imprisoned and have
all their wealth and property confiscated. With the exception of the
Imam-i-Azam (Abu Hanifa)... we have no other great divine authority for
accepting the poll tax (Jiziyah) from a Hindu; for the opinion of the
other learned men is based on the *hadis* 'Either death or Islam'."

Kharaj was originally applied to a land tax or tribute realised from
non-Muslim tribes.[125](#125) After the defeat of Jews at Khaibar (628
CE) they became "the first Zimmis, or members of a subject caste, whose
lives were to be guaranteed, but whose earnings were to support the
Believers."[126](#126) These Jews were the first Kharajguzars in Islam.
Later on Kharajguzars were found in whatever countries the arms of Islam
conquered. The Kharajguzars were Zimmis who had submitted to absolute
obedience to the Islamic state. As non-Muslims they were Kafirs who
could not be accorded any rights. But as Kharajguzars they were/are
granted some minimal rights solely in view of their accepting and
submitting themselves to the suzerainty of Islam. Thus Qazi Mughisuddin
described the status of Kharajguzars fairly correctly."[127](#127)

This exposition of the Quranic injunctions happened to square so much
with the steps which the Sultan had already taken, albeit totally in
ignorance of the law, that he burst out into a laughter of approval of
the Qazi's views and informed him with great gusto that "I have
established laws... so that under the fears of my command they would all
escape into a mouse hole; and now you tell me that it is inculcated in
the Divine law that the Hindus should be made obedient and submissive in
the extreme... Rest assured, that the Hindu will never be submissive and
obedient to the Musalmans until he becomes destitute and
impoverished..." So, as mentioned before, the Sultan made them
destitute. Destitute to the extent that the peasants sometimes paid
Kharaj by selling their wives and children.[128](#128) It is one thing
to raise taxes and be happy. But to gloat over the impoverishment of the
Hindus, both by the kings and chroniclers, is because of the ideology
which advocates degradation of non-Muslims. Barani is the first and
probably the only Muslim chronicler in the fourteenth century to mention
the sale of families for defraying land tax. As we shall see, in later
centuries foreign travellers were so shocked at this inhuman cruelty
that they mention the fact repeatedly. The sale of peasants meant that
they were reduced to the position of bonded labourers as slaves for
life. When they we're free (whatever the extent of their freedom), the
government got 50 to 75 per cent of their produce. When they became
bonded labourers the sultan got cent per cent of the produce earned by
their exertions. Of course some coarse grain was given to them to keep
them alive to continue to work in the fields.

After Alauddin's death (CE 1316) most of his measures seem to have
fallen into disuse, but the peasants got no relief, because Ghiyasuddin
Tughlaq who came to the throne four years later (CE 1320) continued the
atrocious practice of Alauddin. He also ordered that "there should be
left only so much to the Hindus that neither, on the one hand, they
should become arrogant on account of their wealth, nor, on the other,
desert their lands in despair".[129](#129) In the time of Muhammad bin
Tughlaq even this latter fear turned out to be true. The Sultan's
enhancement of taxation went even beyond the lower limits of "bare
subsistence". For the people left their fields and fled. This enraged
the Sultan and he hunted them down like wild beasts.[130](#130) Still
conditions did not become unbearable all at once.

The reign of Muhammad bin Tughlaq started off well so far as the
collection of Kharaj was concerned. The contemporary chronicler writes
with satisfaction that Kharaj of far-flung regions like Gujarat, Malwa,
Devagiri, Telang, Kampila, Dwarsamudra, Malabar, Tirhut, Lakhnauti,
Satgaon, Sunargaon was collected with as much ease as that of Doab and
brought (after deduction) to the treasury located in Hazar Situn in
Delhi. The *walls, iqtadars* and administrators were kept under strict
watch so that they collected the Kharaj from Rais and Raigans in full.
The officers and retainers of the latter were treated with rigour and
not a *kouri* or dirham was condoned. In three or four years, however,
the situation changed because of the dislike of the people for the
Sultan so that except Devagiri and Gujarat no other region remained
under full control. Kharaj could not be realised in full. There was
rebellion everywhere. This was due mainly to the enhancement of Kharaj
in the Doab to ten or twenty times, which obviously means 10 or 20 per
cent. Production and realisation went down. The rich became recalcitrant
and the poor became destitute. People of other regions, fearing the fate
of Doab people, fled and hid themselves in the jungles.[131](#131)

It is difficult to surmise if the condition of the peasants was better
or worse when the ruler at the centre was strong or weak. Under strong
kings like Alauddin Khalji and Muhammad bin Tughlaq, the people of
course suffered. But their condition was no better, say, under the weak
Saiyyads (C. 1400-1450) when revenue was regularly or irregularly
collected through military expeditions.[132](#132)

*Kharaj under the Mughals*

If Sher Shah was "considerate" to the agriculturists, Babur and Humayun,
could give little time and attention to agrarian and fiscal matters.
Like Alauddin Khalji in the Sultanate period, Akbar was the first Mughal
emperor to introduce novel principles and improved practices in land
revenue administration. During his fifty years of reign a number of
measures were adopted from time to time. Some important ones were Todar
Mall's settlement of Gujarat which was later extended to most of
Northern India, the introduction of the institution of Karoris - the
principles of ten years settlement, classification of lands (into
*polaj, parauti, chachar, banjar*) for assessment of revenue and so on -
but that was to get maximum from the peasantry. For in the Mughal period
the condition of the peasantry became more and more miserable; if there
was any progress it was in the enhancement of taxation. According to
W.H. Moreland, who has made a special study of the agrarian system of
Mughal India, the basic object of the Mughal administration was to
obtain the revenue on an ever-ascending scale. The share that could be
taken out of the peasant's produce without destroying his chances of
survival was probably a matter of common knowledge in each locality. In
Akbar's time, in Kashmir, the state demand was one-third, but in reality
it came to two-thirds.[133](#133) The Jagirdars in Thatta (Sindh) did
not take more than half. In Gujarat, according to Geleysen who wrote in
1629, the peasant was made to part with three-quarters of his harvest.
Similar is the testimony of De Laet, Fryer and Van Twist.[134](#134)
During Akbar's reign, says Abul Fazl, evil hearted officers because of
sheer greed, used to proceed to villages and *mahals* and sack
them.[135](#135) But they alone were not to blame. The policy of the
government was to exact land tax in full whatever the circumstances.
There were no remittances, no concessions. For example, "When either
from excessive rain or through an inundation, the land falls out of
cultivation the husbandmen are, at first, in considerable distress. In
the first year, therefore, but two-fifth of the produce is taken: in the
second three-fifth; in the third, four-fifth and in the fifth, the
ordinary revenue. According to difference of situation, the revenue is
paid either in money or in kind. In the third year the charges of 5 per
cent and one *dam* for each bigha are added."[136](#136) Tables of
various harvests in provinces meticulously prepared by Abul Fazl confirm
his above statement. The burden of arrears went on multiplying and the
peasant was crushed under it. Conditions became intolerable by the time
of Shahjahan when, according to Manucci, peasants were compelled to sell
their women and children to meet the revenue demand.[137](#137) Manrique
(1628-43) writes that the peasants were "carried off... to various
markets and fairs, (to be sold) with their poor unhappy wives behind
them carrying their small children all crying and
lamenting..."[138](#138) Bernier too affirms that the unfortunate
peasants who were incapable of discharging the demands of their
rapacious lords, were bereft of their children, who were carried away as
slaves.[139](#139) Here was also confirmation of the practice of bonded
labour in India.

Collection of Kharaj was accomplished through many other objectionable
methods, some leading to great suffering to the people. From the
allotment of Jagirs to *ijaradars* to the actual collection of taxes it
is an unmitigated story of sordid corruption and tyranny for which both
the tax collector and the king were equally responsible. Manucci
describes the process thus: "When any hungry wretch takes it into his
head to ruin the kingdom, he goes to the king and says to him: 'Sire; if
your majesty will give me the permission to raise money and a certain
number of armed men, I will pay so many millions. The king then asks how
it is intended to raise the money. It is by nothing else than the
seizure of everybody in the kingdom, men and women, and by dint of
torture compelling them to pay what is demanded. Such financiers are
hateful and avaricious men. The king generally consents to their unjust
proposals, as he thereby satisfies his own greed; he accords the
asked-for permission, and demands security bonds."[140](#140) Elsewhere
Manucci adds that "If the tax contractor pays twenty-five thousand
rupees to the crown, he must have at least recovered one hundred
thousand. They always keep back three-fourths for themselves and pay in
one-fourth only to the royal treasury."[141](#141)

On the allotment or transference of a jagir on the above lines, the
allottee officer carried the royal *farman* to assume his charge. The
*farman* bore the royal seal with the counter mark of the chief
Wazir,[142](#142) but by the time of Aurangzeb such *farmans* appear to
have lost authority. For, when the allottee carried the letter of
conferment, he was not given charge of the jagir until and unless a
present or bribe was given to one already in possession of the land.
Needless to say that the giver of the bribe collected the amount from
the cultivator in course of time. As has been well said, the essence of
imperialism is exploitation. It protects vested interests. The only
interest that it does not protect is that of the masses, of the
peasantry and the workers. To protect them can only mean to protect them
against exploitation. Imperialism, of which the essence is exploitation,
cannot afford such protection.

The great lords and petty contractors (*iqtadars, jagirdar, faujdars*,
and *ijaradars*) collected the land revenue through their retainers.
These retainers or troopers were hired by the nobles for a temporary
period and were known as sib-bandis (or irregular levy) under the
Mughals.[143](#143) They were not considered eligible for musters and
were generally regarded with some contempt when compared with the
regular soldiers or *tabinan*. These quasi-troops behaved like modem
*dadas* employed by their dons and they went to any length in
perpetrating atrocities on the peasants and the common people. They
entered the houses of the ryots and in many cases occupied them. Often
through them girls of the family were abducted and forcibly married to
their masters. This marriage also entitled the master to inherit the
property and thereafter he cultivated (another man's) land on his own
behalf. Their cruelties were a common knowledge. Even the royal scribe
Jahangir describes this process in *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*.[144](#144) On
accession to the throne emperor Jahangir promulgated his famous twelve
ordinances. One of these said that a government collector or Jagirdar
should not without permission intermarry with the people of the
*pargana* in which he might be; that the Jagirdars should not forcibly
take the ryot's lands and cultivate them on their own account and that
they should not take possession of any one's house.[145](#145) In candid
language girls of the ryots were non-chalantly abducted mainly through
the exertions of hired retainers. This was also possible because the
Jagirdar sometimes paid his own soldiers and retainers by allotting them
a share of his revenue. In a note in the English translation done by
Henry Elliot, he says that "these perpetual repetitions of the same
edicts shows either the very weak authority of the original promulgators
or the vain-glory of their descendents, in assuming to themselves credit
to which they were not entitled."[146](#146) For as Manucci observed,
the king knew how the money was intended to be raised. The retainers or
*sih-bandis* were employed with his knowledge and permission, and the
collection helped satisfy the king's own greed.

4.4. ZAKAT

Zakat or *"Zakah"* or alms tax can be defined as that portion of a man's
wealth which is designated for the poor. The term is derived from the
Arabic verbal root meaning "to increase", "to purify" and "to bless". It
finds its origin in Allah's command to "take *sadaqah* (charity) from
their property in order to purify and sanctify them (at-Taubah:103)...
In this *ayat* "Purify means to purify them from stinginess, greed, and
meanness... As an obligation upon Muslims, *zakah* is one of the
essential requirements of Islam. If somebody disputed its obligation, he
would be outside of Islam, and could legally be killed for his unbelief
unless he was a new Muslim and could be excused for his ignorance." And
as is usual in injunctions of the Quran and Hadis, there is a threat
held out to those who refrain from paying Zakat. Both Bukhari and Muslim
relate from Abu Hurairah that the messenger of Allah said: "No owner of
a treasure who does not pay *zakah* will be spared, for his treasure
will be heated in the Fires of Hell and then made into plates. His
flanks and his forehead will be branded with them until Allah pronounces
judgement on His servants during a day lasting fifty thousand
years."[147](#147)

In short, Zakat is a religious tax levied on the Muslims. By paying
Zakat and thereby sharing his property with the needy a Muslim purifies
himself of avarice. Generally speaking Zakat amounted to one-fortieth or
two-and-half per cent of the property. But since it is an act of piety
to pay Zakat, and since it is based on a clear injunction of the Quran,
it must be realized by the imam. In fact it is the ruler's duty to take
Zakat from the defaulter and rebuke him if he refrains from payment.
Zakat is not levied on primary necessities of life like dwelling houses,
clothes, utensils, slaves and animals used for ploughing or
riding."[148](#148) It is charged only on "apparent property" such as
gold and silver, herds and merchandise, and only when such property
exceeds a certain taxable minimum (*nisab*).

There are three conditions which qualify a man to pay Zakat. First, he
must have reason and maturity, for there can be no responsibility
without them. Second, he must live in Dar-ul-Islam, because the payment
of Zakat is an act of worship and as such it can be rightly performed by
Muslims only. Third, he must be a freeman, because a slave is not
supposed to own property.[149](#149) These conditions exempt infants,
non-Muslims, lunatics, slaves and even debtors, that is, insolvent
persons, from payment of Zakat tax.[150](#150) The Zakat on the apparent
property was collected by the state according to the fixed rate, but the
Zakat on non-apparent property was given to the beneficiaries directly
by the property owner according to his own discretion and
judgement.[151](#151) As explained in the article in the *Arab Times*
referred to above, "Zakah must be paid by every Muslim who has a nisab,
which is the minimum of one's holdings liable to *zakah*." *The nisab is
conditioned by the following:*

1\) *Zakah* should be paid on any amount of money remaining after
meeting the expenses for such necessities as food, clothes, housing,
vehicles and craft machines.

2\) A complete year of Islamic calendar should pass, starting from the
very day of the nisab's possession, without any decrease during the
year. in case of its decrease (being less than *nisab*), the year count
(*hawl*) starts from the day of the *nisab* to completion.

Commenting on the issue, an-Nawawi said: "In our view and the views of
Malik, Ahmad and the majority of scholars, the amount of property liable
for payment of *Zakah*, such as gold, silver, or cattle, is tied to the
completion of *nisab* through the turn of a whole year. If the nisab
decreases in any time of the year, (the counting of) the year
discontinues."

Zakat was perhaps the most difficult to assess and still more difficult
to realize. It was levied on "apparent property". Now, we know that in
the medieval times people used to hide their possessions lest the sultan
should come to know of their wealth. Zakat could not be realized
forcibly since "compulsion-vitiates its character". Again, it could only
be applied to a property held in possession by the owner for at least
one year.[152](#152) If a person just to avoid payment transferred his
taxable property to someone else including his own wife, even a day
before the date of payment, he escaped from paying.[153](#153) On the
other hand pious Muslims sometimes paid Zakat in advance for two or
three years.

The Muslim jurists divide the revenue of a Muslim state into two
categories - secular and religious. The secular taxes, consisting mainly
of Khams, Kharaj, and Jiziyah were levied on non-Muslims.[154](#154) The
religious tax was Zakat levied on Muslims. In India it seems to have
been shared by Hindus also as it included customs duties. The revenue
derived from Zakat was expended for charitable purposes and the other
taxes were earmarked mostly to satisfy secular demands.

There is a desire to equate Zakat with Jiziyah to emphasise the fairness
of the Islamic fiscal system. The Muslims pay Zakat and the non-Muslims
Jiziyah. But the analogy is fallacious. The rate of Zakat tax is as low
as 2½ per cent and that on the apparent property only. All kinds of
concessions are given in Zakat with regard to *nisab* or taxable
minimum. In its collection no force is applied because force vitiates
its character. On the other hand the rate of Jiziyah is very high for
the non-Muslims - 48, 24 and 12 silver *tankahs* for the rich, the
middling and the poor, whatever the currency and whichever the country.
Besides, what is central to Jiziyah is the humiliation of infidel
always, particularly at the time of collection. What is central in Zakat
is that it is voluntary; at least it cannot be collected by force.

In India Zakat ceased to be a religious tax imposed only on the Muslims.
Here Zakat was levied in the shape of customs duties on merchandise and
grazing fee on all milk-producing animals or those which went to
pasture, and was realized both from Muslims and non-Muslims. According
to the Islamic law, "import duties for Muslims were 5 per cent and for
non-Muslims 10 percent of the commodity." For, Abu Hanifa, whose Sunni
school of law prevailed in India, would tax the merchandise of the
Zimmis as imposts at double the Zakat fixed for Muslims.[155](#155)

*Mushroom Levies*

Besides the four regular taxes, there were various kinds of local
imposts levied. Alauddin Khalji imposed house tax and grazing tax
(*ghari* and *charai*). He also levied a tax on all milk producing
animals. These and many others like tax on selling flowers, on betel
leaves, octroi duty on sale of grain and pottery, stall tax *(tah
bazari*), tax on gambling, amusements and dancing girls mentioned by
Afif continued till the time of Firoz Tughlaq. They were collected in
the capital city and some other important cities. Firoz Tughlaq ordered
their abolition in 777 H/1375 CE as they were considered to be not in
accordance with the Shariat. This resulted in a loss of 30 lakh tankahs
annually,[156](#156) which shows that income from such imposts was not
inconsiderable.

Such imposts, however, used to grow like mushroom; these were regularly
pruned but also regularly collected from time to time so that with
Jiziyah and Pilgrim Tax, Akbar also abolished duties on *gao-shumari*
(each head of oxen), *sar-i-darakhti* (on each tree), *peshwar*
(vocational tax on artificers), darogha's fees, tehsildar's fees,
treasurer's fees, lodging charges, *hasil bazar* (market duties) and
many more. These imposts were "equal in amount to the income of
Hindustan."[157](#157) So also did Jahangir. He also issued instructions
forbidding levy of many such cesses. He writes in his memoirs that he
prohibited collection of imposts "under the names of *tamgha* and *mir
bahri* (river tolls), and other burdens, which the jagirdars of every
province and district had imposed for their own profit."[158](#158)
Similarly a *farman* of Aurangzeb preserved in *Mirat-i-Ahmadi*
"directed the jagirdars of the province of Gujarat not to realise cesses
such as *rahdari, mahi, mallahi, tarkari, tab bazari,* etc., which had
been abolished, from traders and merchants."[159](#159) "Zekhaut,
Sermohary and Tumgha had yielded to Akbar sixteen hundred Hindustani
*manns* of gold, equal to sixteen thousand *manns* of Iraq," says
Jahangir at another place.[160](#160) These imposts brought profit to
local officials if they did not always add revenue to the royal
exchequer.

The discrimination and humiliation for non-Muslims in the Muslim state
was not confined to the collection of Kharaj or other major taxes only.
It extended to *tamgha* or customs duties also. These levies on Hindus
used to be high, on Muslims often reduced or wholly rescinded. The
government was unduly keen to exempt Muslims from the levy. Prior to the
Battle of Khanua against Rana Sanga, Babur abolished "throughout all the
territories" the customs duties or *tamgha* on Musalmans - though its
yield was large and though it had been established and maintained by
former rulers. "For it is a practice outside the edicts of the Prince of
Apostles (Muhammad)."[161](#161) Naturally in an Islamic state Muslims
were treated with special favour. For Jahangir writes: "As I had
remitted in my dominions customs duties amounting to krors, I abolished
also all the transit dues (*sair-jihat*) in Kabul. From the provinces of
Kabul and Qandahar large sums used to be derived every year from customs
(*zakat*), which were in fact the chief revenue of those places. I
remitted these ancient dues, a proceeding that greatly benefited the
people of Iran and Turan."[162](#162)

Jahangir also writes, "I had done away with the whole of the customs
dues and charges of Kabul, and whichever of my descendants and
successors should do anything contrary to this would be involved in the
wrath and displeasure of God. Up to the time of my accession these were
fixed and settled, and every year they took large sums on this account
from the servants of God (the Muhammadan people in general). The
abolition of this oppression was brought about during my
reign."[163](#163) Similarly, customs duties at Cambay were abolished.
The Royal scribe writes that "in the time of the Sultans of Gujarat the
customs of this part came to a large sum. Now in my reign it is ordered
that they should not take more than one in forty," i.e. 2½ per cent. In
other parts they collected 10 to 16 per cent. "In Jeddah, which is the
port of Mecca, they take one in four (25 per cent) or even more."
Jahangir claims to have "the grace to remit the whole of the customs
dues of his dominions, which came to a countless sum, and the very name
of customs (*tamgha*) has passed away from my empire."[164](#164) But
all this was Jahangir's wish and his good intentions. The customs duties
were collected by officers who were corrupt and unrelenting. In fact,
customs duties were also a source of oppression and exaction. Still as
Edward Terry notes, the customs duties were "not high, that strangers of
all nations" may have greater encouragement to trade with the
Mughals.[165](#165)

In conclusion a few points may be noted about the tax system in the
Muslim state. Of the four major taxes sanctioned by Canon Law, viz. -
Zakat, Khams, Jiziyah and Kharaj, only Zakat was obligatory on Muslims,
while the other three were due from non-Muslims. The rate of Zakat was
light. It was just two-and-a-half per cent or one-fortieth of taxable
property. Besides, force could not be used in the collection of Zakat.
On the other hand, in the collection of the other three major taxes
taken from non-Muslims force was freely used. Medieval chronicles are
replete with stories of oppression and torture in the- collection of
taxes from non-Muslims realised through war and terror. The Muslim state
was run on the dictates of Islamic scriptures. Their main plank was
discrimination between Muslims and others. In matters of taxes all
concessions were given to the Muslims and all strictness and humiliation
extended to the non-Muslims.

4.5. OTHER SOURCES OF INCOME

Taxes were collected from the people. From defeated Rajas and Zamindars
huge amounts were extorted as war indemnities. When the capital city of
a Raja or any other important city of his kingdom was attacked, the
people were robbed, the temple treasures were raffled and the Rajas
fleeced. Full advantage was taken of their helpless state. The wealth
collected from these sources filled the treasuries of the sultans and
badshahs. Punjab and Gujarat had surrendered wealth and treasure on many
occasions to Mahmud Ghaznavi, Qutbuddin Aibak and Shamsuddin Iltutmish.
But Alauddin Khalji's coffers overflowed with the wealth obtained from
defeated princes. Before attacking Devagiri in 1296, Alauddin, as yet a
prince, had learnt during his raid on Vidisha that Raja Ram Chandra of
Devagir had inherited a huge treasure accumulated by his
ancestors.[166](#166) Marco Polo describing the treasures of the South
says that "when the king dies none of his children dares to touch his
treasures. For they say, 'as our father did gather together all his
treasure, so we ought to accumulate as much in our turn'. And in this
way it comes to pass that there is an immensity of treasure accumulated
in this kingdom (Maabar)." The Venetian traveller describes at length
the jewellery the king wore about his person as well as the ways in
which they used to obtain "very fine and great pearls". The king desires
to reserve all pearls for himself "and so in fact the quantity he has is
something almost incredible."[167](#167) About the Vijayanagar kingdom
Abdurrazaq says that "In the king's treasury there are chambers with
excavations in them, filled with molten gold, forming one
mass."[168](#168) Thus, the treasuries of the Deccan kingdoms were full
of precious metals and precious stones. Ram Chandra was defeated in a
surprise attack, and Alauddin collected from him "six hundred *man* of
gold (a *man* was equal to 14 the then ser), seven *man* of pearls, two
*man* of precious stones like rubies, sapphires, diamonds and emeralds,
one thousand *man* of silver and four thousand pieces of silk and sundry
articles the details of which are beyond computation". This detailed
account is given by Farishtah; he is indirectly supported by the
contemporary writers Barani and Amir Khusrau. Barani says that Alauddin
brought so much money from the Deccan that despite the squandering of it
by his successors much of it remained till the time of Firoz
Tughlaq.[169](#169) It is said that the wealth turned his head and he
began to conceive of "absurdities and impossibilities", but in the end
settled on furthering his conquests. Through these his treasuries got
filled with gold to such an extent that his coins became standard
currency even for future. After about a century, the invader Timur
demanded from the Raja of Jammu a hundred thousand gold *tankahs*
(*asharfis*) of Alauddin.[170](#170) In Akbar's reign, when Asaf Khan
attacked Gondwana, he lay hold on a hundred large pots full of the
asharfis of Alauddin. His silver coin has been found in far-off
Nepal.[171](#171)

In the Warangal campaign (1310), its Raja Pratap Rudra Deva finding
himself helpless consented to the terms of the treaty forced upon him
and surrendered all the treasures which had been accumulated during the
course of many generations. According to Barani, Pratap Rudra Deva gave
100 elephants (Farishtah has 300 elephants), 7,000 horses and many
precious articles and promised to send an equal amount of tribute in
future years. Among the precious stones which the Raja surrendered was
the famous Koh-i-Nur, which according to many writers, including Khafi
Khan, was brought by Malik Kafur from the Deccan.[172](#172) During the
Dwarsamudra expedition, Alauddin's general Malik Kafur's gains consisted
of 512 elephants (Barani has 612), 5,000 horses of various breeds like
Arabi, Yamani and Syrian, and 500 *mans* of jewellery of every
description (Barani has 20,000 horses and 96,000 *mans* of
gold).[173](#173) In another expedition against the Kakatiya king,
Pratap Rudra Deva, promised to give to Khusrau Khan, the commander of
Qutbuddin Mubarak Khalji, a large sum and tribute comprising of 100
elephants, 12,000 horses, gold, jewels and gems beyond
compute.[174](#174)

*Dowries*

Akin to the gains through expeditions, were dowries collected during
marriages of relatives of defeated Rajas with the victorious king or his
son. Dowry is a word of the English language, *qarardad* is Persian and
*jahez* (corrupted as *dahej*) is Arabic. There is perhaps no Hindi or
Sanskrit word for dowry. But it was and is an established custom to give
good amount of money to a girl at the time of her marriage. Although
dowry is not a must in Islam, the marriages of the daughters of the
vanquished rulers would have brought lot of wealth into the palaces of
the sultans and badshahs who entered into innumerable matrimonial
alliances. It would be euphemistic to term the Muslim royalty and
nobility in India as polygamous. "Polygamy" does not convey the idea of
the large number - one to two thousand, even more - of women which was
the norm of a harem in medieval India. The medieval Muslim view was that
a large and magnificent harem would inspire awe and respect for the king
and enhance his prestige in the minds of the people.[175](#175) In
pre-Mughal Hindustan a large harem was the trend of the times and
emperor Akbar followed the fashion. "His majesty," writes Abul Fazl,
"forms matrimonial alliances with princes of Hindustan and of other
countries, and secures by these ties of harmony the peace of the world."
Whether peace was actually achieved or bitter memories survived, is
beside the point. What is important is that Akbar had 5,000 women in his
harem, many of whom were actually married to him. They all brought
impressive dowries. For instance, Raja Bihari Mal "made the arrangements
for the marriage of his elder daughter to the Mughal emperor Akbar in
the most admirable manner and gave substantial dowry."[176](#176)

Each matrimonial contract brought a lot of wealth. Each Rajput princess
brought a lot of dowry. The marriage settlement of Man Bai, the daughter
of Raja Bhagwan Das, with Prince Salim was fixed at two *krors* of
*tankahs*. "The dowry bestowed by Bhagwan Das, included a hundred
elephants, several strings of horses, jewels, numerous and diverse
golden vessels set with precious stones, utensils of gold and silver,
'and all sorts of stuffs, the quantity of which is beyond computation'.
The imperial nobles were presented with Persian, Turkish and Arabian
horses, with golden saddles, etc. Along with the bride were given a
number of male and female slaves, of Indian, Abyssinian and Circassian
origin."[177](#177) A hundred years later, the amount paid by Raja Ajit
Singh in the marriage of his daughter with Farrukh Siyar amounted to a
kror of rupees because when Ajit Singh took her back to jodhpur after
Farrukh Siyar's death, she carried "with her all her jewels and
valuables, amounting to a kror of rupees in value."[178](#178) Rajput
princes vied with one another in providing rich dowries to their
relatives married in the Mughal house. Muslim rulers and nobles seeking
alliance with Mughal royalty too gave rich and handsome treasures in the
form of gifts in gold and jewels and pearls. These marriages thus were a
source of economic gain to the emperor and the empire, and wealth of
many kingdoms, provinces and individual rulers used to be sucked into
the imperial treasury because of the harem system.

Soldiers' loot, tributes and dowries brought in treasures directly and
in bulk. In short, India's vastness rendered waging of warfare a
perennial phenomenon and in consequence enrichment of Muslim rulers
through Khams, and imposed terms of treaties. By the time of Jahangir
the coffers of the Mughals were bursting with wealth, precious metals
and precious stones so that every other day emperor Jahangir was
distributing awards and rewards to his nobles. This information is
contained on almost every page of his memoirs. On the other hand, the
resources of the Rajputs, who were at the receiving end, had gone on
dwindling proportionately. Jahangir himself recounts the straits of the
Mewar royal house and other royal houses who were sometimes forced to
sell their heirlooms to meet financial stringency. Emperor Jahangir
writes that "on the first day he paid his respects he (prince Khurram)
laid before me a celebrated ruby of the Rana, which... he had made an
offering of to my son, and which the jewellers valued at 60,000
rupees... it was formerly in the possession of Ray Maldeo (Rathore)...
his son Chandar Sen, who, in the days of his wretchedness and
hopelessness, sold it to Ray Uday Singh. From him it went to Rana
Pratap, and afterwards to this Rana Amar Singh. *As they had no more
valuable gift in their family*, he presented it on the day that he paid
his respects to my fortunate son Baba Khurram, *together with his whole
stud of elephants*..." (italics added). Interestingly enough, the rich
gifts Jahangir bestowed on Mahabat Khan and the Persian ambassador
Mustafa Beg are recorded by him on these very pages.[179](#179)

4.6. TRADE IN SLAVES

In addition to the gains through loot, tribute and dowries obtained
during wars, the Muslim state in India found and created many other
sources of income like state trading, collection of octrois on sale and
purchase of commodities by private traders, transit duties on movements
of goods on land and rivers and many other cesses collected centrally or
locally. Besides levying taxes on the grains, cloths, articles of food
and medicine, slaves, horses and camels and other animals, the royalty
and nobility itself traded in these articles.

In the categories of articles in which the regime carried on trade, the
sale of slaves may be taken up first. For, the early Muslim invaders and
rulers captured slaves in large numbers and sold them in India and
abroad and made considerable profit. From the day India became a target
of Muslim invaders its people began to be enslaved. Many of them were
sold to make a profit. Muslim rulers were no different from Muslim
invaders so far as the capturing and selling of slaves was concerned.
Slaves was the first commodity Muslims found in India to make profit by
sale. The Arab invader of Sindh Muhammad bin Qasim sent to the Khalifa
Walid I, his (one-fifth) share of captives of both sexes. The latter
sold many of them and distributed the others among his
officers.[180](#180) Mahmud Ghaznavi took captive men and Women in all
his campaigns in India. He took 50,000 slaves in one campaign, 53,000 in
another and 200,000 in a third one. He sold them for two to three
dirhams (silver coin) each in the slave markets of Ghazni, Khurasan and
other places. All the proceeds from such sales were deposited in the
Amir's treasury. Under Aibak, Iltutmish, and Balban the captives were
sold after every campaign. For example, when Muhammad Ghauri and
Qutbuddin Aibak mounted a combined attack on the Salt Range, a large
number of captives were taken "so that five Hindu (Khokhar) slaves could
be bought for a *dinar*."[181](#181) Many more were also sold in
"Khurasan, not long after".[182](#182)

Slavery in Islam was institutionalised from the very beginning. Ibn
Ishaq mentions a transaction of the Prophet which set a precedent for
Islamic slave trade later on: "Then the apostle sent Sa'd b. Zayd
al-Ansari... with some of the captive women of B. Qurayza to Najd and he
sold them for horses and weapons."[183](#183) The women had been made
captive after their menfolk had been slaughtered en masse in the market
place at Medina. Thereafter there was no let up in the policy of
slave-taking by the Muslims. Minhaj Siraj writes that "Ulugh Khan
Balban's taking of captives, and his capture of the dependents of the
great Ranas cannot be recounted". Such was the scale of slave-taking by
Muslims in Hindustan that information about it travelled abroad, so that
Wassaf writes that in the sack of Somnath in 1299 the Muslim army "took
captive a great number of handsome and elegant maidens, amounting to
20,000 and children of both sexes". Like Wassaf, Shihabuddin Ahmad Abbas
also did not visit India but he was informed about the exploits of
Muhammad Tughlaq in this field as Wassaf was for Alauddin Khalji. At
home Amir Khusrau, the sufi poet, writes in his Nub Sipehr that "the
Turks, whenever they please, can seize them, buy them and sell them at
will... The Hindu happens to be a (wretched) slave in all
respects."[184](#184)

The sale price of slaves in the fourteenth century was like this. The
standard price of a working girl was fixed at from 5 to 12 *tankahs*,
and that of a good looking girl suitable for concubinage from 20 to 30
and even 40 *tankahs*. The price of a man slave (*ghulam*) usually did
not exceed 100 to 200 *tankahs*. The prices of handsome boys were fixed
from 20 to 30 *tankahs*; the ill-favoured could be obtained for 7 to 8.
The price of a child slave (*ghulam bachchgan naukari*) was fixed at 70
to 80 *tankahs*. The slaves were classified according to their looks and
working capacity. In the case of bulk purchases by traders who had ready
money and who had the means to carry their flock for sale to other
cities,[185](#185) prices were fixed accordingly.

No rules about the sale price could be laid in special cases where the
catch was big or a very beautiful slave ("man or woman/boy or girl") of
very high price, say, 1,000 to 2,000 *tankahs* was brought for sale in
the market. Even then slaves were sometimes purchased for high amounts.
The poet Badr Chach claims to have bought a slave named Gul-Chehra (Rose
Face) for 900 *tankahs*. The title Hazardinari (of a thousand gold
coins) for Malik Kafur shows that a skilled slave could have cost
anything. It may therefore be contended that except in the reign of
Alauddin when prices were fixed, prices of slaves and concubines were
uncertain, varying according to fortunes of war and famine, looks of the
person, bargaining talent of the auctioneer, shrewdness of the buyer and
fluctuations in the market through influences of demand and supply.

Writing about the days of Sultan Muhammad bin Tughlaq (1325-51),
Shihabuddin al-Umari writes: "The sultan never ceases to show the
greatest zeal in making war upon the infidels... Every day thousands of
slaves are sold at a very low price, so great is the number of prisoners
.... (that) the value at Delhi of a young slave girl, for domestic
service, does not exceed eight *tankahs*. Those who are deemed fit to
fill the parts of domestic and concubine sell for about fifteen
*tankahs*. In other cities prices are still lower... " Probably it was
so because Ibn Battutah while in Bengal says that a pretty *kaniz*
(slave girl) could be had there for one gold dinar (or 10 silver
*tankahs*). "I purchased at this price a very beautiful slave girl whose
name was Ashura. A friend of mine also bought a young slave named Lulu
for two gold coins." It is very difficult to establish a relationship
between the prices of Delhi market and those of the provinces. Umari
continues, "but still, in spite of low prices of slaves, 20000
*tankahs*, and even more, are paid for young Indian girls. I inquired
the reason... and was told that these young girls are remarkable for
their beauty, and the grace of their manners."[186](#186) All evidence
point to the fact that it was the Muslim ruler who profited from the
sale of these slaves. Isami in his *Futuh-us-Salatin* states that when
Mahmud of Ghazni defeated Raja Jayapala of the Hindu Shahiya dynasty, he
"carried him to the distant part of the kingdom of Ghazni and delivered
him to an agent (*dalal*) of the slave market... (and) at the command of
the king Mahmud they (the Brokers of the Market, *Muqiman-i-Bazar* in
the original) sold Jayapal as a slave for 80 *dinars* and deposited the
money realised by the sale in the Treasury." Hodivala adds that "it
would be difficult to get better evidence than this of the ruler making
the profit."[187](#187)

From the fifteenth century onwards, we have some more information about
the sale of slaves at home and abroad. Zahiruddin Muhammad Babur writes
in his memoirs that "there are two trade marts on the land route between
Hindustan and Khurasan; one is Kabul, the other, Qandhar... from
Hindustan, come every year caravans... bringing slaves (*barda*) and
other commodities, and sell them at great profit..." The Mughal emperor
Akbar disapproved of the custom of enslaving women and children in times
of war.[188](#188) He also prohibited enslavement and sale of women and
children of the peasants who had defaulted in the payment of revenue. He
knew, as Abul Fazl says, that many evil hearted and vicious men used to
proceed to villages and *mahals* and sack them. According to W.H.
Moreland, "It became a fashion to raid a village or group of villages
without any obvious justification and carry off the inhabitants as
slaves." In short, there was never an abjuration of the policy of
enslavement as mainly it was not the Mughal emperors but the Mughal
nobility who must have taken the lion's share of enslavement,
deportation and sale by the state. It was not only Jahangir, a
comparatively kind-hearted emperor, who used to capture poor people
during his hunting expeditions and send them to Kabul in exchange for
dogs and horses; all Muslim rulers and governors collected slaves and
exploited them in the manner they pleased. In any case, warfare went on
as usual even under Akbar and Jahangir and Mughal Generals went on with
their usual ways. Abdulla Khan Uzbeg's force destroyed in the
Kalpi-Kanauj area alone, all towns, took all their goods, their wives
and children as slaves. No wonder he once boasted that "I made prisoners
of five lacs of men and women and sold them. They all became
Muhammadans. From their progeny there will be crores by the day of the
judgement.[189](#189)

Conditions became intolerable by the time of Shahjahan as attested to by
Manucci and Manrique. Peasants were compelled to sell their women and
children to meet the revenue demand. Manrique writes that "the peasants
were carried off... to various markets and fairs (to be sold) with their
poor unhappy wives behind them, carrying their small children all crying
and lamenting to meet the revenue demand". Bernier too affirms that "the
unfortunate peasants who were incapable of discharging the demand of
their rapacious lords, were bereft of their children who were carried
away as slaves."[190](#190)

In brief, slave trade was mainly carried out by Muslim royalty and
nobility throughout the medieval period and it brought them considerable
gains.

4.7. TRADE IN GRAIN, CLOTH AND OTHER ARTICLES

As the Muslim government gained in stability, it embarked on trade of
many other commodities. The enterprises of the Muslim government today
would be called 'public sector undertakings' as against private
business. The Muslim state traded in animals, corn and cloth, as it did
in slaves. Under Alauddin Khalji the grain market was taken under the
control of the government. He ordered that the travelling merchants
(caravaneers) should get themselves registered with the Superintendent
of the Grain Market. They were required to take up residence with their
families in villages bordering on the river Jumna. They were made to
sign agreements, collectively and individually, to maintain a regular
supply of grain to the market. Similar undertaking was obtained from the
magistrates and collectors (*shahnagan* and *mutsarrifan*) in the Doab
and regions near the capital to the effect that they would try to obtain
as much grain from the cultivators as possible. They were ordered to
realize fifty per cent of the product as land-tax from the
agriculturists with the utmost vigour as well as to compel them to sell
their surplus stock to the travelling merchants on the fields at rates
fixed by the King. Thus all the available grain flowed into the market
which remained well-stocked. The Sultan established Government Grain
Stores. There was scarcely a *mohalla*, says Barani, where two or three
royal stores filled with foodstuffs did not exist. They were godowns
where grain was stored in reserve to be released in times of emergency.

Alauddin Khalji advanced money from the treasury to the roving merchants
to bring grain into the city; in lieu whereof he gave them commission to
support their families. As hinted by Ibn Battutah, Alauddin advanced
money to the Sindhi merchants for bringing and selling foodstuffs and
other goods in Delhi to have a share in the profits of the trade. His
contemporary rulers in some West Asian countries also indulged in such a
practice. They introduced market control and took over wholesale trade
in grain so that profits accrued to them instead of to private
traders.[191](#191) Throughout the medieval period, part of the Kharaj
or land-tax was taken in kind. Even when it was calculated in terms of
cash, the levy or recovery was often made in the form of grain,
partially if not wholly. During the Mughal period Jagirs were allotted
to Amirs and Mansabdars. They collected their share of the revenue and
traded in grain which was surplus with them. Thus the government and
nobles earned profit by doing business in foodstuffs. It may be noted
that foodgrains were cheap in the medieval period. Medieval chroniclers
of the Khalji and Lodi period take pride in mentioning that grains were
cheap in their times. In Akbar's camp, Father Monserrate was astounded
at the low prices of foodstuffs notwithstanding the immense numbers of
men and animals. How much burden of this cheapness was shared between
the agriculturists, private traders and royal traders is difficult to
determine. But the government did participate in trade in corn and grain
and advanced money to *caravaneers* to bring grain for sale and shared
in the profit.

This becomes all the more clear in the case of trade in cloth. Sultan
Alauddin advanced about two million *tankahs* to Multani or Sindhi
merchants to bring merchandise and sell it on behalf of the King.
According to Ibn Battutah he advanced money to the merchants and told
them: "With this money buy bullock and sheep, and sell them; the price
that they will fetch must be paid to the treasury, and you shall receive
allowance for selling them." Devagiri silks, horses of foreign breed,
swords and many other articles were brought from far off places.

Internal and external trade, royal workshops and private manufactories
provided for the requirements of royalty and nobility and their harems.
Silk was imported from many foreign countries like China and Persia as
well as produced indigenously. Manucci and Bernier talk in general
terms, but Abul Fazl gives specific names of cotton, silk and woolen
fabrics, Indian as well as those imported from "Turkey, Europe and
Portugal".[192](#192) Vincent Smith quoting Monserrate's *Commantarious*
says that "Akbar himself was a trader, and did not disdain to earn
commercial profits."[193](#193) By the time of Shahjahan more and more
foreign stuffs had begun to be imported.[194](#194) Woolen carpets or
*qalins* were also imported from Iran and Central Asia.

When the State made purchases advances were offered to the suppliers.
Jahangir introduced night-time marketing at his residence. The imperial
government traded in articles produced in its karkhanas spread out in
many places like Lahore, Agra, Fatehpur, Ahmadabad, Burhanpur and
Kashmir. Shahjahan even held the monopoly (*sauda-i-khas*) in
cash-earning articles like indigo and saltpetre. "Extensive trading
operations were carried on not only by the Emperor and the Princes,
governors and imperial nobles, such as Asaf Khan and Mir Jumla, but also
by Nur Jahan."[195](#195) The principal trade from India to Europe in
the seventeenth century consisted of silk and cotton fabrics, indigo,
saltpetre, pepper and spices. "Khafi Khan mentions that the imperial
ship, *Ganj-i-Sawai*, which on its way back from pilgrimage was attacked
by the English pirates, was bringing fifty-two lacs of rupees in silver
and gold, the produce of the sale of Indian goods at Mocha and
Jedda."[196](#196)

In brief, internal and external trade by the State provided a good
source of income to the exchequer. It is significant that the memoirs of
Jahangir as well as his *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi* repeatedly mention rates
of exchange between the Mughal *rupia* and currencies of Iran and
Turan.[197](#197) Which would point to continuous Mughal government's
trade with these countries. Pietro Della Valle saw a great number of
Banians and Indian Gentiles in Isfahan (in Iran), where (they) reside
constantly celebrating the festival of Holi with éclat and
gaiety.[198](#198) In the pre-industrial Revolution era, Indian goods
and merchants flooded foreign markets and Indian kings made good profit
through their trade. The toy trade with Europe was also profitable. It
was loaded with curios, presents and bribes to Mughal royalty from the
West. However, trade with England had not been established before
Akbar's death. From the East China came porcelain in considerable
quantities for the use of the Mughal emperor and his nobles. According
to Peruschi, Akbar's dinner used to be brought to him in porcelain
dishes imported from China. "When he died in 1605, he left in Agra alone
more than two million and a half of rupees worth of the most elegant
vessels of every kind in porcelain and coloured glass. The glass
probably came from Venice."[199](#199) It is not necessary to give a
catalogue of imports and exports and an index of balance of trade. Two
factors need to be kept in mind in this regard. One, the trade was
profitable to the Mughal royalty and nobility; else it would have dried
up. Two, traders were strictly forbidden to send out silver. Silver was
largely imported; its import benefited the Mughals.

*Customs Duties*

Where the ruling elite itself was not the trader, it collected imposts
on manufactures and customs on sale. Duty on manufacture of high quality
products was called *jihat*, and the remainder was known as
*sair-jihat*, a term used in the *Ain-i-Akbari* for all kinds of sundry
taxes other than land revenue.[200](#200) *Sair-jihat* formed an
important source of income of the Mughal state as it included taxes on
sale of cloth, oil, grains, articles of food, horses, camels and animal
skins. There was a regular staff of police and revenue officials to
guard and protect the markets and to collect taxes in them. So far as
the rate of customs duty is concerned, Akbar charged at the rate of 2½
per cent. This rate seems to have continued during the reigns of
Jahangir and Shahjahan and also Aurangzeb, but under him for Muslims
only. From 1665 Hindu merchants paid 5 per cent and the Muslim 2½ per
cent. Thevenot who arrived in 1666 found that the Christians paid 4 per
cent and the Hindus (Banians) 5 per cent.[201](#201) In 1667 the Muslim
merchants were exempted from the payment of customs duties altogether.

The duty on gold and silver was 2½ per cent, says Thevenot. Any one was
free to bring gold, silver or copper to the royal mint and get it
converted into coins. The commission earned by the state can be imagined
from the statement of Manucci who says that the government derived
eleven lakhs of rupees every year from the new coins struck at Surat
alone. Mints were owned by the state and merchants were allowed to dig
and work out the mines on payment of a fee. Minerals and metals like
lead, saltpetre, indigo and even salt were sometimes declared the
monopoly of the state.

Merchants in India generally carried their goods by carts and boats.
They had to take a 'passport' (*dastak* or *farman*) from the place of
their departure and show it at check posts on the journey in order to be
allowed to pass without further payments. Manucci says that "if they
chance to loose this paper, or it is stolen they are made to pay again
either in the same or another province."[202](#202) Tavernier informs us
that four rupees were charged on every wagon load of merchandise and one
rupee on every chariot, but a different rate was charged for boats.
Inland trade was flourishing and the Mughal government made a lot of
money through these levies.

Speaking of the income from the ports Manucci says "these seaports also
yield him (the Mughal) a large revenue". The port towns were entered in
revenue records as *mahals*. The Mughal emperors took sufficient
interest in the administration and proper management of their customs
offices. "Among them are those of Sind, Broach, Surat and Cambay. Surat
alone. brings him in usually thirty lakhs, besides the eleven lakhs
derived from profit on new coins struck there."[203](#203) At times the
income from customs duty of a port was granted as Jagir. For example,
the customs of Surat was granted by Shahjahan to his daughter Jahanara
"to meet her expenditure on betel".[204](#204)

As Abul Fazl rightly remarks: "In every country such demands are
troublesome and vexatious to the people. His majesty (Akbar) in his wise
statesmanship and benevolence of rule carefully examined the subject and
abolished all arbitrary taxation..."[205](#205) But corruption and
harassment remained common at least under his successors. The person and
goods of the traders in transit were systematically searched. Thevenot
says that "men may wait sometimes a month before they can get out their
baggage and specially they who have Merchant goods."[206](#206) The evil
effects of this system were widely known. Besides abolishing many such
taxes in port towns, Jahangir ordered that "Merchants travelling through
the country were not to have their bales or packages of any kind opened
without their consent."[207](#207) Sometimes religious persecution added
to the woes of merchants who closed or threatened to close their
business.[208](#208) But royal regulations could not stop extortion. As
a modem economic historian points out, "It is mentioned that Mir Jumla
once demanded Rs.50,000 from the merchants of Dacca. On refusal they
were threatened with death by being trampled by elephants and
compromised for Rs.25,000 while the bankers of the city appeased his
wrath by paying Rs.30,000 without much ado. Occasionally, however, the
mercantile community could protest successfully against the exactions of
a governor or high administrative officer by *hartal* or suspension of
business."[209](#209) In any case, as mentioned by Jadunath Sarkar,
"Foreign trade... occupied a negligible position in the economics of the
Mughal empire, on account of its small volume - the total yield of the
import duty being probably less than 30 lakhs of Rupees a year, while
the land revenue brought to the State one hundred and eleven times that
amount."[210](#210) As mentioned earlier, in other Muslim countries
customs duties were regularly collected but in Muslim state in India,
Muslim traders were granted liberal exemptions. Besides, income from
such sources was shared by the king and his officers. And this income
was subsidiary or auxiliary. The main sources of income of the Muslim
state were the four regular taxes - Khams, Kharaj, Jiziyah and Zakat. It
is on these four pillars that the economic structure of the Muslim
government rested.

4.8. ESTIMATE OF INCOME OF THE STATE

An estimate of the income of the Muslim state in India has been
attempted by a number of scholars. They are aware of the deficiencies in
their calculations because contemporary chroniclers give figures of such
incomes but rarely. Boundaries of 'empires' were also constant y
changing. The currency too was changing - ratios and weights of coins.
Even so estimates of the income of the state have been attempted by some
indefatigable scholars like Edward Thomas, W.H. Moreland and Jadunath
Sarkar, and their findings are being reproduced here.

Edward Thomas has arrived at the following figures of the income during
the reigns of monarchs from Firoz Tughlaq to Aurangzeb:

[TABLE]

Aurangzeb's total revenue from various sources (was) 77,43,88,000 silver
*tankahs* (or rupees)."[211](#211)

Shams Siraj Afif's figure of the income of Sultan Firoz Tughlaq is
67,500,000 *tankahs*.[212](#212) p. Saran writes that Firoz Tughlaq's
total income from land revenue, canals, and gardens was nearly 8 crores
of *tankahs*. He rightly adds that income from other sources like Zakat,
Jiziyah, Khams, octrois, tolls, was also there but it is impossible even
to make any rough estimates of the same. He estimates the income of Sher
Shah's empire at 16 crores of silver *tankahs* or rupees (about half the
income of Akbar's reign).[213](#213)

Jadunath Sarkar makes the following statement on the subject: "Excluding
Afghanistan, Mughal empire had a revenue of Rupees 13 *krores* and 21
*lakhs* under Akbar and 33 *krores* and 25 *lakhs* under Aurangzeb. The
figure stood for land revenue alone but the amount was never fully
realised. It did not include proceeds of taxes like *Zakat* and
*Jiziyah*. A rough idea of the state-income can be formed from the
figures of Gujarat in Aurangzeb's reign: land revenue Rupees 113 *lakhs,
Jiziyah* 5 *lakhs*, customs duties of Surat port 12 *lakhs* per annum
(the other ports did negligible trade). The amounts of land held as
military Jagir and Crown lands (*khalsa*) can be judged from the
following figures (circa 1690): land revenue assessed on *jagirs* 27.64
*krores* and on *khalsa* 5.81 *krores* of Rupees (for the whole
empire)."[214](#214) Stanley Lanepoole, an expert on numismatics and
fiscal subjects, also says that the figures of income of the state
"represents only the land revenue, including, however, the tribute which
took the place of the land-tax in half-subdued States…"[215](#215)

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) *Sunan Abu Daud*, vol. II, pp. 473-4.

[2](#2a) *Ibid.*, pp. 384-85.

[3](#3a) Margoliouth, *Mohammed*, pp. 245-46.

[4](#4a) Quran, 8:42. Hughes, *Dictionary of Islam*, pp. 375-76.

[5](#5a) *Mishkat*, II, pp. 78-87.

[6](#6a) Muir, *The Life of Mahomet*, p. 229.

[7](#7a) For a fuller account of the Civil List (*Diwan*), one can refer
to the *Tarikh-i-Tabari*, Part I, Khilafat Rashida, Urdu, vol. II, Nafis
Academy, Karachi, n.d. pp. 476-479.

[8](#8a) Ram Swarup in his introduction to Sir William Muir's *The Life
of Mahomet*, New Delhi reprint, 1992, pp. 11-12.

[9](#9a) It may be mentioned here that besides gains in war, Khams was
also levied on mines and treasure troves. "The products of mines and the
finds of treasure troves were regarded as spoils of war because it was
believed that they formerly belonged to the infidels and became Muslim
property on conquest." U.N. Day, *The Government of the Sultanate*,
Kumar Brothers, New Delhi, 1972, p. 107; *Sunan ibn Majah*, vol. II, p.
94, hadis 281.

As regards mines and treasure troves, however, the jurists greatly
differ about the share of the state. The Hanafi school makes it
one-fifth, the Shafite nil and the Maliki holds that Zakat or
one-fortieth be paid on it. Loot of Muslim property was against the law
and was prohibited. Any treasure trove of unknown ownership discovered
in the house of a Musalman was permitted to be retained by him. Eg.
Rizqullah, *Waqiat-i-Mushtaqi*, fol. 21a; Ahmad Yadgar,
*Tarikh-i-Salatin-i-Afghana*, p. 36.  

[10](#10a) Hamilton, *Hedaya*, vol. II, p. 178.

[11](#11a) Hughes, *Dictionary of Islam*, p. 378.

[12](#12a) S.R. Chowdhry, *Al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf*, Delhi, 1972, p. 118 on
the authority of al-Biladuri's Futuh-ul-Buldan.

[13](#13a) C.H.I. III, p. 3; *Chachnama*, E.D. vol. I, pp. 174-75.

[14](#14a) *Chachnama*, E.D. vol. I, pp. 174-75.

[15](#15a) *Ibid*., p. 183, also p. 160.

[16](#16a) *Ibid*., p. 185, also p. 182.

[17](#17a) *Ibid*., p. 186.

[18](#18a) Utbi, Reynolds, p. 282.

[19](#19a) The house was quite large, covering an area of about a
thousand square feet. Hodivala also says that the canopy must have been
what the old annalists of Gujarat call a *Mandapika*. it was a folding
pavilion for being used in royal journeys, and not a throne. Hodivala,
*Studies in Indo-Muslim History*, p. 143.

[20](#20a) On return to Ghazni, Mahmud ordered this impressive treasure
to be displayed in the courtyard of his palace. "Ambassadors from
foreign countries including the envoy from Taghan Khan, king of
Turkistan, assembled to see the wealth... which had never been
accumulated by kings of Persia or of Rum" (Utbi, Reynolds, pp. 342-43;
E.D. vol. II, p. 35).

[21](#21a) Utbi, E.D. vol. II, p. 45; Reynolds, pp. 455-57. I have
elsewhere calculated that 70 *misqals* were equal to one seer of 24
tolas in the Sultanate period. See my *History of the Khaljis* 2nd ed.,
Bombay, 1967, pp. 199-200. On the basis of the above calculation the
weight of five gold idols comes to 10.5 maunds, each idol being of about
2 maunds.

[22](#22a) Bosworth, *op. cit.*, p. 78.

[23](#23a) *Ibid*., pp. 76, 120, 126; Hodivala, op. cit., pp. 139-40,
176; Fakhr-i-Mudabbir, *Adab-ul-Harb*, trs. in Rizvi, *Adi Turk Kalin
Bharat*, Aligarh, 1965, p. 258; Utbi, op. cit., p. 33; Taj-ul-Maasir,
E.D. vol. II, p. 227.

[24](#24a) *Mishkat*, vol. II, p. 87.

[25](#25a) There are many *ahadis* on this policy, e.g., *Mishkat*, vol.
II, pp. 65-67.

[26](#26a) Fakhr-i-Mudabbir, *Tarikh Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah*, p. 20.

[27](#27a) Hitti, *The Arabs*, p. 76.

[28](#28a) *Chachnama*, Kalichbeg, p. 163; E.D. vol. I, p, 181.

[29](#29a) Farishtah, vol. I, pp. 59-60.

[30](#30a) Sunan ibn *Majah*, vol. I, pp. 521-22.

[31](#31a) *Sunan Abu Daud*, vol. II, pp. 160-61.

[32](#32a) For some facts and figures of humans, especially women,
captured in Muslim wars in India, see my *Muslim Slave System in
Medieval India*, pp. 17-24, 41-59, 70-73. Also my *The Mughal Harem*,
pp. 29, 32, 37, 167-68.

[33](#33a) Shah Nawaz Khan, *Maasir-ul-Umara*, vol. I, p. 105.

[34](#34a) *Sunan ibn Majah*, vol. II, pp. 602-604.

[35](#35a) *Fatuhat-i-Firoz Shahi*, Aligarh, 1954, p. 6.

[36](#36a) Abbas Sarwani, *Tarikh-i-Sher Shahi*, E.D. vol. IV, p. 314.

[37](#37a) E.G. Abu Daud, vol. II, p. 369; Tirmizi, vol. I, p. 529.

[38](#38a) *Mutla'us Sadain*, E.D. vol. IV, p. 109, also pp. 106-107.

[39](#39a) Farishtah, vol. I, p. 120.

[40](#40a) Wassaf, *Tazjiyat-ul-Amsar*, text, vol. IV, p. 447. trs. in
E.D. vol. III, p. 43.

[41](#41a) Lal, *Khaljis*, pp. 67-73.

[42](#42a) Barani, p. 253.

[43](#43a) Tirmizi, vol. I, p. 584.

[44](#44a) Isami, *Futuh-us-Salatin*, p. 243.

[45](#45a) Tirmizi, vol. I, p. 586.

[46](#46a) *Waqiat-i-Mushtaqi*, E.D. vol. IV, p. 547.

[47](#47a) Smith, *Akbar the Great Mogul*, pp. 51-52.

[48](#48a) Alberuni's *India*, p. 22.  

[49](#49a) Wassaf, *op. cit.*, E.D. vol. III, p. 43.

[50](#50a) Suresh Mishra, *Garha ke Gond Raj ka Utthan aur Patan*
(Hindi), pp. 59-61.

[51](#51a) Bernier, pp. 226-227.

[52](#52a) Regarding the glories of pre-Buddhist Aryan rule in West
Asia, see Jamna Das Akhtar's article in the *Organiser* dated 16
November 1997.

[53](#53a) Alberuni, Preface by Sachau, p. xiv.

[54](#54a) *Ain*, Jarret, vol. III, p. 224.

[55](#55a) Tuzuk, vol. I, p. 92.

[56](#56a) Quran, Al Taubah: 29.

[57](#57a) Harsh Narain, *Jizyah and the spread of Islam*, New Delhi,
1990, pp. 10-12.

[58](#58a) *Encyclopaedia of Islam*, vol. I, pp. 958-59.

[59](#59a) *Dictionary of Islam*, p. 711.

[60](#60a) Aghnides, *Muhammadan Theories of Finance*, pp. 399, 4o6-7,
528, 530.

[61](#61a) *Mishkat*, vol. II, pp. 38-45; Abu Daud, vol. II, p. 290.

[62](#62a) Tirmizi, vol. I, pp. 594-599.

[63](#63a) Abu Daud, vol. II, pp. 511-13, 518, *ahadis* 1263-64, 1279.

[64](#64a) Ibid., p. 513, *ahadis* 1268-69,

[65](#65a) Tirmizi, vol. I, pp. 604-05.

[66](#66a) Barani, pp. 216-217, 290-91. Also his *Fatawa-i-Jahandari*,
pp. 46-48.

[67](#67a) Quoted in S.R. Sharma, *Religious Policy of the Mughal
Emperors*, p. 19, quotation cited in note 47, p. 50.

[68](#68a) S.A.A. Rizvi, *Muslim Revivalist Movements*, pp. 247-49.

S.A.A. Rizvi, *Shah Waliullah and his Times*, Canberra, 1980, pp. 218,
285-86.

Aziz Ahmad, *Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment*, p.
204.

Many more references are found in Sita Ram Goel, *Muslim Separatism*,
Voice of India, New Delhi, Revised ed., 1995, pp. 33-56.  

[69](#69a) *Chachnama*, trs. Kalichbeg, p. 165.

[70](#70a) Habibullah, *The Foundation of Muslim Rule in India*, p. 281
and notes 8, 9 and 10 on p. 292.

[71](#71a) Barani, p. 574.

[72](#72a) *Ibid*., p. 218.

[73](#73a) Afif, pp. 382-84.

[74](#74a) *Akbar Nama*, trs. Beveridge, vol. II, pp. 316-17.

[75](#75a) *Hedaya*, trs. Hamilton, vol. II, p. 211.

[76](#76a) Tripathi, *Some Aspects of Muslim Administration*, pp.
340-41.

[77](#77a) Afif. pp. 382-84.

[78](#78a) Saqi Mustaad Khan, *Maasir-i-Alamgiri*, trs Sarkar, pp. 78,
94, 95; Lal, *Legacy of Muslim Rule*, pp. 221-223 for detailed
references.

[79](#79a) Khafi Khan, Text, pp. 278-79, 339.

[80](#80a) Barani, p. 291.

[81](#81a) Trs. in Jadunath Sarkar, *Aurangzib*, vol. III, pp. 325-27.

[82](#82a) S.R. Sharma, op. cit., p. 154, also pp. 152-58.

[83](#83a) *Maasir-i-Alamgiri*, p. 174; *Mirat-i-Ahmadi*, vol. I, pp.
296-98.

[84](#84a) Manucci, vol. III, pp. 288-91.

[85](#85a) *Ibid*., p. 288. Also Athar Ali, *The Mughal Nobility under
Aurangzeb*, p. 99.

[86](#86a) Trs in E.D. vol. III, p. 386.

[87](#87a) Afif., p. 383.

[88](#88a) Sarkar, *Short History of Aurangzib*, p. 157.

[89](#89a) Ibid., pp. 157-58.

[90](#90a) This was according to both Hindu and Buddhist ideas. U.N.
Ghoshal, *A History of the Hindu Political Theories*, Oxford, 1923, pp.
65-209.

[91](#91a) Ibid., pp. 237-238.

[92](#92a) P.V. Kane, *History of Dharmashastra*, vol. II, Part II, pp.
865-69; *Arthashastra*, English trs. by R. Shama Shastry, Mysore, 1923,
p. 140; *Proceedings of the Indian History Congress*, 1944, pp. 43-51.

[93](#93a) *Shukraniti*, trs., B.K. Sarkar, Allahabad, 1914, pp.
147-148.

[94](#94a) Cited in A.S. Altekar, *Rashtrakutas and their Times*,
Oriental Book Agency, Poona, 1934, p. 217.

[95](#95a) Alberuni, vol. II, p. 149. Also Hiuen Tsang, I, p. 176.

[96](#96a) *Si-yu-ki*, vol. I, pp. 87-88 cited in B.K. Sarkar, *The
Political Institutions and Theories of the Hindus*, Leipzig, 1922, p.
111.

[97](#97a) Altekar, *Rashtrakutas*, p. 223.

[98](#98a) Altekar, *Village Communities in Western India, Humphrey
Milford*, Madras, 1927, p. 70.

[99](#99a) Idrisi, *Nazhat-ul-Mushtaq*, E.D. vol. I, pp. 85-86.

[100](#100a) K.S. Aiyangar, *Ancient India, Madras*, 1911, pp. 181-182.

[101](#101a) Barani, pp. 61-63.

[102](#102a) *Ibid*., pp. 50-51.

[103](#103a) *Ibid*., p. 100.

[104](#104a) Habibullah, op. cit., p. 316.

[105](#105a) Ibn Majah, vol. I, p. 514, *hadis* 1897.

[106](#106a) Aghnides, *Muhammadan Theories of Finance*, p. 378.

[107](#107a) Fakhr-i-Mudabbir, *Tarikh-i-Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah*, pp.
31-32.

[108](#108a) Barani, pp. 216-17 and *Fatawa-i-Jahandari*, pp. 46-48.

[109](#109a) Barani, p. 287; Lal, *Khaljis*, pp. 182-183.

[110](#110a) Aghnides, *Muhammadan Theories of Finance*, pp. 251-54.

[111](#111a) Afif, p. 98.

[112](#112a) *Sunan Abu Daud*, vol. II, pp. 463-64, *hadis* 1171.

[113](#113a) Barani, pp. 291, 297-98.

[114](#114a) Isami, *Futuh-us-Salatin*, Agra text, pp. 569-70;
*Tarikh-i-Wassaf*, Bombay text, Book V, pp. 646, 647.

[115](#115a) Barani, p. 288.

[116](#116a) *Ibid*., pp. 288, 305, 307.

[117](#117a) R.P. Tripathi, *Some Aspects of Muslim Administration* p.
262.

[118](#118a) Barani, pp. 288-89, 292.

[119](#119a) For Alauddin Khalji's Market Control see Lal, *Khaljis*,
pp. 197-225.

[120](#120a) Barani, p. 107.

[121](#121a) *Ibid*., pp. 46, 287-89.

[122](#122a) *Ibid*., pp. 262, 304.

[123](#123a) Lal, *Khaljis*, pp. 93, 97.

[124](#124a) Actual spitting in the mouth of the non-Muslims was not
uncommon. Ganga Devi wife of Kumar Kampana (died 1374 CE) of Vijayanagar
writes as follows in her *Madhuravijayam* regarding the state of things
in the Madura region when it was under Muslim rule: "The temples in the
land have fallen into neglect, as worship in them has been stopped...
The sweet odour of the sacrificial smoke and chant of the Vedas have
deserted the villages which are now filled with the foul smell of
roasted flesh and the fierce noise of the ruffianly Turushkas... The
wicked *mlechchas* pollute the religion of the Hindus every day."

*Chaitanya-magala*, a biography of the great Vaishnava saint of medieval
India, presents the plight of the Hindus in Navadvipa on the eve of the
saint's birth in 1484 CE. The author Jayananda writes "...The king
plunders the houses of those who wear sacred threads on the shoulder and
put sacred marks on the forehead, and then binds them. He breaks the
temples and uproots tulsi plants... The bathing in Ganga is
prohibited..."

Vijaya Gupta wrote a poem in praise of Husain Shah of Bengal (1493-1519
CE) The two Qazi brothers, Hasan and Husain, are typical Islamic
characters in this poem. "The peons employed by the Qazis tore away the
sacred threads of the Brahmans and *spat saliva in their mouths*
(italics ours)." Isana Nagara describes the condition of the Hindus
under Husain Shah as follows: "The wicked *mlecchhas* urinate like dogs
on the tulsi plant and deliberately pass faeces in the Hindu temples.
They throw water from their mouths on the Hindus engaged in worship, and
harass the Hindu saints... "

This was the state of things in those parts of the country which were
ruled by Muslim monarchs ever since Qutbuddin Aibak set up his first
Islamic state in Delhi in 1206 CE. "Hindu records of what the 'law' of
Islam meant to the Hindus are few and far between. But whenever they are
available, they confirm the medieval Muslim historians." Sita Ram Goel,
*The Story of Islamic Imperialism in India*, New Delhi, 1994 ed., pp.
97-99.

*The Delhi Sultanate*, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1960, pp. 631-33.  

[125](#125a) *Hidaya*, vol. II, p. 204; Hughes, p. 269.

[126](#126a) Margoliouth, pp. 358-59.

[127](#127a) For references see Lal, *Khaljis*, p. 181.

[128](#128a) Barani, p. 340.

[129](#129a) *Ibid*., p. 430.

[130](#130a) Hajiuddabir, *Zafar-ul-Wali*; Barani, pp. 479-80. For a
detailed discussion on the Sultan's measures see Ishwari Prasad, *A
History of the Quraunah Turks in India*, pp. 67-74.

[131](#131a) Barani, pp. 468-473, 482-83, 486-87.

[132](#132a) Lal, *Twilight of the Sultanate*, pp. 114-131.

[133](#133a) W.H. Moreland, *From Akbar to Aurangzeb*, pp. 253-55.

[134](#134a) Moreland in *Journal of Indian History*, IV, pp. 78-79 and
XIV, p. 64.

[135](#135a) Abul Fazl, *Akbar Nama*, Beveridge, vol. II, 159-60.

[136](#136a) *Ain*, Jarret, vol. II, p. 73.

[137](#137a) Manucci, vol. II, p. 451.

[138](#138a) *Ibid*., vol. III, pp. 48-49.

[139](#139a) Manrique II, p. 272.

[140](#140a) *Ibid*., vol. III, pp. 290-91

[141](#141a) Mucucci, vol. III, p. 232.

[142](#142a) Bernier, p. 205.

[143](#143a) *Babur Nama*, p. 470 and n.

[144](#144a) *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*, p. 12.

[145](#145a) *Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri*, I, pp. 8-9.

[146](#146a) E.D., vol. VI, Appendix, pp. 493-512, esp. p. 493 n.

[147](#147a) In an article on Zakat in *Arab Times*, Kuwait, February
19, 1996, Ramadan 30, 1416 A.H. As the date shows the article appeared
in the holy month of Ramzan.

Also Abu Daud, vol. I, p. 576. After the Prophet's death Abu Bakr said
that he would fight those who say namaz but do not pay Zakat.

Ibn Majah, vol. I, pp. 499-500, hadis 1849; pp. 507-09, *ahadis*
1867-78.  

[148](#148a) Aghnides, *Muhammadan Theories of Finance*, pp. 207, 297,
318.

Also Tripathi, Some Aspects of Muslim Administration, p. 345; Lal,
Khaljis, pp. 185-86.  

[149](#149a) Aghinides, p. 213.

[150](#150a) Tripathi, p. 345.

[151](#151a) *Ibid*., 346; Aghnides, p. 526.

[152](#152a) Aghnides, pp. 530-33. See such a case of evasion in *Ain*.,
Blochmann, vol. I, 181.

Lal, *Khaljis*, pp. 185-86.

U.N. Day, *Government of the Sultunate*, pp. 106-07.  

[153](#153a) Such cunning was not uncommon, E.G. Makhdum-ul Mulk's
"tricks with the *Shari'at* in evading the payment of *Zakat* by
transferring his property towards the end of the year to his wife and
then getting it transferred to himself, completely shattered his
position at (Akbar's) court."

Azra Alavi, *Socio-Religious* outlook of Abul Fazl, p. 25, quoting
Badaoni, II, p. 204, trs. Lowe, II, p. 2o6.  

[154](#154a) Aghnides, p. 525.

[155](#155a) *Hedaya*, trs. Hamilton, vol. I, pp. 33-34.

[156](#156a) Afif, p. 379, also p. 375; Rizvi, *Tughlaq Kalin Bharat*,
vol. II, 1959, pp. 328-29; *Fatuhat-i-Firoz Shahi*, Aligarh, 1954, p. 5;
Barani, p. 287;

Farishtah, vol. I, p. 109; Aghnides, pp. 251-52, 253-54.  

[157](#157a) Ain., Jarret, vol. II, pp. 72-73.

[158](#158a) *Tuzuk*, vol. I, p. 7.

[159](#159a) A. Athar Ali, *The Mughal Nobility under Aurangzeb*, p.
159.

[160](#160a) Tarikhi, *Salim Shahi*. p. 8

[161](#161a) *Babur Nama*, p. 555.

[162](#162a) *Tuzuk*, vol. I, p. 47

[163](#163a) *Ibid*., pp. 167-108.

[164](#164a) *Ibid*., p. 417.

[165](#165a) Smith, *Akbar the Great Mogul*, p. 298.

[166](#166a) Farishtah, vol. I, p. 95; Kincaid and Parasanis, *A History
of the Maratha People*, vol. I, pp. 36-37.

[167](#167a) Yule, *Ser Marco Polo*, vol. II, p. 357.

[168](#168a) *Mutla-us-Sadain*, E.D. vol. IV, pp. 106-07.

[169](#169a) Farishtah, vol. I, 96; Barani, p. 223, 258.

[170](#170a) Sharafuddin Yazdi, *Zafar Nama*, vol. II, pp. 164ff;
*Mulfuzat-i-Timuri*, E.D. vol. III, p. 470; Farishatah, vol. II, P. 340;
*Rauzat-us-Safa*, vol. VI, p. 116.

[171](#171a) Lal, *Khaljis*, Appendix, pp. 347-49.

[172](#172a) Barani, p. 330; Taverier's Travels, vol. II, App. 1;
*Khazain-ul-Futuh*, Habib trs., p. 77.

[173](#173a) *Khazain*, Habib trs., pp. 105-107.

[174](#174a) Barani 398.

[175](#175a) *Ibid*., p. 294.

[176](#176a) Jagdish Singh Gehlot, *Rajputana ka Itihas*, Jodhpur, 1966,
vol. III, p. 63; *Akbar Nama*, vol. II, p. 243; Lal, *The Mughal Harem*,
pp. 25-29.

[177](#177a) *Akbar Nama*, vol. III, p. 677-68; Beni Prasad, p. 24.

[178](#178a) Khalji Khan, vol. VII, p. 883.

[179](#179a) *Tuzuk*, vol. I, pp. 284-85.

[180](#180a) *Chachnama*, Kalichbeg, pp. 154, 163.

[181](#181a) Hasan Nizami, *Taj-ul-Maasir*, E.D. vol. II, p. 235;
Minhaj, *Tabqat-i-Nasiri*, Raverty, p. 484 note.

[182](#182a) Minhaj, p. 487 note.

[183](#183a) *The Life of Muhammad:* A translation of Ibn Ishaq's *Sirat
Rasul Allah* by A. Gillaume, OUP, Karachi, 1955, Eighth Impression,
1987, p. 466; Hughes, *Dictionary of Islam*, p. 600.

[184](#184a) Amir Khusrau, *Nub Sipehr*, Wahid Mirza ed., Calcutta,
1998, Sipehr II, pp. 89, 130-131.

[185](#185a) Barani, pp. 314-15.

[186](#186a) *Masalik-ul-Absar*, E.D. vol. III, pp. 580-81.

[187](#187a) Hodivala, *Studies in Indo-Muslim History*, pp. 192-193.

[188](#188a) *Akbar Nama*, vol. II, p. 246; Du Jarric, *Akbar and the
Jesuits*, pp. 152-59, also pp. 28, 30, 70, 92.

[189](#189a) Shah Nawaz Khan, *Maasir-ut-Umara*, vol. I, p. 105. For
detailed references about the sale of slaves, see my *Muslim Slave
System in Medieval India*.

[190](#190a) Manucci, vol. II, p. 451; Manrique, vol. II, p. 272;
Bernier, p. 205. For details see Lal, *Legacy*. pp. 249-55.

[191](#191a) Ira Marvin Lapidus, *Muslim Cities in the Later Middle
Ages*, Cambridge, Mass., 1967, pp. 54ff; Lal, *Khaljis*, pp. 201-203,
207-208, 218-219.

[192](#192a) *Ain*., vol., I, pp. 93-102.

[193](#193a) *Akbar the Great Mogul*. p. 298.

[194](#194a) Manucci, vol. II, p. 340; Lal, *Mughal Harem*, pp. 123-24.

[195](#195a) R.K. Mukerjee, *The Economic History of India*, pp,
88-89-91.

[196](#196a) Ibid., p. 99

[197](#197a) Tuzuk, vol. I, pp. 12, 298, 401; *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*, p.
8.

[198](#198a) *Travels in India*, vol. I, p. 122.

[199](#199a) Smith, op. cit., pp. 298-99, quoting De Laet and Manrique
in 'The Treasure of Akbar', J.R.A.S., 1915, p. 242.

[200](#200a) *Ain*., Jarret, vol. II, p. 63.

[201](#201a) Thevenot, *Travels*, pp. 3-4; Manucci, vol. II, p. 389.

[202](#202a) Manucci, vol. II, p. 389.

[203](#203a) *Ibid*., p. 392.

[204](#204a) *Ibid*., vol. I, p. 63.

[205](#205a) *Ain*., Jarret, vol. I, p. 63.

[206](#206a) Thevenot, p. 4.

[207](#207a) *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*, p. 9

[208](#208a) Lal, *Legacy of Muslim* Rule, pp. 225-27.

[209](#209a) Mukerjee, *Economic History*, p. 73.

[210](#210a) *Short History of Aurangzib*, p. 479.

[211](#211a) Edward Thomas, *The Chronicles of the Pathan Kings of
Delhi*, p. 445, for details see pp. 435-445.

[212](#212a) Afif, p. 94, has "*shash karor wa haftad wa panj lak
tankah*". Moreland, *The Agrarian System of the Moslem India*, p. 57,
has 5 krores through mistaken reading or printing error because he
quotes the same page number 94.

[213](#213a) "Annual Income and Expenditure of Sher Shah" in his
*Studies in Medieval Indian History*, pp. 90-103.

[214](#214a) Sarkar, op. cit., pp. 476-77.

[215](#215a) S. Lanepoole, *Aurangzeb*, *Ruler of India Series*, Oxford,
MCMVIII, p. 122, detail on pp. 121-125.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books.html)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
