+++
title = "03 WISDOM IS FOOLISHNESS"

+++


> ‘Utter trash,’
>
> the Greek intellectual Celsus evaluates the Old Testament





In early AD 163, some of the most glamorous figures of second-century Rome gathered in a distinctly unglamorous-looking room. These people were not the merely rich, they were something that in those days was considered far more chic: they were the empire’s intellectual elite. Eminent philosophers, scholars and thinkers could be glimpsed among the gathering crowd.

In front of this illustrious group, however, was one rather less distinguished guest: on a large board at the front of the room, tied fast by ropes around each limb, was one doubtless rather distressed-looking pig.

Then a young man stepped forward and assumed his place beside the pig. He was only in his early thirties, yet his manner was confident, arrogant even; he had the air of a performer who knew that he would soon have the audience in the palm of his hand. This was Galen. He would quickly become the most renowned doctor in Rome and within a few decades, the most famous physician in the Roman Empire. After his death his fame would spread throughout the entire Western hemisphere. But all that was yet to come. On that day, in that room, Galen was little more than a man with a pig. And in a few moments, through a bravura demonstration of surgical skill, he was going to steal its squeal.

Gatherings of this sort were not unusual in those days. At this time, the intellectual was also fashionable. Even the emperor himself was a philosopher – and not a bad one: Marcus Aurelius’s *Meditations* are still widely read today. Surgery had become a popular spectator sport and educated citizens crowded round to watch an animal being vivisected with the same enthusiasm that they might once have listened to the melodramatic declamations of a tragic poet. Those attending such performances needed enquiring minds, long attention spans \(for demonstrations could go on for days\) and strong stomachs. A favourite trick of Galen’s was to tie an animal to his board and lay bare its still-beating heart. Audience members were then invited to squeeze the throbbing muscle – albeit with care: the pulsing wet heart was apt to jump from between inexperienced fingers. At times, for anthropomorphic drama, Galen used an ape, though its agonized expressions could be so vivid that they were off-putting. For this particular experiment he preferred pigs because, as he put it in one of his more heartfelt asides, ‘there is no advantage in having an ape in such experiments and the spectacle is hideous’.1

And ‘hideous’ was not what Galen wanted. Galen wanted awe and admiration from his audience – and practised relentlessly to get it. The whole Galenic performance – and make no mistake, dissection for him was just that – had been ceaselessly rehearsed. Everything, from the experiments he chose to the way in which he flourished his glittering steel instruments, had been practised with the same obsessiveness with which a magician might burnish their sleight of hand. Galen was a consummate showman. He was hardworking, brilliant – and crashingly vain. ‘Even as an adolescent,’ he later wrote, ‘I looked down on many of my teachers.’2 His skill as a healer would later be rivalled only by his talent as an irritant.

But then, he was stupendously talented. It would take centuries for many of Galen’s observations to be bettered. His understanding of neuroanatomy would not be superseded until the seventeenth century; his understanding of certain functions of the brain would not be surpassed until the nineteenth.3 It was Galen who proved that arteries contained blood and not, as had been thought, air or milk. It was Galen who proved that the spinal cord was an extension of the brain and that the higher it was severed, the more movement was lost.

Note that word ‘proved’. Galen knew vivisection was a good show, but it was not merely a show for him. It was utterly essential to understanding how bodies worked. As Galen wrote: ‘the anatomy of the dead teaches the position . . . of the parts. That of the living may reveal the functions.’ His writing is littered with the phrases of empiricism: ‘then you can show . . .’, he writes at one point; ‘you have seen all this publicly demonstrated’ he adds at another; ‘you observed . . .’, he writes at a third.4 He was a dedicated empiricist\* and had nothing but the deepest scorn for anyone who was not. After describing the experiment to show what arteries contain, Galen writes contemptuously that he never saw milk in them and ‘nor will anyone who chooses to make the experiment’.5

Back in Rome, the experiment went well. Galen tied some hair-like nerves in the pig’s larynx, its squeal was silenced and his reputation in the capital of the empire – and hence in history – was assured.

There was, however, one group of people who even the great Galen found himself unable to convince. This was a group who did not form their beliefs by basing them on experiments or on observations, but on faith alone – and who, worse still, were actually proud of this fact. These peculiar people were for Galen the epitome of intellectual dogmatism. When he wished to adequately convey the blockheadedness of another group of physicians, Galen used these people as an analogy to express the depths of his irritation. They were the Christians.

To show the extent of some doctors’ dogmatism he used the phrase: ‘one might more easily teach novelties to the followers of Moses and Christ’.6 Elsewhere, he disparaged physicians who offered views on the body without demonstration to back up their assertions, saying that to listen to them was ‘as if one had come into the school of Moses and Christ \[and heard\] talk of undemonstrated laws’.7 Galen had little time for Moses himself, either. ‘It is his method in his books,’ wrote Galen, disapprovingly, ‘to write without offering proofs, saying “God commanded, God spake”.’8

To a proto-empiricist like Galen, this was a cardinal error. Intellectual progress depended on the freedom to ask, question, doubt and above all, to experiment. In Galen’s world, only the ill-educated believed things without reason. To show something, one did not merely declare it to be so. One proved it, with demonstrations. To do otherwise was for Galen the method of an idiot. It was the method of a Christian.



At around the same time as Galen was torturing pigs in Rome, another Greek intellectual was performing a rather different sort of dissection: a merciless intellectual carving up of Christianity.

This was a new experience for all concerned. For the first hundred-odd years of Christianity’s existence, there are no mentions of Christianity in Roman writings. Then, around the turn of the second century, it started to appear, albeit in a scrappy and piecemeal fashion, in the writings of non-Christians. In AD 111, there is a letter from Pliny, the Roman governor. Then a few years later come some tantalizingly brief references to it in Roman histories – a quick section in the historian Tacitus’s *Annals* and another mention in a history by Suetonius. And that was it. None of these accounts were particularly detailed. Certainly none were lengthy – a few paragraphs in total. But then why would they have been longer? Christianity may have seen itself as the only truth but to most people then it was little more than an eccentric and often irritating eastern cult. Why waste time rebutting it?

Then, about fifty years later, everything changed. Suddenly, in around AD 170, a Greek intellectual named Celsus launched a monumental and vitriolic attack against the religion. It is clear that, unlike the other authors who have so far written about it, Celsus knows a lot about it. He has read Christian scripture – and not just read it: studied it in great detail. He knows about everything – from the Creation, to the Virgin Birth and the doctrine of the Resurrection.

It is equally clear that he loathes it all and in arch, sardonic, and occasionally very earthy sentences, he vigorously rebuts it. The Virgin Birth? Nonsense, he writes, a Roman soldier had got Mary pregnant.9 The Creation is ‘absurd’; the books of Moses are garbage; while the idea of the resurrection of the body is ‘revolting’ and, on a practical level, ridiculous: ‘simply the hope of worms. For what sort of human soul would have any further desire for a body that has rotted?’10

What is also clear is that Celsus is more than just disdainful. He is worried. Pervading his writing is a clear anxiety that this religion – a religion that he considers stupid, pernicious and vulgar – might spread even further and, in so doing, damage Rome.

Over 1,500 years later, the eighteenth-century English historian Edward Gibbon would draw similar conclusions, laying part of the blame for the fall of the Roman Empire firmly at the door of the Christians. The Christians’ belief in their forthcoming heavenly realm made them dangerously indifferent to the needs of their earthly one. Christians shirked military service, the clergy actively preached pusillanimity, and vast amounts of public money were spent not on protecting armies but squandered instead on the ‘useless multitudes’ of the Church’s monks and nuns.11 They showed, Gibbon felt, an ‘indolent, or even criminal, disregard for the public welfare’.12

The Catholic Church and its ‘useless multitudes’ were, in return, magnificently unimpressed by Gibbon’s arguments, and they promptly placed his *Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire* on the *Index Librorum Prohibitorum*, its list of banned books.\* Even in liberal England, the atmosphere became fiercely hostile to the historian. Gibbon later said that he had been shocked by the response to his work. ‘Had I believed,’ he wrote, ‘that the majority of English readers were so fondly attached even to the name and shadow of Christianity . . . I might, perhaps, have softened the two invidious chapters, which would create many enemies, and conciliate few friends.’13

Celsus did not soften his attack either. This first assault on Christianity was vicious, powerful and, like Gibbon, immensely readable. Yet unlike Gibbon, today almost no one has heard of Celsus and fewer still have read his work. Because Celsus’s fears came true. Christianity continued to spread, and not just among the lower classes. Within 150 years of Celsus’s attack, even the Emperor of Rome professed himself a follower of the religion. What happened next was far more serious than anything Celsus could ever have imagined. Christianity not only gained adherents, it forbade people from worshipping the old Roman and Greek gods. Eventually, it simply forbade anyone to dissent from what Celsus considered its idiotic teachings. To pick just one example from many, in AD 386, a law was passed targeting those ‘who contend about religion’ in public. Such people, this law warned, were the ‘disturbers of the peace of the Church’ and they ‘shall pay the penalty of high treason with their lives and blood’.14

Celsus paid his own price. In this hostile and repressive atmosphere his work simply disappeared. Not one single unadulterated volume of the work by Christianity’s first great critic has survived. Almost all information about him has vanished too, including any of his names except his last; what prompted him to write his attack; or where and when he wrote it. The long and inglorious Christian practice of censorship was now beginning.

However, by a quirk of literary fate, most of his words have survived. Because eighty-odd years after Celsus fulminated against the new religion, a Christian apologist named Origen mounted a fierce and lengthy counter-attack. Origen was rather more earnest than his occasionally bawdy classical adversary. Indeed, it was said that Origen had even taken the words of Matthew 19:12 \(‘For there are some eunuchs . . . which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven’s sake’\) a little too much to heart and, in a fit of heavenly self-abnegation, castrated himself.

Ironically, it was the very work that had been intended to demolish Celsus that saved him. No books of Celsus have survived the centuries untouched, true – but Origen’s attack has and it quoted Celsus at length. Scholars have therefore been able to extract Celsus’s arguments from Origen’s words, which preserved them like flies in amber. Not all of the words – perhaps only seventy per cent of the original work has been recovered. Its order has gone, its structure has been lost and the whole thing, as Gibbon put it, is a ‘mutilated representation’ of the original.15 But nevertheless we have it.

It is easy to see why it upset the ancient Christians. Even by today’s standards, Celsus’s *On the True Doctrine* feels bracingly direct. It wasn’t just Mary and Moses who were attacked. Everything was. Jesus was not, Celsus wrote, conceived through the Holy Spirit. This, he scoffs, was most unlikely because Mary wouldn’t have been beautiful enough to tempt a deity.16 Instead, he says, Jesus was conceived via the rather baser means of that Roman soldier named Panthera.\* When Mary’s pregnancy and infidelity had been discovered, she was convicted of adultery and ‘driven out by her husband’.17

If that feels shocking, Celsus had barely begun. The divine scriptures were, he said, rubbish; the story of the Garden of Eden was ‘very silly’ and Moses ‘had no idea’ about the true nature of the world.18 The ‘prophecies’ that had predicted Jesus’s coming were also a nonsense, since ‘the prophecies could be applied to thousands of others far more plausibly than to Jesus’. Judgement Day also came in for scorn. How *precisely*, asked Celsus, was this going to work? ‘It is foolish of them also to suppose that, when God applies the fire \(like a cook\!\), all the rest of mankind will be thoroughly roasted and that they alone will survive.’19 Cherished Christian beliefs were dismissed as being the sort of tales that ‘a drunken old woman would have been ashamed to sing . . . to lull a little child to sleep’.20

Celsus professes himself baffled by the extent to which Jesus’s teachings seem to contradict many of those laid down in the Old Testament. Have the rules of an allegedly omniscient god changed over time? If so, then ‘who is wrong? Moses or Jesus? Or when the Father sent Jesus had he forgotten what commands he gave to Moses?’ Or maybe God knew he was changing his mind, and Jesus was a legal messenger, sent to give notice that God wished to ‘condemn his own laws and change his mind’.21

Celsus cannot understand, either, why there was such a great gap between the creation of mankind and the sending of Jesus. If all who don’t believe are damned, why wait so long to enable them to be saved? ‘Is it only now after such a long age that God has remembered to judge the life of men? Did he not care before?’22 Moreover, why not send Jesus somewhere a bit more populous? If God ‘woke up out of his long slumber and wanted to deliver the human race from evils, why on earth did he send this spirit that you mention into one corner’ of the world – and, Celsus implies, a backwater at that?23 He also queries why an omniscient, omnipotent God would need to send someone at all. ‘What is the purpose of such a descent on the part of God?’ he asks. ‘Was it in order to learn what was going on among men? . . . Does not he know everything?’24

Jesus’s logistical abilities are, like God’s, called into question. Celsus attacks the tendency for some of his most miraculous moments to be witnessed by the fewest number of people. ‘When he was punished he was seen by all; but by only one person after he rose again; whereas the opposite ought to have happened.’25 What witnesses the Bible did offer were, for Celsus, rarely reliable. Of the Resurrection he says: ‘Who saw this? A hysterical female, as you say’ – and one other person who then went on to invent this ‘cock-and-bull story’.26 The Resurrection was therefore either ‘wishful thinking’ or perhaps ‘a hallucination’.27

The claim that Christ was divine seems to Celsus a logical impossibility: ‘How can a dead man be immortal?’28 The idea that Jesus came to save sinners also comes in for short shrift. ‘Why on earth this preference for sinners?’ he asks. ‘Why was he not sent to those without sin? What evil is it not to have sinned?’29

The arguments go on, hammering at Christianity’s central beliefs. The Creation story itself takes a particular bashing. Celsus disdains the idea of an omnipotent being needing to piece out his work like a builder, to make so much on one day, so much more on a second, third, fourth and so on – and particularly the idea that, after all this work, ‘God, exactly like a bad workman, was worn out and needed a holiday to have a rest.’30

To many intellectuals such as Celsus, the whole idea of a ‘Creation myth’ was not only implausible but redundant. During this period in Rome, a popular and influential philosophical theory offered an alternative view. This theory – an Epicurean one – stated that everything in the world was made not by any divine being but by the collision and combination of atoms. According to this school of thought, these particles were invisible to the naked eye but they had their own structure and could not be cut \(*temno*\) into any smaller particles: they were *a-temnos* – ‘the uncuttable thing’: the atom. Everything that you see or feel, these materialists argued, was made up of two things: atoms and space ‘in which these bodies are and through which they move this way and that’.31 Even living creatures were made from them: humans were, as one \(hostile\) author summarized, not made by God but were instead nothing more than ‘a haphazard union of elements’.32 The distinct species of animals were explained by a form of proto-Darwinism. As the Roman poet and atomist Lucretius wrote, nature put forth many species. Those that had useful characteristics – the fox and its cunning, say, or the dog and its intelligence – survived, thrived and reproduced. Those creatures that lacked these ‘lay at the mercy of others for prey and profit . . . until nature brought that race to destruction’.33

The intellectual consequences of this powerful theory were summarized succinctly by the Christian apologist Minucius Felix. If everything in the universe has been ‘formed by a fortuitous concourse of atoms, what God is the architect?’34 The obvious answer is: no god at all. No god magicked up mankind out of nothing, no divinity breathed life into us; and, when we die, our atoms are simply reabsorbed into this great sea of stuff. ‘No thing is ever by divine power produced from nothing,’ wrote Lucretius in his great poem, *On the Nature of Things*, and ‘no single thing returns to nothing’.35 Atomic theory thus neatly did away with the need for and possibility of Creation, Resurrection, the Last Judgement, Hell, Heaven and the Creator God himself.

As indeed was its intention. Thinkers in the classical world frequently lamented the mortal fear of divine beings. Superstition, wrote the Greek biographer Plutarch, was a terrible affliction that ‘humbles and crushes a man’.36 People saw earthquakes and floods and storms and lightning and assumed, in the absence of any other explanation that they are ‘done by divine power’.37 The consequence of this was that people tried to propitiate these temperamental gods. Writers such as Lucretius argued that atomism, correctly applied, could blast this fear into tiny pieces. If there was no creator – if lightning, earthquakes and storms were not the actions of irate deities but simply of moving particles of matter – then there was nothing to fear, nothing to propitiate and nothing to worship.38 Including no Christian God.

In the ensuing centuries, texts that contained such dangerous ideas paid a heavy price for their ‘heresy’. As has been lucidly argued by Dirk Rohmann, an academic who has produced a comprehensive and powerful account of the effect of Christianity on books, some of the greatest figures in the early Church rounded on the atomists.39 Augustine disliked atomism for precisely the same reason that atomists liked it: it weakened mankind’s terror of divine punishment and Hell. Texts by philosophical schools that championed atomic theory suffered.

The Greek philosopher Democritus had perhaps done more than anyone to popularize this theory – though not only this one. Democritus was an astonishing polymath who had written works on a breathless array of other topics. A far from complete list of his titles includes: *On History; On Nature; the Science of Medicine; On the Tangents of the Circle and the Sphere; On Irrational Lines and Solids; On the Causes of Celestial Phenomena; On the Causes of Atmospheric Phenomena; On Reflected Images* . . . The list goes on. Today Democritus’s most famous theory is his atomism. What did the other theories state? We have no idea: every single one of his works was lost in the ensuing centuries. As the eminent physicist Carlo Rovelli recently wrote, after citing an even longer list of the philosopher’s titles: ‘the loss of the works of Democritus in their entirety is the greatest intellectual tragedy to ensue from the collapse of the old classical civilisation’.40

Democritus’s atomic theory did, however, come down to us – but on a very slender thread: it was contained in one single volume of Lucretius’s great poem, that was held in one single German library, that one single intrepid book hunter would eventually find and save from extinction. That single volume would have an astonishing afterlife: it became a literary sensation; returned atomism to European thought; created what Stephen Greenblatt has called ‘an explosion of interest in pagan antiquity’, and influenced Newton, Galileo and later Einstein.41

In the Renaissance, Lucretius and his atomic theories were revolutionary. In Celsus’s time they were utterly unremarkable. It wasn’t just the fact that Christians were ignorant about philosophical theories that annoyed Celsus; it was that Christians actually revelled in their ignorance. Celsus accuses them of actively targeting idiocy in their recruitment. ‘Their injunctions are like this,’ he wrote: ‘“Let no one educated, no one wise, no one sensible draw near. For these abilities are thought by us to be evils.”’

He went on: Christians ‘are able to convince only the foolish, dishonourable and stupid, and only slaves, women and little children’.42 They made overtures to children, cobblers, laundry-workers and yokels, then dripped honeyed intellectual poison into uneducated ears, claiming ‘that they alone . . . know the right way to live, and if the children would believe them, they would become happy’.43 Christianity’s lack of intellectual rigour worried Celsus for the same reasons that it had bothered Galen. Christians, Celsus wrote, ‘do not want to give or to receive a reason for what they believe, and use such expressions as “Do not ask questions; just believe”, and “Thy faith will save thee”.’44 To men as educated as Celsus and Galen this was unfathomable: in Greek philosophy, faith was the lowest form of cognition.

Celsus wasn’t merely annoyed at the lack of education among these people. What was far worse was that they actually celebrated ignorance. They declare, he wrote, that ‘Wisdom in this life is evil, but foolishness is good’ – an almost precise quotation from Corinthians. Celsus verges on hyperbole, but it is true that in this period Christians gained a reputation for being uneducated to the point of idiotic; even Origen, Celsus’s great adversary, admitted that ‘the stupidity of some Christians is heavier than the sand of the sea’.45 This slur \(and it almost certainly was a slur – Christians were no more likely, it is now thought, to be poorly educated than any other religious group\) would make conversion socially awkward for Rome’s upper classes for centuries to come. An educated man on the brink of becoming Christian would have to ask himself not only whether he was able to make the leap of faith but whether he was able to make the necessary social leap as well. Such a man would wonder to himself, as Augustine succinctly put it, ‘Shall I become what . . . my concierge, is and not a Plato, not a Pythagoras?’46

There is more than a whiff of actual as well as intellectual snobbery in Celsus’s criticisms – and more than a dash of misogyny: Christianity is not something that educated men in Rome do: it is the habit of women and vulgar foreigners in foreign places. However, there was more to it than that. Lack of education, Celsus argued, made listeners vulnerable to dogma. If Christians had read a little more and believed a little less, they might be less likely to think themselves unique. The lightest knowledge of Latin literature, for example, would have brought the interested reader into contact with Ovid’s *Metamorphoses*. This epic but tongue-in-cheek poem opened with a version of the Creation myth that was so similar to the biblical one that it could hardly fail to make an interested reader question the supposed unique truth of Genesis.

Even the most fervent Christian must notice the similarities between the two. Where the biblical Creation begins with an earth that is ‘without form’, Ovid’s poem begins with a ‘rough, unordered mass of things’. In Genesis, the creator God then ‘created the heaven and the earth’ and ordered ‘the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear’. In Ovid’s version, a god appears and ‘rent asunder land from sky, and sea from land’ before instructing the seas to form and the ‘plains to stretch out’.

The God of Genesis ordered that ‘the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven’, while Ovid’s deity \(‘whichever of the gods it was,’ he adds, somewhat vaguely\) ensures that ‘the sea fell to the shining fishes for their home, earth received the beasts and the mobile air the birds’. Both creation stories culminate in the creation of man, who in Ovid is ‘moulded into the form of the all-controlling gods’; while in Genesis, ‘God created man in his own image.’

In both, things then go wrong as mankind falls into wicked ways. The Ovidian god, at once grand and a trifle camp, looks down upon the world he has created, shakes his head in despair and groans. ‘I must,’ he declares, not without some melodrama, ‘destroy the race of men.’47 The God of Genesis looks down at the world and its wickedness and says: ‘I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth.’48 In both accounts, the rainwaters fall, and the oceans rise across the lands. In both, only two humans, a man and a woman, survive.

The idea of ‘the Flood’ was, to Celsus, ‘a debased’ version of this classical flood, a ‘myth’ for Christians to recount to small children.49 To Christians it was the truth. Even in nineteenth-century England, the Church was still defending it as such. At this time, the story’s authority was less in danger of erosion from scornful philosophers than from the new science of geology. The sheer age of the earth was beginning to make any belief in a Creation difficult – particularly in a Creation that had happened, as one Christian theologian infamously stated, on 23 October 4004 BC. Many pious Victorian academics fought back against this new and threatening science, including, somewhat bizarrely, some geologists. In his inaugural address, William Buckland, the first professor of geology at Oxford University, delivered a paper entitled ‘*Vindiciae Geologicae*, or, the Connexion of Geology with Religion explained’, in which he announced that a recent ‘deluge’ is ‘most satisfactorily confirmed by every thing that has yet been brought to light by Geological investigations’ and that ‘the Mosaic account is in perfect harmony with the discoveries of modern science’.50

The Christian belief that their religion was unique – and uniquely correct – frequently grated on others. An educated critic of Christianity could point not only to other flood stories but to numerous characters who had made similar claims to those made by Jesus and his followers. The empire was not lacking, Celsus observed, in charismatic preachers who claimed divinity, espoused poverty, or announced that they were going to die for the sake of mankind. There are ‘others who go about begging \[and\] say that they are sons of God who have come from above’.51 Nor, Celsus pointed out, was Jesus the only one to claim resurrection. Did the Christians believe that other tales of risings from the dead are ‘the legends which they appear to be, and yet that the ending of your tragedy is to be regarded as noble and convincing’?52

The Greek rhetorician Lucian, who described the Christians as those ‘poor wretches’, wrote a satirical account of one such man, a charlatan \(as Lucian saw him\) named Peregrinus who lived in Greece. Desperate for fame, this pseudo-philosopher grew his hair long and travelled about the empire preaching platitudes. He lived off charity, gathered a reputation among the credulous, and eventually committed suicide by jumping into a fire ‘to benefit mankind by showing them the way in which one should despise death’.53

Lucian, watching, learnt not to despise death but he did learn to despise the ‘villainous reek’ of an elderly man burning to death.54 Before Peregrinus had died, he had hesitated, pausing on the edge of the flames, speechifying. As he havered, some of the assembled crowd begged him to save himself while others – the ‘more manly part’, as Lucian approvingly describes them, bellowed, ‘Get on with it.’55 You can imagine, says Lucian, ‘how I laughed’.56

After Peregrinus had been ‘carbonified’ \(as our unsympathetic narrator puts it\) his stock only rose among his followers.57 Before his end, Peregrinus had sent letters to all the great cities of the empire, bearing witness to his great life and encouraging and instructing his followers. He even ‘appointed a number of ambassadors for this purpose from among his comrades, styling them “messengers”’ – the Greek word is *angelos*, the same word translated in Christianity as ‘angel’ – ‘from the dead’.58 Rumours that Peregrinus has indeed risen from the dead begin to spread: one disciple declares that ‘he had beheld him in white raiment a little while ago, and had just now left him walking about . . . wearing a garland of wild olive’.59

The Church was profoundly unamused by such irreverence. As one tenth-century Byzantine text explained, the nickname for Lucian was ‘the Blasphemer’ because ‘in his dialogues he went so far as to ridicule religious discourse’.60 In the sixteenth century, the Inquisition also added Lucian to its list of banned books. Christianity found its own grimly humourless punchlines for such men. As the same Byzantine chronicle informed its readers, ‘the story goes that \[Lucian\] was killed by dogs, because of his rabid attacks on the truth, for in his *Life of Peregrinus* he inveighs against Christianity, and \(accursed man\!\) blasphemes against Christ himself. For that reason he paid the penalty befitting his rabidity in this world, and in the life to come he will share the eternal fire with Satan’.61 An invigorating lesson for all satirists.

Celsus, however, implied that if people were better educated they would be more resistant to such hucksters as Peregrinus – or indeed to Jesus, who Celsus considered little more than a ‘sorcerer’.62 The ‘miracles’ that Jesus performed were, he felt, no better than the sort of thing that was constantly being peddled by tricksters to the gullible across the Roman Empire. In a world in which medical provision was rare, many laid claim to magical powers. Travel in the East and you would come across any number of men who, ‘for a few obols make known their sacred lore in the middle of the market-place and drive daemons out of men and blow away diseases’, and display ‘dining-tables and cakes and dishes which are non-existent’.63 Even Jesus himself, observes Celsus, admits the presence of such people when he talks about men who can perform similar wonders to his own. Modern scholarship supports Celsus’s accusations: ancient papyri tell of sorcerers who had the power to achieve such biblical-sounding feats as stilling storms and miraculously providing food.64

Celsus touches on a sore point here. Early Christianity would have to spend a considerable amount of time and effort policing the boundaries between sanctity and sorcery. A large amount of ink was spilled on the subject of Simon Magus \(the Magician\). A quick summary of Simon’s life makes it clear why he was so threatening: Simon performed various miracles, gathered a following of people who thought he was a god – including a former prostitute – and one of Simon’s disciples ‘persuaded those who adhered to him that they should never die’.65 His followers even honoured him with a statue inscribed with the words ‘To Simon, the Holy God’ – in Latin, *Simoni Deo Sancto*. Interestingly, it is not Simon’s supernatural abilities that are denied by Christian accounts – the texts admit he can perform amazing feats – merely his divine right to do so. The criticism seems to be not one of religious fakery but of religious fuel: Simon gains his power not from God but ‘by virtue of the art of the devils operating in him’.66

Christians debunked pretenders. The ancient world debunked everyone else. Stories of witty atheists were treasured, told and retold. When one man asked a Greek philosopher to go with him to a shrine to pray, the friend replied that he must think the god is very deaf if he couldn’t hear them from where they were.67

Some Romans had so little patience for Roman religious rites that they discarded them entirely. One moonlit night in the third century BC, a Roman consul called Publius Claudius Pulcher decided to launch a surprise attack against an enemy fleet. Before he moved, he took the usual auspices required before military action. In accordance with these rites, the sacred chickens were released from their cage. They refused to eat – a terrible omen and a clear sign to all that the gods did not favour this attempt and that it should be abandoned. It was not clear to Publius Claudius Pulcher. Throwing the chickens into the sea he scoffed: ‘Let them drink, since they don’t wish to eat,’ and sailed into what would be a disastrous battle.68

There was a strong strain of scepticism in Greek and Roman thought. As Pliny the Elder put it: ‘I deem it a mark of human stupidity to seek to discover the shape and form of God. Whoever God is – provided there is a God – . . . he consists wholly of sense, sight and hearing, wholly of soul, wholly of mind, wholly of himself.’69 Pliny suggested that what divinity there was, was to be found in humanity itself: ‘God,’ he wrote, ‘is one mortal helping another.’70 Rome was not an empire of atheists – emperors were even deified after their death, and their ‘genius’ \(divine spirit\) then worshipped. Nevertheless, even the emperors themselves didn’t always take this too seriously. The emperor Vespasian is said to have announced the severity of his final illness by declaring: ‘Gah. I think I’m turning into a god.’71

But Romans were not all cynics. ‘We too are a religious people,’ one nettled official tartly told some pious Christians.72 It was a commonly held belief that Rome’s great success depended on the goodwill of the gods. As a character in a Roman history observed: ‘All went well so long as we obeyed the gods, and ill when we spurned them.’73 This state of divine benevolence – the *pax deorum* or ‘peace of the gods’ – was not manna that fell from heaven on the divinely deserving Romans. They weren’t automatically gifted with the gods’ favour and they were not automatically assured of this peace. Instead *pax* in that phrase was like the *pax* in *pax Romana*: less a state of eternal peace than the absence of war that had been negotiated through effort and could be lost by neglect. The real punchline of the Claudius Pulcher tale, retold by Cicero, is not the gag about chickens but what came next: after losing the battle, Claudius Pulcher was tried and died soon after.74

Religious they may have been; dogmatic and unbending they were not. Like the Roman Empire, the Roman pantheon could happily expand. Rome was not a paragon of religious pluralism. It had no scruples about banning or suppressing practices – whether Druidic or Bacchic or Manichaean – that seemed for any reason pernicious. But equally it could admit foreign gods – though as with so much else in Rome a bureaucratic process had first to be observed. To ignore this process and worship a foreign god that had not been accepted was a socially unacceptable act; it risked upsetting the contract with the incumbent gods and spreading disaster and pestilence. This was one of the problems with Christianity and its growth was, for some, nerve-racking: what effect would this new religion have on the *pax deorum*? ‘I cannot think there is anyone so audacious,’ wrote one, neatly summarizing this attitude, that they would ‘endeavour to destroy or weaken so ancient, useful and salutary a religion.’75 The old religions had served Rome well. Why abandon them now?

Despite his contempt for Christians, Celsus seems unsurprised that yet another religion had appeared in this world full of gods: religious diversity is precisely what one expects. Celsus shows an almost anthropological interest in the different sorts of worship that flourished across the Roman Empire. ‘The difference between each nation is very considerable,’ he writes. Some Egyptians ‘worship only Zeus and Dionysus. The Arabians worship only Ourania and Dionysus. The Egyptians all worship Osiris and Isis.’76 So what? is the implication. There is a strong strain of relativism in Celsus’s work. At another point he states: ‘even if something seems to you to be evil, it is not yet clear whether it really is evil; for you do not know what is expedient either for you or for someone else or for the universe’.77 It was clear to Celsus that a person’s religious affiliation was based less on any rational analysis of competing religious ideologies than on the geography of their birth. Every nation always, he points out, thinks its way of doing things is ‘by far the best’.78 He quotes Herodotus approvingly: ‘if anyone were to propose to call men and to tell them to choose which of all laws were the best, on consideration each would choose his own’. But that didn’t matter. As Herodotus himself said, ‘it is not likely that anyone but a lunatic would make a mock of these things’.79

Christian observers would look on the tolerance of their non-Christian neighbours with astonishment. Augustine later marvelled at the fact that the pagans were able to worship many different gods without discord while the Christians, who worshipped just the one, splintered into countless warring factions. Indeed, many pagans like Celsus seemed to actively praise plurality. To the Christians, this was anathema. Christ was the way, the truth and the light and everything else was not merely wrong but plunged the believer into a demonic darkness. To allow someone to continue in an alternative form of worship or a heretical form of Christianity was not to allow religious freedom; it was to allow Satan to thrive.

Augustine, despite being impressed by the harmony of his neighbours, was not willing to extend such tolerance himself. It was, he concluded, the duty of a good Christian to convert heretics – by force, if necessary. This was a theme to which he returned again and again.80 Far better a little compulsion in this life, than eternal damnation in the next. People could not always be trusted to know what was good for them. The good and caring Christian would therefore remove the means of sinning from the uncertain reach of the sinner. ‘For in most cases we serve others best by not giving, and would injure them by giving, what they desire,’ he explained. Do not put a sword in a child’s hand. ‘For the more we love any one, the more are we bound to avoid entrusting to him things which are the occasion of very dangerous faults.’81

A few decades after Celsus wrote *On the True Doctrine*, an even more monumental assault was made on the Christian faith by another Greek philosopher. It shocked the Christian community with its depth, breadth and brilliance. Yet today this philosopher’s name, like Celsus’s, has been all but forgotten. He was, we know, called Porphyry. We know that his attack was immense – at least fifteen books; that it was highly erudite and that it was, to the Christians, deeply upsetting. We know that it targeted Old Testament history, and poured scorn on the prophets and on the blind faith of Christians. We know some parts in more detail: that Porphyry felt that most people thought the story of Jonah and the Whale to be nonsense, as it ‘is utterly improbable and incredible, that a man swallowed with his clothes on should have existed in the inside of a fish’.82 It is also clear that Porphyry, like Celsus and Galen, accused Christianity of being an ‘unreasoning faith’.83 We know that Porphyry too found himself baffled as to why God had waited so long to save mankind: ‘If Christ declares Himself to be the Way of salvation, the Grace and the Truth . . . what has become of men who lived in the many centuries before Christ came?’ he asked. ‘What, then, has become of such an innumerable multitude of souls, who were in no wise blameworthy’ who were born earlier? Why ‘did He who is called the Saviour withhold Himself for so many centuries of the world?’84

This much, then, is known – but not much more. And the reason we don’t know is that Porphyry’s works were deemed so powerful and frightening that they were completely eradicated. Constantine, the first Christian emperor – now famed for his edict of ‘toleration’ – started the attack. In a letter written in the early part of the fourth century, he heaped odium on the long-dead philosopher, describing him as ‘that enemy of piety’; an author of ‘licentious treatises against religion’. Constantine announced that he was henceforth ‘branded with infamy’, overwhelmed ‘with deserved reproach’ and that his ‘impious writings’ had been destroyed. In the same letter Constantine also consigned the works of the heretic, Arius, to the flames and announced that anyone who was found hiding one of Arius’s books would be put to death. Constantine signed off this aggressive epistle with the instruction: ‘May God preserve you\!’85 Presumably unless you were an admirer of Porphyry or Arius. A century or so later, in AD 448, Porphyry’s books were burned again, this time on the orders of the Christian emperors Theodosius II and Valentinian III.86

This, the new generation of Christian preachers would argue, was loving, not repressive. To force someone to change what they did, or what they believed, was to heal, not harm them. In one of his many reassuring metaphors, he explained that to restrain a sinner from being able to sin was not a cruelty but a kindness. ‘If any one saw his enemy running headlong to destroy himself when he had become delirious through a dangerous fever, would he not in that case be much more truly rendering evil for evil if he permitted him to run on thus, than if he took measures to have him seized and bound?’87 He went on: ‘Not every one who is indulgent is a friend; nor is every one an enemy who smites. Better are the wounds of a friend than the proffered kisses of an enemy.’88

A new era was opening. To worship another god was no longer to be merely different. It was to err. And those who erred were to be seized, struck and – if necessary – wounded. Above all, they were to be stopped.

‘There is nothing wrong,’ Celsus had written, ‘if each nation observes its own laws of worship.’89 To many of the most powerful thinkers within the Christian Church, nothing could be more abhorrent.




