+++
title = "09 THE RECKLESS ONES"

+++


> ‘For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God,’
>
> 1 Corinthians 3:19





They called them the ‘*parabalani*’ – ‘the reckless ones’.1 At first, the name had been a compliment. Under the scorching heat of the Alexandrian sun, in this city at the crossroads of busy trading routes, someone needed to carry away the bodies of the sick and the weak – not to mention the merely unsavoury poor – and do so swiftly, to protect everyone else.

This was a city that knew how devastating a plague could be. A hundred and fifty years before, a new disease had arrived in Alexandria, then fanned out into the rest of the empire, killing millions. Then, a hundred or so years later, the Plague of Justinian struck. Its symptoms were even more abhorrent: buboes appeared, followed variously by coma, delirium, agonizing pain, ‘black pustules about as large as a lentil’, the vomiting of blood and, finally, death.2 The plague was more devastating than the last: 25 million people died.

To deal with the dead and the dying in an ancient city was therefore an essential job and, like most essential jobs, a despised one. In fifth-century Alexandria, the men who stepped forward to do this work were the *parabalani*, the ‘reckless’ young Christians brave enough to act as stretcher bearers in this medicine-free world.3 These men were in many ways at the bottom of society: they were not wealthy, or educated, or even literate, but they had muscle, they had faith – and they had strength in numbers.4 By the beginning of the fifth century there were an estimated 800 members of the *parabalani* in Alexandria alone: an army – and the word is used advisedly – of young men, devoted to the service of God.5

Or more precisely, to the service of His representatives on earth: the bishops. As the scholar Peter Brown has pointed out, in cities across the empire at this time, powerful clerics were beginning to marshal huge followings of young men; strong believers, in both senses of the word. In Rome, those who flocked behind the bishop were the ‘*fossores*’, the diggers who mined out the city’s famous catacombs. In Antioch, it was the pallbearers who surrounded their patriarch. These men had all initially been gathered to do good Christian deeds – but they could and would be deployed to do terrible ones. The control that many bishops had over their flocks was firm to the point of unyielding. They were the gatekeepers of heaven and could shut those gates in the faces of those who displeased them. In the fourth and fifth centuries, bishops controlled de facto militaries of the faithful – and they were not afraid to use them. In Rome, the diggers upset an episcopal election with the use of ‘alarming’ violence. As one bishop somewhat smugly observed, bishops were ‘the calmers of disturbances, and anxious for peace, except when even they are moved by some offence against God, or insult to the Church’, as Brown has observed.6

*Except*. Brown has rightly drawn attention to that word. Peace could only be had at the Church’s say-so. The Lamb of God was now flanked by lions. The diggers in Rome were fearsome enough, but it was the *parabalani* in Alexandria who became infamous. Cross the bishop of Alexandria and, as locals knew to their cost, he might send some of the 800 *parabalani* to visit you. Argument incarnate, they massed outside the town hall, the theatre and the law courts. Their mere presence was enough to bully opponents into submission. They have been described as a ‘terrorist charity’ – a strange oxymoron, but a good one. These men did, at times, do good deeds but they also sowed fear. ‘Terror’ is the word used in Roman legal documents about them.7

One spring day in AD 415, the *parabalani* would go much further than merely threatening violence. On that day, they committed one of the most infamous murders in early Christianity.8



Hypatia of Alexandria was born in the same city as the *parabalani* and yet a world away from them. While they spent their days toiling among the filthy and the dying, this aristocratic intellectual spent her days working with abstract mathematical theories and astrolabes. Hypatia was not only a philosopher; she was also a brilliant astronomer and the greatest mathematician of her generation. The Victorians, who became much taken with her, granted her other graces posthumously. One famous painting shows her draped naked against an altar, her nubile body shielded by little more than her tumbling tawny locks. A novel about her by the Reverend Charles Kingsley, author of the children’s novel *The Water Babies*, is rich in such breathless phrases as ‘the severest and grandest type of old Greek beauty’ and in musings on her ‘curved lips’ and the ‘glorious grace and beauty of every line’.9

This, alas, is romantic bunk. Hypatia was, without doubt, a beauty – but far from draping herself and her tumbling curls over altars, she always dressed in the austere and concealing uniform of a philosopher’s cloak. She was devoted to the life of the mind rather than of the flesh and remained a virgin. Any man bold enough to attempt to sway her from this resolve met with a bracing response. It is said that one of her students fell in love with her and, ‘not being able to control his passion’, confessed his feelings. Hypatia responded briskly. ‘She brought some of her sanitary towels and threw them before him, and said, “You love this, young man, and there is nothing beautiful about it.”’10 The relationship, understandably, went no further.

By the early fifth century AD, Hypatia had become something of a local celebrity. Alexandria was a city that had, for hundreds of years, been in thrall to its intellectuals. Almost as soon as there had been a city in that spot, there had been a library; and almost as soon as there was a library, stories about the library, and particularly about its foundation, had started to accumulate. According to one story, Ptolemy II, the ruler of Alexandria, had written a letter to every king and ruler on earth begging them to send his library works by all kinds of authors, ‘poets and prose-writers, rhetoricians and sophists, doctors and soothsayers, historians and all the others too’.11 Not just in Greek, either, but in every language. Men, too, were sought and experts enlisted from every nation to act as translators. ‘Each group of scholars was allocated the appropriate texts, and so a Greek translation of every text was made.’12

Nothing was to be left out of this ambitious new collection – not even religion. Indeed, particularly not religion. It had been Alexander’s firmly held belief that to govern a people you needed to understand them – and who could hope to understand a people unless you knew what they worshipped? Understand *that* and you understood their souls; understand a nation’s soul and you could control it. Vast efforts were made with religious texts: 2 million lines of verse, said to be by the ancient Iranian prophet, Zoroaster, were translated. The very first translation of the Hebrew Bible into Greek was, according to legend, made here in the third century BC.

This was intellectual conquest as much as academic enquiry and it could, at times, feel invasive. If you had docked in the city’s handsome port in the third century BC then your ship would have been boarded by the officials of King Ptolemy III Euergetes. These officers would then have conducted a brisk search of your ship, hunting not for contraband but for something that was, here, considered far more valuable: books. If any were found, they would be confiscated, taken off and copied. The copies – the librarians, well aware of the fallibility of scribes, preferred originals – would then be returned to the ships while the originals were labelled ‘from the ships’ and taken to the Great Library itself.

The Athenian government was written to and their official copies of the great tragedies of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides – believed to be the most accurate in existence – were requested. The Athenians, naturally, refused. Ptolemy III pressed them. He would pay a vast deposit, he said, fifteen talents, as proof of his good faith. Finally, the Athenians were persuaded and they sent their tragedies. The faithless Ptolemy made magnificent copies, on the finest writing materials – then sent these back across the sea. Athens got the money and the handsome new copies, but Alexandria had the best.

It was a library of awesome ambition – and size. The numbers of scrolls that it held is contested, but estimates of the collection give an idea of its extent – and they are astonishing. One puts the library’s holdings at an implausibly high 700,000 volumes by the first century BC. Nonsense, probably, but there were perhaps as many as 500,000 scrolls by the third century BC. Certainly there were so many that, for the first time, a system of categorizing the scrolls had to be invented to keep track of them all.

This was easily the greatest library that the world had ever seen – or that it would see for centuries. The famous later monastic libraries were paltry by comparison: the earlier ones usually held around only twenty books, and even the major libraries of the twelfth century contained no more than 500 or so – and naturally such collections were heavily weighted towards Christian texts. It took well over a millennium for any other collection to come close to what Alexandria had achieved in terms of volume, and longer still before any other library demonstrated such intellectual omnivorousness. By 1338, the library of the Sorbonne in Paris, the richest in the Christian world, offered a theoretical 1,728 works for loan – 300 of which, as its registers noted, it had already managed to lose.13

It wasn’t only books that Alexandria collected, but intellectuals. Scholars here were treated with reverence and to some marvellous facilities. Together, the Great Library and the Musaeum provided them with a charming existence: there were covered walkways to stroll through, gardens in which to rest and a hall to lecture in. Almost every need was catered for: academics were also given a stipend from public funds; board and lodging, and meals in an elegant, domed-roofed dining hall. There may also have been, somewhat incongruously, a zoo.

The intention of all this was to lure the empire’s intellectuals here – and it worked. Some of the most brilliant minds of the classical period flocked there to write, read, study, eat those free meals and, of course, to bicker. ‘In populous Egypt,’ one vinegary observer wrote, ‘many cloistered bookworms are fed, arguing endlessly in the chicken-coop of the Muses.’14 The brilliant mathematician and physicist Archimedes, who famously stepped in a bath, noticed its water move and announced ‘Eureka\!’, had studied here.15 So too did Euclid, whose mathematical textbook remained the basis of maths education until the twentieth century. Eratosthenes, who worked out the circumference of the earth to an accuracy of 80 kilometres using little more than a stick and a camel, was also here, as too were the poet Callimachus; Aristarchus of Samos, who proposed the first heliocentric model of the solar system; the astronomer Hipparchus; Galen . . . The catalogue of Alexandria’s intellectuals is as remarkable as that of its books.

Hypatia’s own father, Theon, had studied here. He was a mathematician of astonishing perspicacity, not to mention longevity: the commentaries he produced on Euclid were so authoritative that they form the foundation of modern editions of his texts. Read Euclid today, and you are reading, in part, the work of Hypatia’s father.



Nothing lasts forever. As she stepped out on her daily ride through Alexandria in her chariot, Hypatia would have passed through a very different city to the one enjoyed by her forebears. As the fourth century opened, even its horizon had changed: the great temple of Serapis that had once dominated the city’s skyline had now gone; passing through the city she would have seen other desecrations – smaller but still shocking. After razing Serapis the Christians had gone on a victorious rampage through the city and its 2,500 shrines, temples and religious sites.16 Busts of Serapis that had \(much like the Virgin Mary in Italian villages today\) previously stood in streets, wall niches and above doorways had been removed – ‘cleansed’. The Christians had ‘so cut and filed \[them\] away that not even a trace or mention of \[Serapis\] or any other demon remained anywhere. In their place everyone painted the sign of the Lord’s cross on doorposts, entrances, walls and columns.’17 Later, with bolder finality, crosses were carved in.

The city’s intellectual life had suffered. The final remnants of the Great Library had gone, vanishing along with the temple. Many of Alexandria’s intellectuals had gone too, fleeing to Rome, or elsewhere in Italy, or anywhere they could to get away from this frightening city.18

Nevertheless, though much had gone much remained. At the beginning of the fifth century, Alexandria still exerted a pull on the intellectuals of empire and Hypatia moved in a gilded circle. It was said that anyone who wanted to study philosophy travelled vast distances to get to her, coming from as far afield as Rome, Libya and Syria. Some of Alexandria’s leading citizens petitioned her for advice which, it seems, she doled out with alarming frankness.19 Whenever anyone new and notable visited Alexandria, one of the first things they did was to pay Hypatia a visit. Orestes, the aristocratic governor of Alexandria and one of the most important men in the city, had become a confidant, friend and a powerful ally – and, as it would turn out, a dangerous one.20

In a world that was becoming increasingly riven along sectarian lines, Hypatia remained determinedly non-partisan in her behaviour, treating non-Christian and Christian with meticulous equality. Orestes himself was a Christian. People of all faiths crowded in to hear her lecture and flocked to her house to hear her speak. Devotees gathered round her at all times. Those who were taught by her grew almost queasily rhapsodic in their praise: they were ‘fortune’s darlings’ to be able to sit at the feet of this ‘luminous child of reason’.21 Many of Hypatia’s pupils had other, more concrete reasons to consider themselves blessed: they were some of the wealthiest and best-educated young men in the empire. When away from Alexandria, they wrote each other fondly affectionate letters from their country villas, extolling the virtues of simple rural life with the enthusiasm of those who have never had to do any simple rural work. When one student wished to show his affection for another, he bought him a horse.22 Now in her late middle age, Hypatia had established herself as one of the most respected figures in Alexandria. The entire city, as one later admirer gushed, ‘naturally loved her and held her in exceptional esteem’.23

It was not true. In the spring of the year 415, relations between Christians and non-Christians in Alexandria were tense. The sky above the city might have been darkened by only a few scudding white clouds but in its streets the atmosphere – always quarrelsome – was more precarious than ever. To make matters worse the city had a new bishop, Cyril. After the zealot Theophilus, many Alexandrians must have hoped that their next cleric would be more conciliatory. He was not. But then his breeding hinted at as much – he was, after all, Theophilus’s nephew. And, true to family form, he was a thug. Cyril had not been in power long before he showed himself to be, if anything, more vicious than his uncle. Even Christians had reservations about this brutal and ambitious man: he was, as one council of bishops put it, ‘a monster, born and educated for the destruction of the Church’. And within a few years of his coming to power his violence had begun.

The Jews were among the first to suffer. The population of Jews in Alexandria was large and, according to the legend, had itself benefited from the city’s bibliomania. Ptolemy II – or so the charming story goes – had been desperate to find scholars who could translate the mysterious but highly respected Jewish writings for him so that they could be added to the library’s collection. However, no Greek could fathom the script in which they were written. So Ptolemy had asked the Jewish leaders for help. They had agreed to send him some elders as translators – but there were terms. In return, they wanted the 100,000 or so Jewish prisoners of war held in the city to be set free. It was a vast number. Ptolemy thought for a moment, then agreed. He got his translators – seventy or so of them; the Jewish prisoners gained their liberty; and the Great Library got its translation – which became known, in the translators’ honour, as the Septuagint.24

There was little interest in Hebrew writings by now. According to the hectoring sermons being preached by a new generation of intolerant Christian clerics, the Jews were not a people with an ancient wisdom to be learnt from: they were instead, like the pagans, the hated enemies of the Church. A few years earlier, the preacher John Chrysostom had said that: ‘the synagogue is not only a brothel . . . it also is a den of robbers and a lodging for wild beasts . . . a dwelling of demons . . . a place of idolatry’.25 St Chrysostom’s writings would later be reprinted with enthusiasm in Nazi Germany.

At that moment in Alexandria, the smouldering Christian dislike of Jews burst into outright violence. A Christian attempt to regulate the dancing and theatrical displays – apparently much enjoyed by the city’s Jewish population – started a complicated chain of reprisals that climaxed in a Jewish attack on some Christians. Some were killed in the attack – and Cyril was provided with the pretext he needed. Mustering together a mob of the *parabalani*, as well as some of the merely brutal and enthusiastic, Cyril set out. He ‘marched in wrath to the synagogues of the Jews and took possession of them, and purified them and converted them into churches’. ‘Purified’ in such texts is often a euphemism for stole, self-righteously. The Christians then completed their work by purifying the Jewish ‘assassins’ of their possessions: stripping them of all they owned, including their homes, they turned them out of the city into the desert.26

Orestes looked on in horror. He was an educated man, and one who – much like his good friend Hypatia – refused to live his own life along sectarian lines, despite the increasingly hysterical atmosphere of the time. Ostensibly the most powerful man in the city, he was nonetheless unable to stop this uprising: a mere governor’s retinue was no match for 800 marauding, muscular *parabalani*. Moreover, Orestes knew well how determined Cyril could be: the bishop had previously tried to set his spies on Orestes, ordering them to follow the governor as he went about his business around the city – and presumably as he called on Hypatia, too. Surrounded by informers, powerless to retaliate, Orestes took the only action he could in the face of Cyril’s aggression: he wrote to the emperor to complain about it.

Cyril, in turn, went to see Orestes. If Orestes had expected an apology from this belligerent man, he was to be disappointed. What he received instead was piety. When he approached the governor, Cyril held out a copy of the Gospels towards him, ‘believing’ – or so the chronicle says – ‘that respect for religion would induce him to lay aside his resentment’. It was an infuriatingly ostentatious act and, unsurprisingly, did little to end the quarrel.27

The atmosphere in the city darkened; the numbers of Cyril’s militia swelled. Around five hundred monks descended from their shacks and caves in the nearby hills, determined to fight for their bishop. Unwashed, uneducated, unbending in their faith, they were, as even the Christian writer Socrates admits, men of ‘a very fiery disposition’.28 One day, as Orestes rode in his chariot through the city, these monks in their dark and foul-smelling robes suddenly surrounded him. They began to insult him, accusing him of being a ‘pagan idolater’.29 He protested that, on the contrary, he was a baptized Christian. It made no difference. One of the monks threw a rock and it struck Orestes on his head. The wound started pouring with blood. Most of his guards, seeing what they were up against, scattered, plunging into the crowd to get away from the monks.

Orestes was left almost entirely alone, his robes covered in blood. The monks drew closer, forming a black crowd around him. He was outnumbered, and almost certainly afraid; yet he refused to give in. Helped by some locals who rushed to his aid, he got away. Once again, intimidation only seems to have made him more determined, as his next act was to capture then torture to death the monk who had hurled the rock. Everything about this episode would have been abhorrent to a cultured citizen like Orestes: cities should not be dictated to by the whims of bishops or terrorized by lynch mobs. They should be ruled by the law of the government that was administered by imperial officials. Anything less was the behaviour of savages. Many of the city’s aristocrats, perhaps repelled by the Christians’ violence, supported him in his defiant stance towards Cyril. So too, crucially, did Hypatia.30

And then the whispering began. It was Hypatia’s fault, said the Christians, that the governor was being so stubborn. It was she, they murmured, who was standing between Orestes and Cyril, preventing them from reconciling. Fanned by the *parabalani*, the rumours started to catch, and flame. Hypatia was not merely a difficult woman, they said. Hadn’t everyone seen her use symbols in her work, and astrolabes? The illiterate *parabalani* \(‘bestial men – truly abominable’ as one philosopher would later call them\) knew what these instruments were. They were not the tools of mathematics and philosophy, no: they were the work of the Devil. Hypatia was not a philosopher: she was a creature of Hell. It was she who was turning the entire city against God with her trickery and her spells. She was ‘atheizing’ Alexandria. Naturally, she seemed appealing enough – but that was how the Evil One worked. Hypatia, they said, had ‘beguiled many people through satanic wiles’.31 Worst of all, she had even beguiled Orestes. Hadn’t he stopped going to church? It was clear: she had ‘beguiled him through her magic’.32 This could not be allowed to continue.

One day in March AD 415, Hypatia set out from her home to go for her daily ride through the city. Suddenly, she found her way blocked by a ‘multitude of believers in God’.33 They ordered her to get down from her chariot. Knowing what had recently happened to her friend Orestes, she must have realized as she climbed down that her situation was a serious one. She cannot possibly have realized quite how serious.

As soon as she stood on the street, the *parabalani*, under the guidance of a Church magistrate called Peter – ‘a perfect believer in all respects in Jesus Christ’34 – surged round and seized ‘the pagan woman’. They then dragged Alexandria’s greatest living mathematician through the streets to a church. Once inside, they ripped the clothes from her body then, using broken pieces of pottery as blades, flayed her skin from her flesh. Some say that, while she still gasped for breath, they gouged out her eyes. Once she was dead, they tore her body into pieces and threw what was left of the ‘luminous child of reason’ onto a pyre and burned her.35




