+++
title = "12 *CARPE DIEM*"

+++


> Let the girl with a pretty face lie supine, let the lady  
Who boasts a good back be viewed  
From behind . . . The petite should ride horse . . .  
>
> the Roman poet Ovid advises on positions for lovemaking, *Ars Amatoria*, 3





‘*Imperium sine fine*’ – ‘Empire without end’.1 That, so the poet had said, had been Rome’s aim as it had sought to push itself forwards, outwards, onwards into new countries, new continents and new worlds. But the Christianity that had taken it over was, according to its preachers, no less ambitious. As the world’s first century of Christian rule drew to a close and the fifth century opened, the effects of this conquest were everywhere to be seen. In Italy, Gaul, Greece, Spain, Syria and Egypt, temples that had stood for centuries were falling, shutting, crumbling. Brambles began to grow across disused ruins, as the mutilated faces of gods looked on silently.

An entire way of life was dying. Writers in the ancient world who had held out against the Christian religion struggled to put their feelings into words. In a bleak epigram Palladas asked, ‘Is it not true that we are dead and only seem to live, we Greeks . . . Or are we alive and is life dead?’2 Their old society was being swept away. The banner of the cross, in Gibbon’s resonant phrase, was being erected on the ruins of the Capitol in Rome.3

But, according to some of the most famous preachers of the time, even this was not enough to satisfy the Christian God. Christians may have taken control of the empire’s landmarks and temples but their God, they told their congregations, wanted more. He was not satisfied by mere buildings. Nor was He content with the appearance of piety only. The old Roman gods might have been fooled by a mere show of obedience to their rites – just *touch* the incense, as Roman governors had pleaded with Christians – but this god would not be so easily duped. He didn’t want ritual observance or temples or stones; He wanted souls. He wanted – He demanded – the hearts and minds of every single person within the empire.

And, these clerics threatened, He would know if He didn’t get them. As preachers in the fourth century started to warn their congregations, God’s all-seeing gaze followed you everywhere. He didn’t only see you in church; you were also watched by Him as you went out through the church doors; as you went out into the streets and as you walked round the marketplace or sat in the hippodrome or the theatre. His gaze also followed you into your home and even into your bedroom – and you should be in no doubt that He watched what you did there, too. That was not the least of it. This new god saw into your very soul. ‘Man looketh on the face, but God on the heart,’ thundered Cyprian, the Bishop of Carthage. ‘Nothing that is done is hidden from God.’4 There was, congregations across the empire were warned, no escape: ‘Nothing, whether actually done or only intended, can escape the knowledge of God’ – or His ‘everlasting punishment of fire’.5

Many Roman and Greek intellectuals had shown profound distaste for such an involved deity. The idea that a divine being was watching every move of every human being was, to these observers, not a sign of great love but a ‘monstrous’ absurdity. The Christian God in their writings was frequently described as a prurient busybody, a peculiar ‘nuisance’ who was ‘restless, shamelessly curious, being present at man’s every act’.6 Why was He so interested in the every doing of mere mortals? Even before Christianity, sophisticated Roman thinkers had poured scorn on such an idea. As Pliny the Elder had put it: ‘that \[a\] supreme being, whate’er it be, pays heed to man’s affairs is a ridiculous notion. Can we believe that it would not be defied by so gloomy and so multifarious a duty?’7 Didn’t a god have better things to do?

No, declared the Christian clerics. He did not. His attention was a sign of His great love for man. As too was His punishment. For make no mistake, God was not merely a disinterested observer of men’s souls; He would judge them – and He would punish them. Horribly. A very particular kind of fear starts to appear. As Peter Brown has pointed out, this is the perpetual anxiety of people who believed that not only their every deed, nor even their every word, but their every thought was now being watched. One Christian had a vision in which he could, quite literally, see stains upon his heart. They were there, he realized, because he had not made up ‘at once’ a quarrel that he had had with another Christian.8



Such were the words and the threats of the bishops and the Christian elite. But did the people listen to these diatribes? Did most of them even hear them? The words of preachers such as John Chrysostom and Augustine may have resounded in the ears of their listeners and in the literature of the age, but the vast majority of the empire – perhaps eighty to ninety per cent of men, and a higher percentage of women – was illiterate.9 Did such people also absorb the message that they were now Fallen and had to be redeemed? In short, in the pithy words of the academic E. A. Judge: ‘what difference \[did it make\] to Rome to have been converted?’10

The short answer is: we cannot know for certain. Late antiquity offers a frustratingly thin web of texts with which to answer this question. Of the tiny percentage of the empire who were literate, far fewer would have been confident writers. The vast majority of the empire lived and died leaving almost no traces for future historians to analyse.

Faced with such uncertainty, scholars have had the freedom to offer widely differing responses – and have done so. For centuries, their obedient answer was to say that the spread of Christianity had made all the difference in the world – or rather, in heaven. Before Christianity, Europe was damned, its religions and much of its behaviour primitive and damnable. After Christianity, it was saved. In the modern era, scholars – less likely to be quite so obedient to ecclesiastical authority – have taken a more robust, even iconoclastic approach. What difference did Christianity make? No difference at all, came the provoking reply from the twentieth-century scholar A. H. M. Jones. None. He instead argued that ‘Christian belief, if anything, led to a lowering of moral standards in the community’.11

The truth, as always, lies somewhere between these extremes. For without a doubt, something, certainly, did change.



In the mid-eighteenth century, some workmen happened to be digging in an Italian hillside known tantalizingly as ‘la Civita’ – the city. These Neapolitan labourers started to clear the pumice and ash that Pliny the Younger had watched falling seventeen centuries before. The effect was a cultural cataclysm. Figures of unimaginable sexual frankness started to be unearthed. Even to modern eyes, Pompeii offers a bracing spectacle. Whether it is the image of Priapus, in which the god is weighing his enormous phallus in some scales; or the frescoes of couples having sex; or the infamous statue of the god Pan, his lip jutting forward as he enters a goat, the erotic is everywhere.

The phallus is a staple of home decoration: it appears on walls, statues, and in frescoes, and is even carved into the very paving stones of the city. One bar was lit by a pretty bronze lamp in the form of a small figure with a vast penis, bells hanging down from its enormous shaft. Some images were astonishingly vivid. On the walls of a brothel there was a fresco that now survives only in a nineteenth-century reproduction. It depicts a man and a woman; he stands behind her and they are drinking what must be wine from what looks like two pint glasses. The man is holding his glass up, as if for inspection. They might, to judge from their serene expressions, be discussing the provenance of their drinks. However their minds are evidently on other things: the man is pushing his large erection into her.

Pompeii was a revelation. In some ways, it shouldn’t have been. For those willing and able to read it, Latin literature had contained numerous hints that all in the pre-Christian world was not as chaste as St Basil might have liked. The infamous ‘Carmen 16’ of Catullus was an obvious one. Few could read the line ‘I will bugger you and I will fuck your mouths’ and think that the author was being chastely pure – but then few could read it.12 By the time Pompeii was rediscovered, Latin had become an increasingly rare accomplishment.

By contrast, anyone with eyes could see the images that were being pulled from the Pompeian soil. No one could begin to pretend that the god Pan was doing anything other than entering the goat; or that the people in those frescoes were doing anything other than having enthusiastic sex. Even more disquieting, these paintings couldn’t be dismissed as the reprehensible habits of the poor, the immoral or the uneducated, as these images were not just found in brothels; they were found everywhere, even – especially – in some of the most opulent villas in the town. The Pompeians had not simply put up images of naked people; they had done so openly and without shame. No one in these images was struggling to hide their modesty with their hands or with fig leaves.

For centuries, Christian Europe had, as effective as any Vesuvius, been carefully obscuring the sexuality of the classical world; scraping nipples from statues, suppressing lewd frescoes and obscene poems. Now, a world untouched by the hand of Christianity was coming to light. It is just conceivable that there had been Christians in Pompeii when Vesuvius had erupted in AD 79, but if there were they would not have been in a position of power, and would not have been able to do anything to its art. No zealous Christians had attacked the Pompeian frescoes with hammers; no squads of the godly had chiselled away at the herms that stood on almost every street corner. The people in these images in Pompeii were not just naked; they were unashamedly naked. This was a world that had, quite literally, seen no Fall.

The site’s excavators, who knew not only the Fall but also the Catholic Church, were appalled. Some excavators simply reburied works that were considered too lewd. Others buried these objects in silence, and early guidebooks glided over the racier objects. There was no illustration of the penis lamp in the first published collection of the finds. The first English guide by Sir William Gell, published in 1824, neglected to mention a single object that might raise the polite eyebrows of his readers. As the scholar Walter Kendrick put it, ‘Gell managed to get through two thick, heavily illustrated volumes without once letting on that anything untoward was to be found.’13

Nevertheless, word eventually got out and the world was shocked – or at any rate professed itself to be – and remained so for decades. One nineteenth-century author described the frescoes as being the sort of thing that would ‘be seized in any modern country by the police’.14 Those Pompeian guidebooks that did mention sexual objects strenuously draped them in disapproval. One visitor was pained by their ‘moral degradation’.15 One privately printed guide to some of the ruder objects was typically prim. ‘The customs to which the women of antiquity devoted themselves were dissolute and scandalous,’ wrote its author. ‘The nudities of that epoch, and the impure writings of its authors, are unchallengeable witnesses to the libertinism which then prevailed in all classes. It was a time when men did not blush to make known to the world that they had obtained the favours of a fair youth, when women honoured themselves with the name of \[lesbians\].’ The force of its disapproval was somewhat undermined by its lip-smacking title \(*The Royal Museum at Naples, Being Some Account of the Erotic Paintings, Bronzes and Statues Contained in that Famous ‘Cabinet Secret’*\) and the fact that its front page advertised that it came with ‘Sixty Full Page Illustrations’.16

Lewder objects were smothered – the goat was considered ‘not lawful to show’ and put in a cellar.17 Such objects were eventually gathered together in a single collection and the ‘Secret Cabinet’, as the museum became known, was created in 1819. Access to it was limited and monitored. The precise population of this collection varied over time; fascination with it remained constant.18 As one 1871 guide recalled, entrance was ‘forbidden to women and children \[and\] only granted to men of mature age by means of special permission from the minister of the king’s household’.19 One can only begin to imagine the embarrassment of making this request. The famous art historian Johann Winckelmann visited Naples at a time when a special licence was needed that was ‘signed by his majesty’ to see such objects. He decided not to bother: ‘I thought it did not become me to be the first to apply’.20 Women were not allowed access to the Secret Cabinet until the 1980s.21

It wasn’t just in Pompeii. In museums all over Europe, classical statues that had been harvested during so many Grand Tours were shut away. Lacking the confidence of their early Christian forebears, later museum curators did with editing and discreet storage what earlier centuries had done with chisels. The result was the same: sexually explicit objects vanished, once again, from view. Other statues found their sexual organs disappearing under a new lush canopy of fig leaves that were fashioned by chaste curators then applied to the shamefully naked classical statues. The vivid images on Greek pots were tamped down. An exuberant satyr who had balanced a cup on his huge erection found his phallus painted out by an appalled curator, leaving the cup balancing in mid-air. Even classicizing statues were covered up. In 1857, Queen Victoria was given a cast of Michelangelo’s David as a present. It is said that when Victoria saw the massive statue for the first time in the V&A, she was so shocked by his nakedness that a fig leaf was commissioned. A half-metre-high plaster cast of the leaf was thereafter kept at the ready for any potential royal visits, whereupon it would be dangled on to the offending area using two hooks, thus saving the blushes of her Britannic majesty.

Eve’s shame was being applied to the classical world. The eruption of Vesuvius was seen by pious Victorians as the just deserts of a wanton people. As that 1871 guide to the erotic paintings and statues of Pompeii piously concluded, ‘Eternal glory to the religion which, overturning these impure idols into the mire, and unrolling the code of chastity before our eyes, has made our sensations purer and our pleasures keener.’22 Then, perhaps less conscious of the code of chastity than it might have been, it printed one of those ‘Full Page Illustrations’ of the satyr and the goat.

To say that the Roman world was pre-Fall is not to say that it had been without shame. It had not. There existed intricate and keenly-felt distinctions between what was and what was not acceptable sexual practice. As the academic Paul Veyne has put it, ‘Actually, the pagans were paralysed by prohibitions.’23 Veyne is exaggerating: there were rules, but this was not paralysis. Sex was accepted, and expected to be enjoyable. That was a great difference. There were limits – and as always the main one was one of privilege. What was acceptable for a rich man was unacceptable for a poor one; what was acceptable for men was unacceptable for women; slaves had almost no rights at all and were de facto prostitutes peopling the houses of the free. Within the Roman Empire the atmosphere in the east was, as a general rule, more conservative than in the west.

Even wealthy men had to comply with certain rules: homosexuality was considered unremarkable, so long as one was not in the passive, ‘effeminate’ role of being penetrated. An accusation that a man might have been could be enough to end a political career. As always there were exceptions: Julius Caesar was mockingly called ‘the Queen of Bithynia’ for his alleged relationship with King Nicomedes. He survived, though it was, the biographer Suetonius writes, ‘always a dark stain on his reputation, and frequently quoted by his enemies’.24 Making love with the lights on was another, rather teenage-sounding, prohibition. To do so was considered dissolute. Roman poets, as poets tend to, liked to play with these rules: in one memorable poem, Ovid describes making love in the afternoon as light filtered into the bedroom through a half-open shutter – more than enough light for him to be able to see and describe every part of his lover’s body in one of the most erotic poems he ever wrote.25

Above all, it was said that a man – and these texts were written by and largely for men – should govern his sexual urges rather than being governed by them. To fall abjectly in love with a woman was unacceptable. Poets who wrote that they were the ‘slave’ of their woman set traditionalist teeth on edge. One should keep within certain limits: Ovid would be exiled for ‘carmen et error’ – for a sexually rude poem and for personally overstepping the bounds of Augustus’s crackdown on immorality.26 In sex, as in everything else, the words carved into the temple at Delphi were to be followed: nothing in excess. Too much sex and you were boorish; but equally, to have too little – or rather, to go on about how little you had – was to be boring. ‘Do not,’ advised one writer, ‘make yourself offensive or censorious to those who so indulge, and do not make frequent mentions of the fact that you yourself do not indulge.’27

Sex then ought to be contained – but it was not denied. In the writings of the Roman elite, like any other appetite it was, as Peter Brown has observed, something to be admitted and managed rather than something to be ashamed of. The feast of the Liberalia was on 17 March; a now sadly forgotten festival at which Roman citizens celebrated a boy’s first ejaculation. In Roman medical manuals, ejaculation had been readily and openly discussed by classical doctors who advised it for health and getting rid of the seed that might otherwise cause headaches. It was thought that if athletes could abstain from sex they would be stronger. Orgasms and sex were even recommended for women’s health.28

Sex, sexual desire and the consequences of sex were frankly discussed. Poets chastised their lovers when they had abortions, less for the abortion than for endangering their own health. Ovid professed himself furious with his lover Corinna for rashly attempting one – but less because she had committed this act than because she had taken ‘that risk, and she never told me\!’29 Others followed more laborious methods of avoiding pregnancy. When Julia, the famously racy and beautiful daughter of the emperor Augustus, was asked how, given her many lovers, her children all resembled her husband, she replied that she would ‘take on a passenger only when the ship’s hold is full’.30

Why not have sex? Life was short and one didn’t know what was coming next. Live now, proclaimed countless mosaics, paintings and poems in the old Roman world. For who knows what tomorrow might bring? In a recently discovered mosaic in Antioch, a skeleton reclines, a cup in his hand, and an amphora of wine near by. Over his head, in clear Greek lettering, the mosaic gave an instruction to those diners above: ‘Be cheerful,’ it reads. ‘Enjoy your life.’31 The injunction to enjoy yourself is written in stone. One of the most famous of all classical poems had put this ideal into rather more elegant lines. ‘Quam minimum credula postero’ – trust as little as possible in tomorrow – advised the poet Horace, and instead ‘carpe diem’. Seize the day.32

One of the most famous of all Roman poems had been a version of the ancient self-help book by the poet Ovid on the art of seduction. ‘Should anyone here in Rome lack finesse at love-making,’ Ovid announced in its opening lines, ‘let him/ Try me – read my book, and results are guaranteed\!’33 Witty, erudite and egotistical, Ovid became one of the most famous poets in Rome which, one suspects, was no less than he felt he deserved. ‘Wherever Rome’s power extends over the conquered world,’ he gloated in another poem, ‘I shall have mention on men’s lips, and . . . through all the ages shall I live in fame.’34 Somewhat infuriatingly, he has so far been proved correct, and part of what assured him of this fame was the ‘Art of Love’ – a poem that, after it had advised on almost everything else, also found time to advise on particular sexual positions. ‘If you’re built like a fashion model, with willowy figure,/ Then kneel on the bed, your neck/ A little arched . . .’35 And so on.

But then something, slowly, had changed. A little over two centuries after Pompeii experienced its cataclysm, the Roman elite experienced a convulsion of their own when Constantine converted. The effects reverberated throughout the fourth century as temples were torn down, statues smashed and laws passed outlawing the old ‘pagan’ ways. The number of Christian converts – willing or otherwise – increased rapidly during this period. And as they did so, literature started to change, too. The old bawdy ways started to fade from the pages of poetry. The sermon and the homily – stern, judgemental and often aggressive – bloomed in their stead. This literature alternately threatened and instructed readers in minute detail on how to behave in almost every aspect of life. Christianity was not the sole cause of this – an increasingly moralizing tone had been noticeable in literature already. Indeed, the rise in Christianity might even have in part been a symptom of such moralizing. But Christianity nevertheless embraced, amplified and promulgated this hectoring to a far greater extent than ever before.

Christian authors of this period were not charmed by the sexual frankness that had been expressed by Roman authors and paintings. They were repelled by it. St Paul had set the tone early. He had felt that the ‘pagans’ were so far gone as to be all but beyond redemption. Due in part to their idol worship, God had ‘abandoned them to do whatever shameful things their hearts desired. As a result, they did vile and degrading things with each other’s bodies.’36 Not only did they have sex, worse still they had homosexual sex. ‘Even the women turned against the natural way to have sex and instead indulged in sex with each other. And the men, instead of having normal sexual relations with women, burned with lust for each other. Men did shameful things with other men.’37 Still, Paul reassured his readers, these sinners would have their comeuppance. ‘Or do you not know that wrongdoers will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: neither the sexually immoral nor idolaters nor adulterers nor men who have sex with men.’38 Later centuries would follow suit. In the sixth century, during the reign of the repressive emperor Justinian, laws started to outlaw homosexuality with a viciousness never seen before.

For St Paul and other Christian preachers, the body and its urges were not to be celebrated but smothered. In tortuous and embarrassed circumlocutions, Paul raged at ‘this body of death’.39 The rewards of a virgin in heaven were said to be sixty times greater. Christian writers in this period recorded the stirrings of their sexuality with great distaste – perhaps none more influentially than Augustine. Sex was, he felt, permissible if children resulted from the union but even then the action itself was lustful, evil and ‘bestial’, while erections were ‘unseemly’. The West would reap a bitter harvest of sexual shame from the disgusted writings of these two men. In the earliest days of the religion, some Christians went further, arguing that there was no need for sex any more at all. A new form of creation, in the form of a great conflagration and rebirth of the godly, was imminent. What need for awkward, messy, inexact human reproduction? Eternal life rendered reproduction redundant.

If the most famous non-Christian manual had been Ovid’s, then one of the most famous manuals by a Christian writer was a third-century tract by the theologian Clement of Alexandria. It is called the *Paedagogus* – the instructor – and its stated aim was to ‘compendiously describe what the man who is called a Christian ought to be during the whole of his life’.40 Clement then added some frank reminders of what lay in wait for those who strayed from his precepts and God’s, namely the teeth of wild beasts and the rage of serpents. As Clement wrote, the Lord himself had said that: ‘I will sharpen my sword . . . and I will render justice to mine enemies, and requite those who hate me. I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh from the blood of the wounded.’ This was not a mark of God’s cruelty but of love. ‘Censure,’ the author reassured his reader, ‘is a mark of good-will, not of ill-will.’41

Clement, in precise and authoritative paragraphs, peppered with frequent quotations and not infrequent threats from the scriptures, advised the faithful on every aspect of their day, from what they were allowed to eat and drink to what they could wear and put on their feet; from how they could style their hair to even what they were allowed to do in bed. In the three volumes of his guide he censured almost every human activity. ‘Unblushing pleasure,’ he wrote, ‘must be cut out by the roots.’42 He began with eating, opening with the reminder that we are all ultimately dust, before turning his attention on particular dishes. In starchy and unforgiving sentences, unseasoned by even a dash of humour, the extravagant dinner was deplored. As too was almost everything eaten at it. Overuse of the pestle and mortar was frowned upon. Condiments were considered unacceptable, as too were white bread \(‘emasculated’\) and sweetmeats, honey cakes, sugar plums, dried figs . . . One should not, Clement warned, be like the gourmands who source their lampreys from Sicily, their turbots in Attica, their thrushes in Daphnis . . . 43 The list went on.

Though, like those post-Second World War novels, the Bonds and *Bridesheads*, that were written in a period of austerity yet salivate over detailed descriptions of food, Clement’s abstemious pen seemed to linger a little too long over these forbidden fruits.\* Clement himself would have rejected the thought: people who enjoyed fine dining were, he wrote, nothing less than ‘beasts in human shape after the image of their father, the voracious beast’.44 Satan lurked among the sweetmeats. Then there was the wine – which in Clement’s eyes was even more pernicious than food. This warming liquid, he wrote, would heat up the overheated bodies of the young adding ‘fire to fire. For hence wild impulses and burning lusts and fiery habits are kindled . . . and shameless pulsations follow abundance.’ Clement fulminated furiously against those ‘miserable wretches’ whose life was nothing but ‘revel, debauchery, baths, excess . . . idleness, drink’ and, intriguingly, ‘urinals’.45

In the writings of preacher after Christian preacher, it was made clear that almost everything about a dinner was suspect. If one went out to dinner one might find oneself smitten with pernicious envy for another man’s house and come home more discontented than when setting out. John Chrysostom advised avoiding them altogether in favour of funerals. ‘Is it better,’ he thundered at his congregation, ‘to go where there is weeping, lamentation, and groans, and anguish, and so much sadness, than where there is the dance, the cymbals, and laughter, and luxury, and full eating and drinking?’46 One doesn’t need to be too familiar with Chrysostom’s oeuvre to know that the expected answer to this rhetorical question was a hearty ‘Yea, verily\!’ In a house of happiness one might envy a neighbour’s well-appointed atrium, or his charming dining room. In a house of mourning one would, said Chrysostom, be more likely to declare: ‘We are nothing, and our wickedness is inexpressible\!’47

The breadth of Clement’s self-help manual wasn’t entirely new. Centuries before God’s enforcers had started to prod at every corner of life, Ovid had bossily advised his gentle reader in similar detail to Clement how one should behave at dinner, though his aims were rather different. As he explained:


Banquets, too, give you an *entrée*, offer

More to the palate than wine:

There flushed Love has often clasped the horns of reclining

Bacchus in a seductive embrace.48


Ovid, like Clement, spent some time on the topic of wine which, he agreed, should be drunk in moderation. Though once again, for different reasons: get too drunk and, Ovid warned, you’d lose your man: ‘The girl/ Who’s passed out drunk is the most disgusting object.’49

He had also issued lengthy instructions on appearance and personal grooming. He advised men, for example, to take care of their appearance; to be fragrant; to ensure that their nails were clean and pared, and to monitor their nose hair:


Don’t let those long hairs sprout

In your nostrils, make sure your breath is never offensive,

Avoid the rank male stench

That wrinkles noses.50


One should not, he added, go much further than this: ‘Don’t torture your hair, though, with curling-irons,’ he warned men. ‘Don’t pumice/ Your legs into smoothness.’ To do this was, he said, the behaviour of ‘wanton women – or any half-man who wants to attract men’.51

Women had received stringent instruction from Ovid too. Their hair should not be neglected; those with a plump face should pile their hair up; those with a long face should go for a plain central parting. Though he also recommended a careful dishevelment: ‘the Neglected Look suits many girls: quite often/ You’d think it untouched since yesterday, though in fact it’s fresh-combed.’52

White clothes, he wrote, suited dark-skinned women; the pale looked becoming in grey; everyone should avoid purple and flounces. Personal hygiene should be attended to in women too: teeth should be clean and unstained; ‘rank goatish armpits’ were, fairly enough, warned against.53 Make-up, in moderation, was advised: ‘with powder, add rouge to a bloodless face,/ Skilfully block in the crude outline of an eyebrow’, and so on. The effect should be natural, since ‘the best/ Make-up remains unobtrusive’. On a similar note, Ovid was uncharacteristically strict on one point: you should not let your partner see you applying cosmetics:


Leave us to imagine

You’re asleep while you’re at your toilet: only emerge

When the public picture’s complete. I don’t want to know how

That complexion’s built up.


And, above all, Ovid advised: never let your partner see you cleaning your teeth: ‘The result may be attractive, but the process is sickening.’54

Christian tracts took a similar stance to Ovid on many topics – Clement also disliked done-up women and overgroomed men – but the tone here was very different. Everything was laid down, from how to treat the hairs on the top of the head \(which should not be dyed, plucked, or falsely curled – all ‘wicked arts’\) to the soles of the feet \(which should be shod in plain sandals\). Make-up was abhorred as a sign of a diseased soul.55 Golden, silver and jewelled cups were inveighed against, as too were purple bedsheets – ‘proofs of tasteless luxury, cunning devices of envy and effeminacy’.56 The wearing of gold jewellery was deplored as a terrible habit through which women would ‘disfigure God’s gifts, emulating the art of the evil one’. So too was the wearing of diaphanous fabrics \(‘proof of a weak mind’\).57 The odium heaped on women was, however, mild when compared to the disapproval reserved for men who depilated. Had not the Lord said that ‘the very hairs of your head are all numbered’? Well, then, said Clement, with nimble scriptural footwork, that settled it. ‘There must be therefore no plucking out, contrary to God’s appointment, which has counted them in according to His will.’58

Ovid had offered his opinion in the spirit of a connoisseur advising a novice. In Ovid’s writings, if you get your dress wrong or drink too much at dinner, you will suffer the consequences in this life: you won’t get your man, or people will think you uncouth. In the writings of the new Christian texts, it was not the taste of any man – even an expert – that mattered. It was the taste of God. ‘Man is the measure of all things,’ Protagoras had said. No longer. Now God was, and He was not only weighing and measuring man, He would, if he was found wanting, punish him.

Christian preachers expressed none of Horace’s uncertainty about what tomorrow might bring. On the contrary, they knew precisely what was coming: death and judgement. Followed by Heaven for the fortunate few – and Hell for everyone else. One should therefore be perpetually mindful of the dangers threatened by the next life – and constantly watchful of one’s behaviour in this one. Eating, drinking and making love were, they warned, the last things that one must do. Merrymaking in this life would not win eternal bliss in the next. ‘You are too greedy of enjoyment, my brother,’ warned the Christian scholar Jerome, ‘if you wish to rejoice with the world here, and to reign with Christ hereafter.’59




