+++
title = "05  APPENDIX 1         MAPPILAS OF MALABAR"

+++
APPENDIX 1  
MAPPILAS OF MALABAR

1. It would be worthwhile to have some broad idea of the character of
Mappilas who became notorious after the invasion of Kerala by Hyder Ali
and Tipu Sultan. The following notes are based on the documented history
of the period contained in. the *Malabar Manual* of William Logan.

2\. The Mappilas had not dared to disobey their Hindu Rajas before the
advent of Mysore Sultans with their Islamic brutalities in Kerala. But
having joined hands with Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan, they assisted them
in all their Islamic atrocities against the Hindu population. Since the
whole of Malabar was divided into a number of independent
principalities, the Mysore Sultans who had a huge army and powerful
field-guns, had no difficulty in subjugating the tiny kingdoms one by
one. The Mysore army was defeated only when it attacked Travancore which
by then was a big state, and had acquired superior field-guns and a
trained army

3\. The first thing that Ali Raja of Cannanore did after his appointment
as the Naval Chief of Hyder Ali's army, was to capture the king of
Laccadives and present him to Hyder Ali after gouging out the eyes of
the helpless victim (p. 459). Later the fisherfolk living there were
forcibly converted to Islam. According to the report of Gen. Abercromby
of Bombay who was in Kerala supervising the English Company's
operations, "Mappilas are fanatic Muslims who are also treacherous by
nature. From the repeated treachery and notorious infidelity of the
whole Mappila race, rigid and terrifying measures have become
indispensably necessary. Lenity (towards Mappilas) has been found
ineffectual" (p. 533).

4\. Mr. Conally who was the District Magistrate for some years in
Malabar, wrote as follows in his report to the Government in 1852: "For
some years past, the province of Malabar has been disgraced by a
succession of outrages of the most heinous character, perpetrated by the
Mappilas on Hindus. Bodies of Mappilas have openly attacked Hindus of
wealth and respectability, murdered them under most horrible
circumstances, burnt their houses or given them up to pillage, and
finally wound up their crimes by throwing away their lives in desperate
resistance to the police and military. While on former occasions, the
fanatic Mappilas spared women and children, they had in the last outrage
put to death men, women, children, even the infants sucking at the
breasts of their mothers, guests and servants, in short every human
being, found in the house of attack." (p. 636).

5\. Mr. Thomas Strange who had served in various capacities in Malabar
investigated the real cause of frequent Mappila outrages, especially
those relating to land disputes. According to his study report,
circumstances of these outrages are mostly unconnected with any
provocation, real or imaginary (p.  
640). In no instance can any outrage or threat of outrage that has
arisen, be attributed to oppression of Muslim tenants by Hindu
landlords. A great clamour is now raised in this regard, prominently in
the (Muslim majority) southern talukas seeking to throw the blame for
the (Mappila) outrages upon the Hindu landlords thus accusing the Hindus
as the cause thereof. "I have given the subject every attention and am
convinced that though the instances (of Mappila outrages) may and do
arise out of individual hardships to tenants (Mappila and Hindu), the
general character of the dealings of Hindu landlords towards their
tenants whether Mappila or Hindu, is mild, equitable and forebearing'
(p. 641).

6\. His conclusion regarding the frequent Mappila outrage against Hindus
was that they were the result of Islamic teachings by one of their high
priests - Aval Thangal of Thirurangadi: "it is no sin, but a merit to
kill a Hindu Janmi who evicts" (P. 691). Even today Islamic mullahs
preach hatred against Hindus in a similar tone.

7\. Mr. Strange observed further: "Since land is with the Hindus and the
money with the Mappilas, to get the land, the Mappilas encouraged (or
resorted to) fanaticism" (p. 691). "And finally the result was that
there was steady movement whereby in all Mappila tracts, the land was
passing slowly but surely to the possession of the Mappilas" and the
Hindus were going to the walls (p. 493). Today, Mappilas are rich
landlords and traders while the Hindus have been generally reduced to
the status of service class people in the Malabar region of Kerala.

8\. Encouraged by the perverted Khilafat movement, this anti-Hindu
fanaticism resulted in the notorious Mappila outrage of 1921 in
Malappuram district of Malabar. While the Congress Party tried to
explain away the Mappila riots as part of anti-British patriotic action,
the Communist Party defended the riots as class war - landless tenants
against landlords. Both interpretations were provided by the respective
political parties in order to gain political support of the aggressive
and fanatic Muslims in the country. Even today, when the victims of
Muslim riots are Hindus, the same old explanation is invariably put
forward by these parties to shift the blame on to Hindu community.

9. The above reports and assessments of Mappila outrages since the
advent of Muslim invasion in 1766, hold good even today. It is the
peculiar psyche that the Muslim converts have developed in the
subsequent years, which has resulted in the communal flare-ups in all
Muslim-dominated localities throughout the country. Islamic violence
breeds on Hindu cowardice. Once the Hindus, especially their
self-seeking leaders, understand the Muslim psyche and the Koranic
sanction for violence against Hindus and other non-Muslim people, peace,
prosperity and integrity of the country shall be established and
preserved.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
