+++
title = "02  I         Introduction"

+++
I  
Introduction

1.1. THE RISE OF ISLAM

Professor R.P. Tripathi begins his famous monograph entitled *Some
Aspects of Muslim Administration*, by writing that the Muslim "invaders
gradually wormed themselves into the heart of India, and finally assumed
the role of the earlier Hindu Empire-builders like Chandra Gupta,
Samudra Gupta and even Harsha... The Muslim Sultan, however, differed
from the earlier Hindu sovereigns in two respects. He did not belong to
the country over which he had come to rule... Secondly, he believed in a
religion whose outlook on social and political questions was very
different from that of the Hindus. He did not come... simply for
conquest. With him he had brought a well-defined religion, a highly
developed civilization, and a set of institutions to which he clung with
all his faith. Indeed, it was an avowed principle with him to maintain
their purity and to establish them in lands under his sway."[1](#1)

This statement of R.P. Tripathi lays stress on the following points:
that Muslim invaders assumed the role of earlier Hindu empire-builders
like Chandra Gupta, Samudra Gupta and Harshavardhan; that they did not
belong. to the country over which they had come to rule; that they
believed in a religion which was very different from that of the Hindus;
and that the invaders and rulers had not come just to conquer but also
to establish Islamic religion and institutions in all their purity in
this country.

We shall elaborate on these points to give an idea of what the present
work is all about. It has been correctly said that the Muslim invaders
and rulers did not belong to Hindustan. Muhammad Ghauri, Iltutmish and
Balban ruled with the help of Muslim soldiers from abroad. The Khaljis
and Tughlaqs may be considered Indian, but they also regularly recruited
warriors from outside India for extending their dominions and spreading
Islam in India. Many Muslim rulers depended upon the caliphs of Baghdad
or Cairo for moral support. The Mughal invader Babur did not belong to
India. He was forced by circumstances to march into Hindustan. His
officers and soldiers disliked the country and clamoured to return home
to Afghanistan. Babur himself had no love for the country and as per his
wishes his body was taken and buried in his homeland. Akbar and Jahangir
were regarded as Indians but not the other Mughals. As late as the
seventeenth century the French physician Francois Bernier while on a
visit to India asserted that "the *Great Mogol* is a foreigner in
*Hindustan*, a descendent of Tamerlane, chief of those Mogols from
Tartary who, about the year 1401, overran and conquered the Indies,
consequently he finds himself in a hostile country, or nearly soâ€¦"

These alien rulers could not assume the role of earlier Hindu emperors.
Although they gradually wormed themselves into the heart of India and
built up large empires, they could not rule like Chandra Gupta, Samudra
Gupta or Harshavardhan. The two belonged to two different religious
streams. The Muslim sultans reigned according to the dictates of the
Shariat, the Hindu emperors on the principles of Dharmashastra. Their
rules of war and governance were poles apart. The Quran does not permit
the existence or continuance of other faiths and their religious
practices. Of the 6236 ayats in the Quran about 3,900 are directly or
indirectly related to Kafirs, Mushriks, Munkirs, Munafiqs or
non-believers in Allah and his Prophet. Broadly speaking these 3,900
ayats fall into two categories - those relating to Muslims who for their
faith will be rewarded in this as well as the world hereafter, and those
relating to Kafirs or nonbelievers who are to be punished in this world
and are destined to go to Hell after death. The Quran reads like a
manual of war on mankind rather than a charter of brotherhood for all
mankind. For people of other faiths, jihad or permanent war was the
command of the Quran and order of the day. Islam recommends jihad or
perpetual war on adherents of other religions - to lay hold of them,
bind them, strike off their heads and bum them in the fire of hell. This
makes Islam a totalitarian and terrorist cult which it has remained ever
since its birth.

On the other hand, Indian kings waged wars according to humane rules
which have been elaborately described in the Dharmasutras and
Dharmashastras, the Ramayana and Mahabharata, and the Arthashastra
treatises of Kautilya, Kamandaka, and Shukra. Even during the medieval
period, as has been observed by K.M. Munshi: "Whatever the provocation,
the shrine, the Brahman and the cow were sacrosanct.... War being a
special privilege of the martial classes, harassment of the civilian
population during military operations was considered a serious lapse
from the code of honour. The high regard which all Kshatriyas had for
the chastity of women, also ruled out abduction as an incident of
war."[2](#2) Moreover, never in this country was a war psychology
developed for aggressive ends. The whole nation was never trained for
purposes of war. Only one caste - the Kshatriya - was set aside for
purposes of defence against foreign invasions and protection of life and
property from internal dissensions. It is another matter that against
the no-holds-barred Jihadists, all castes, all sections of Hindu society
joined to fight the invaders and proselytizers, but fighting was the
duty primarily of the Kshatriya.

In war and in peace, the Muslim rulers of Hindustan followed, as far as
lay in their power, the injunctions of the Quran and the Hadis, the
Shariat and the Sunnah. They had no knowledge of the scriptures and
institutions followed by Chandra Gupta, Samudra Gupta or Harshavardhan.
They could not and did not rule like Hindu kings. It is often said that
all religions are alike. People may follow different paths but they all
lead to the same God. if that were so, there was no need of any quarrel
among peoples of different faiths. But strife among followers of
different creeds is common. Therefore all religions are not similar. It
is the fundamental teachings of a creed that mould the character and
determine the conduct of its followers. Therefore it has been rightly
pointed out by Tripathi that Muslim invaders and rulers believed in "a
religion whose outlook on social and political questions was very
different from that of the Hindus". The growing awareness that Muslim
religion and Muslim rule were impositions and that Indians belonged to a
different religious and political tradition, has not escaped Hindu
consciousness of medieval history. It does not accept the Ilbaris, the
Khaljis, the Tughlaqs, the Bahmanis, the Sharqis, the Lodis and the
Mughals as indigenous dynasties on par with the Mauryas, the Guptas, the
Cholas, the Pandyas, the Sangamas, the Marathas, the Sikhs, and the
Jats. Its heroes are Prithviraj Chauhan, Vikram Pandya of Madura,
Harihar and Bukka and Krishnadevaraya of Vijayanagar, Maharanas Kumbha,
Sanga and Pratap, Maharajas Shivaji and Ranjit Singh and not Muhammad
Ghauri, Alauddin Khalji, Sikandar Lodi or even Shahjahan.

It was the erudite Alberuni who, after describing the atrocities
inflicted by Sabuktigin and Mahmud of Ghazni, declared that "the
antagonism between them (the Hindus) and all foreigners receives more
and more nourishment both from political and religious sources". Muslim
invaders and rulers, had come not only to conquer but also to impose the
Islamic religion. And the gulf created by the phenomenon has not been
bridged. For, Islam is an imposition on India. Worse, it has been
imposed through conquest. Ralph Borsodi, an American educationist and
social thinker, in his *The Challenge of Asia* observes that "everywhere
in the world except in Asia Minor, the three great Semitic religions -
Judaism, Christianity and Islam - are intruders; that indigenous Asia is
Brahmanist, Confucianist, Buddhist, Taoist; indigenous Europe is pagan;
that in Europe, Christianity is a superimposition; in Asia, Islam
is."[3](#3) The achievements of Muslim conquerors and rulers in India
consist of the pursuit of their political and religious policy of
superimposing Islam on India. This is clearly borne out by the writings
of medieval Muslim chroniclers like Hasan Nizami, Minhaj Siraj,
Ziyauddin Barani, Shams Siraj Afif, Farishtah, etc. It is by going
through their works that one can appreciate the spirit of how Islam was
made to spread in India. As against the modern apologists, they take
pride in the fact that Islam spread in India through the sword and
through methods laid down in Quran and Hadis.

Many educated Muslim rulers of medieval India had mastered the Quran and
were familiar with other literature on Muslim religion and
jurisprudence. The uneducated kings employed ulema to familiarize them
with the Islamic lore. For an Alim and a Maulana, Quran was the first
must among the works he studied. Its *Surahs* (chapters) and ayats
(verses) are often quoted and its phraseology freely used by them while
writing the chronicles of their kings. There are two sorts of Muslim
historians - the dry annalists, and the pompous and flowery
rhetoricians. But both of them use the language of their scriptures - a
style more natural to their ideas and sentiments. Therefore, present-day
scholars working on medieval Indian history should acquaint themselves
with this literature to know what Islam stands for. It is necessary to
know Islam in order to understand the spirit of Muslim rule in India.
The religion and theology of Islam are based on four great works - (1)
The Quran, (2) the Hadis, (3) the *Sirat-un-Nabi* or the Biography of
Muhammad, and (4) the Shariat or Islamic law as elaborated in the
*Hidayah*. The word 'Quran' literally means recitation, lecture or
discourse. Muslims consider it to be the word of God conveyed to His
prophet Muhammad through the angel Gabriel. The Quran is not only the
heart of the religion but it is still "considered by one-eighth of
mankind as the embodiment of all science, wisdom and theology".[4](#4)
The Quran is the principal scripture revealed by Allah to Prophet
Muhammad. Consequently, its injunctions become commands of God. With the
Prophet becoming inalienable part of it, he is also bestowed with
unquestionable authority on each and every theory and practice of Islam.

The study of Quran and the necessity of expounding it gave rise to that
most characteristically Muslim literary activity, namely, the books of
tradition or Hadis, literally meaning "narrative". It is the compendium
of the doings, sayings, reservations and judgements of Muhammad. Muslim
theologians make no distinction between Quran and Hadis. To them both
are works of revelation or inspiration. "In the Quran, Allah speaks
through Muhammad; in the Sunnah \[Hadis\], He acts through him... No
wonder that the Muslim theologians regard the Quran and the Hadis as
being supplementary or even interchangeable'."[5](#5) Within three
hundred years of the death of Muhammad, the Hadis acquired substantially
the form in which it is known today. Imam Bukhari (d. CE 870) compiled
'authentic' traditions from a plethora of voluminous traditions. Next in
importance are the collections of Imam Muslim (d. 875) and Imam Tirmizi
(d. 892). These are well known and oft-quoted. In the series of original
collectors of Hadis, Imam ibn Majah's name is equally important. Born in
209 H/824 CE, he died in 273/ 886. He collected traditions at his home
in Qazwin and by travelling abroad in Khurasan, Iraq, Hijaz, Egypt and
Syria. In every *hadis* in his *Sunan ibn Majah* he quotes the copious
authorities from whom he got his information.

*Sunan ibn Daud* by Imam Abu Daud Sijistani is a compilation of 4,800
*ahadis* selected from five lakh *ahadis*. In the preface to the work
published from Delhi, the publisher rightly emphasizes that the Quran
and Hadis are supplementary, that "without Hadis, it is not possible to
practise the (injunctions) of the Quran and without Quran, Hadis is
incomplete". *Mishkat-ul-Sharif* also is a collection of more than 6,000
*ahadis* selected by Abdullah al-Khatib al-Umari (d. 743/1342 CE), from
the works of Bukhari, Muslim, Tirmizi, Abu Daud and many others. He
quotes their authority at the end of each *hadis* cited.

Equally important guide for the Muslims in the performance of their
duties is the life-story of Muhammad. Apart from several *maghazi* books
dealing with the Prophet's campaigns, his first authentic biography too
was ready in the eighth century. Its author Ibn Ishaq was born at Medina
in 85 H and died in Baghdad in 151 H (7o4-768 CE). He wrote the *Sirat
Rasul Allah*.[6](#6) Other biographers of note who succeeded him were
al-Waqidi, Ibn Hisham, and at-Tabari. Muslims try to mould their lives
after the model of Muhammad. As advocated by Bukhari, I, p. 623,
*ahadis* 1578ff, "No one regarded by any section of human race as the
perfect man has been imitated so minutely."[7](#7) In short, anything
derived from the Quran and the Hadis is the Shariat or Islamic
jurisprudence; anything derived from Hadis and history of the prophet
Muhammad by and large constitutes the Sunnah. There is no aspect of life
which does not receive guidance from Islamic scriptural literature. it
deals with government and administration, payment of taxes, crime and
punishment, buying and selling, treatment of women and slaves, baths,
prayers and fasts, marriage, divorce and sex. Nothing is missing. Islam
is complete in all matters of do's and don'ts for Muslims. A Muslim need
not think at all - all his problems find a ready answer in Quran and
Hadis.

*Essentialism of Islam*

Jihad is the highest duty of a Muslim. Jihad means attacking, killing,
enslaving or converting non-Muslims even when they have done no harm to
the Muslims, even when they are unarmed. Jihad is waged for the sake of
Allah; war and worship in His service are the same. Shirking jihad is
the greatest sin; obtaining glory through jihad is the highest grace.
Islam suffers from the ego of triumphalism. It says that it should
triumph over others, because it alone is true and all others are false.
Not all exclusivists belong to the militant extreme, but all are
convinced that their religion alone is true. This is Islamic
fundamentalism. Fundamentalism is belief in the inerrancy of the
scriptures of one's religion. Fundamentalism is not accidental but
essential to Islam. What Islam always meant by "knowledge" (*ilm*) was
religious knowledge by "revelation", the logic that all that is in Islam
is right. It sees unchangeability as strength. That is why the word
reform is so abhorrent to Muslim thinkers and religious leaders. In
Islamic scriptures there are commands, directions and orders. There is
no mention of discussions or consensus arrived at. This was the practice
in Arabia after its conquest by Muhammad and this was the practice
wherever Muslim armies marched. In Islam, truth is established by the
sword, not through argument. Image breaking is a contribution of
prophetic religions. In Islam, iconoclasm is important, but it is more
important that the shrines of non-Muslims are desecrated and destroyed
rather than spared through agreement or in exchange for wealth. (What
Mahmud of Ghazni declared at Somnath according to Attar, is the gist of
the true spirit of Islam).

The Quran and the Hadis provided the foundation upon which theology and
law of Islam were raised. Totalitarian nature of Islam permits no
separation of state and church. "Law in Islam is more intimately related
to religion than to jurisprudence as modern lawyers understand
it."[8](#8) Named after their founders Abu Hanifa (c. 699-767), Abu
Abdullah Muhammad bin Idris (c. 767-820), Ahmad Bin Hanbal (c. 780-855)
and Malik bin Anas (c. 715-795) - the four mazahib or schools of Islamic
law named Hanafi, Shafii, Hanbali and Malaki respectively, had come into
being in the eighth-ninth century. The Hanafi law is followed in India.
If at all anything was wanting with regard to Muslim law, it was
provided by *Hidayah* or Guidance.[9](#9) The *Hidayah* is a voluminous
treatise based on Sunni law composed by Shaikh Burhanuddin Ali who was
born at Marghinan in Transoxiana about 530 H and died in 593 H
(1135-1196).[10](#10) Burhanuddin claims to have studied all earlier
commentaries on the Quran and the Hadis belonging to the schools of
Malik, Shafi and Hanbal besides that of Abu Hanifa.[11](#11) The other
outstanding work of this kind is the *Kanz-ud-Daqaiq* of Maulana
Abdullah Nasafi.

Muslim law in its ultimate form was thus available to the conquerors and
sultans who established their rule in India in the thirteenth century.
True, there were no printed editions of these works. But beautiful
hand-written copies were always available, at least to distinguished
conquerors and kings and their counsellors. Muslim law is definite,
clear and universal. This law was the actual sovereign in Muslim lands;
no one was above it and all were ruled by it.[12](#12)

Muslim state in India was administered according to this law. Muslims
and non-Muslims were all governed by it. For Muslim sultans and
governors in India, it provided examples, precedents and judgements by
the learned in the law in other Muslim lands. It helped them in taking
decisions in any matter of importance. Qazis and Muftis were there with
them to render advice and interpretation on complicated matters. In
short, the functioning of the Muslim state in India, its history and
polity, cannot be correctly understood without a working knowledge of
Islamic scriptures and law.

1.2. THE SPREAD OF ISLAM

Muhammad, the prophet of Islam (full name Abu al-Qasim Muhammad ibn
Abdullah ibn Abdul Muttalib ibn Hashim) was born in Arabia in or around
570 CE and died in 632. In 622 he had to migrate from Makkah to Madinah
(called *hijrat*) and this year forms the first year of the Muslim Hijri
calender. During his life time, Muhammad made Arabia a land exclusively
adherent to Islam. After his death, the Arabs embarked on a series of
territorial expansions and made themselves masters of Syria, Palestine,
Egypt and Persia within a short span of twenty years, or, in the
rhetorical words of Earnest Barker, Arab Islamism "Spreading with the
rapidity of an electric current from its power house in Mecca, it
flashed into Syria, it traversed the whole breadth of north Africa; and
then, leaping the Straits of Gibralter it ran to the Gates of the
Pyrenees."[13](#13) Such unparalleled feats of success were due to their
proud feeling of Arabicism, their zeal for the new faith, and the
material gains brought through holy war or jihad. The ponderosity of the
jihad gave them the energy and the rapidity of electric current. And
Islam came to be what the world has ever since recognized it to be - a
militant religion, a creed of aggression and violence.

Islam originated in the land of the Arabs. The rise of Arabs as a
political power has been elucidated by a large number of writers on
Islam. T.W. Arnold observes that the expansion of the Arabs was due not
so much to the religious spirit as to their desire to obtain the lands
and goods of their neighbors who were richer and more fortunate than
themselves.[14](#14) Most Arabs of the days of prophet Muhammad were
poor. They needed a reformer to improve their economic condition. There
are two ways of alleviating poverty and gaining economic well-being. One
way is to work hard and raise one's resources through labour and sweat.
The other is to attack and rob others and thereby grow rich. The early
indigent Arab Muslims could either be persuaded to make a living by
working hard, or encouraged to attack and plunder the others. Islam
resorted to the second alternative as ordered by Allah. Recruits, mainly
from among the slaves or lower classes, began to swell the ranks of the
believers, or in the flowery words of Edward Gibbon, the shepherds were
turned into robbers and robbers were collected to form an army of
conquest. "Soldiering was not only the noblest and most pleasing
professions in the sight of Allah but also most profitable."[15](#15)

Anwar Shaikh analyses the expansion of Arab power in the following
words: "The prophet Muhammad divided humanity into two sections - the
Arabs and the non-Arabs... The Arabs are the rulers and the non-Arabs
are to be ruled... Islam is the means to realize this dream... Islam has
caused more damage to the national dignity and honour of non-Arab
Muslims than any other calamity ... Yet they believe that this faith is
the ambassador of 1. Equality and 2. Human Love. This is a
fiction."[16](#16) Creation of a pure (Muslim) nation, demanded that the
Jews must be expelled from Arabia. So, they were treated mercilessly.
Finally, the policy of ethnic cleansing was adopted, and the Jews were
banished.[17](#17)

As the Quran is in Arabic, this must be the preferred language of the
Muslims everywhere. Translation of Quran in fact is not Quran. The real
Quran is the one that has been revealed in the Arabic language.[18](#18)
Besides, *"no place on earth bas ever exacted such a tribute of
reverence from mankind as the Kaaba. Respect to the Kaaba means, respect
to Mecca, respect to Mecca means respect to Arabia, and respect to
Arabia means respect to Arabs, the dwellers of Arabia"*. (italics by the
author).[19](#19) Everything about Arabia is superior, says also the
Hadis. Mecca is Allah's best land and most beloved of God. Muhammad
decreed that Muslims everywhere must prostrate five times a day facing
Makkah. When Muslims die, they must be buried facing Mecca which is the
guarantee of their salvation. Keeping one roza in Makkah brings
benediction (*sawab*) of one lakh *rozas*.[20](#20)

Muhammad made Hajj to Arabia an obligatory ritual for his followers. As
prophet of Allah, Muhammad was aware of his power and influence over
Muslims. If he had said that Hajj should be performed every year, it
would "have become obligatory on Muslims to go for Hajj every
year.[21](#21) He knew their limitations and therefore made one Hajj at
least good enough in one's lifetime. Mecca was declared Allah's own land
and it became a centre of pilgrimage of Islam and of all Muslims; Hajj
impressed upon Muslims the sanctity of Arabia. Besides for the old, the
weak and women, Hajj is their Jihad.[22](#22) Hajj created an
everlasting source of income for the Arabs.[23](#23) Ruben Levy notes
that "the largest amount of space devoted in the Quran to any of the
four duties is then given to the pilgrimage".[24](#24)

Anwar Shaikh dwells on this early period of Arab glory. "The Arabs made
a profession of robbing and murdering the non-Muslims in the name of
Allah, but they called it jihad. Egypt and Iran were the early
casualties. It was the pillaged wealth and abducted daughters and
sisters of the foreign nations which lent the golden touch to this Arab
era."[25](#25) "After their spectacular conquests, the Arabs were
unwilling to concede equality to the non-Arab converts to Islam, despite
Islamic doctrine that expressively forbade discrimination. But for the
Arabs there were the conquered and the conquerors... The Arabs ruled as
a sort of conquistador tribal aristocracy", to which only "true Arabs"
could belong â€¦[26](#26) Later on the same was done by the "true Turks".
The Turks took concubines from the conquered people, but their children
and their slave women were heavily discriminated against and were not
considered full Turks.

To sum up, Islam spread through unparalleled feats of armed might. Some
Muslim merchants spread their creed by peaceful means also by making
their employees and other beneficiaries join their faith. Peaceful
propagation of Islam was ruled out by the fact that the majority of
early Arab Muslims were not educated enough to discuss, debate, argue
and convince. Hence they were not trained for spreading the new creed
through any missionary endeavour. They could only wield the sword very
well. Hence Muslim historical literature repeatedly mentions that Islam
spread through military conquests when the vanquished were offered the
alternative of Islam or death. They accepted Islam because they had
hardly any other choice. Death is no choice because nobody chooses
death, so they chose Islam.

In view of this it is difficult to agree with the view that Islam was
hailed by people living under "despair and frustration" and that its
"success should be sought, not so much in the strength of Muslim armies,
as in the revolutionary impact of the principles of the new social order
which Islam preached and strove to establish".[27](#27) It is true that
Muslims believe Islam to be a religion of equality and love. This idea
of equality and love may not be a total fiction, but it is meant not for
all the people; it is confined to Muslims only.

There are one or two passages in the Quran evincing tolerance like: Your
religion to you, my religion to me; or, there is no compulsion in
religion. "All passages preaching tolerance are found in Meccan, i.e.,
early Suras, and all the passages recommending killing, decapitating,
and maiming are Medinan, i.e., later toleration has been abrogated by
intolerance. For example, the famous verse 9.5, "Slay the idolaters
wherever you find them," is said to have cancelled 124 verses that
dictate toleration and patience.[28](#28)

Islam has two sets of principles of morality, ethics and justice: One
for Muslims and the other for non-Muslims. Sincerity, well-wishing and
brotherhood are for the believers and faithful. For non-Muslims the
principles and standards of behaviour are different. The differences are
elaborately defined in the Quran, the Hadis and the Sunnah. Subversion
of many ancient civilizations by Islam is a historical fact. Welcome
reception of the new creed by other people because they were living in
frustration in their old order, is only an assumption.

This assumption is disproved by a patent fact. Islamic armed creed
projected through war, achieved quick success only in small countries
with small populations (beginning at home with Arabia itself), not in
large countries with large populations. In 622 CE "when the Muslims took
up arms they had little more than a tiny existence. In 632 the Muslims
had conquered the whole of the Arabian Peninsula. It was conquered at
the cost of only 150 men killed in the battlefield on the enemy
side."[29](#29) For the same reason, it could accomplish its aim of
spreading Islam in Egypt, Syria, Iraq, Iran and North Africa. According
to Colin Clarke's estimates the population of Egypt about the middle of
the fourteenth century was three million, of the rest of North Africa
two million, of Asia Minor, Syria and Cyprus eleven million, and of
other countries of South-West Asia also eleven million.[30](#30) The
fighting force of these countries in the seventh and eighth centuries
would have been very small - too small to withstand the armed might of
the invading Arabs. Hence these were overrun and Islamized speedily. Big
countries with large population and hoary civilizations like India,
China, Russia and Europe rejected Islam. Not that Islamic armies did not
try to penetrate them, but they were persistently resisted and Islam was
not accepted by them as their national creed or culture. India is the
most appropriate example of this phenomenon. Here a thousand years of
Islamic rule, terror and vandalism failed to impress the people about
the Islamic revolution. Islam was not welcomed as harbinger of a
revolution promising a new world order because it was not believed to be
so by those who were subjected by it. If today some Muslim countries
like Saudi Arabia and Iran take pride in the achievements of Islam and
dream of furthering Pan-Islamism, they do not care or dare to remember
the point of time when their original religions and civilizations were
subverted; they do not desire to recapitulate how their ancestors had
felt at the sudden trampling of their cherished values through violence.
Of course some countries like Egypt, Turkey and Algeria which were
similarly Islamized in medieval times now want to rid themselves of
Islamic fundamentalist shackles.

  
1.3. THE ADVENT OF MUSLIMS IN INDIA

*Arab invasion of Sindh*: The Arab and later Turk Muslims spread into
India through three major waves of invasions, but it took them five
hundred years to do so. After the conquest of Iran by 643 CE, the
boundaries of the Caliphate touched the frontiers of India. India, known
to early Arabs as Hind wa Sind, too could not escape Muslim expansionist
designs, and they sent their armies into India both by land and sea.
They proceeded along the then known (trade) routes - 1. from Kufa and
Baghdad, via Basra and Hormuz to Chaul on India's west coast; 2. from
West Persian towns, via Hormuz to Debal in Sindh; and 3. through the
land route of northern Khurasan to Kabul via Bamian. But progress of
Muslim arms and religion in India was slow, very slow. For, the
declarations of the objectives of Muslim invaders had not taken into
account the potentialities of Indians' stiff and latent resistance.
Caliph Umar (634-44 CE) had sent an expedition in 636-37 to pillage
Thana. It was followed by some attempts on the part of Caliphs Usman and
Ali. But in vain. The four 'pious' Caliphs of Islam died without hearing
of the conquest of Sind and Hind.

The first full-fledged Arab invasion of Sindh was launched by Muhammad
bin Qasim in 712 on the command of Hajjaj bin Yusuf on behalf of the
Caliph. By the irony of circumstance, the majority of the Sindhi
population at that time was Buddhist. They were averse to fighting. But
there was no difference between them and Brahmans with regard to
resistance to the invader.[31](#31) Debal, the fort-temple town, was
attacked first. When the siege of Debal had continued for some time a
defector informed Muhammad about how the temple could be captured.
Thereupon, the Arabs, planting their ladders, stormed the citadel-temple
and swarmed over the Walls. As per Islamic injunctions, the inhabitants
were invited to accept Islam, and on their refusal to do so, all adult
males were put to the sword and their wives and children were enslaved.
The carnage lasted for three days. The temple was razed and a mosque
built on its site and with its debris. Muhammad laid out a Muslim
quarter, and placed a garrison of 4,000 in the town.

The result of the destruction of Debal, the venerated shrine of Sindh,
was that the Jats, who perhaps had earlier shown indifference if not
jubilation on the arrival of the new corners, turned enemies of Muslims
for all time to come,[32](#32) Most of the major cities of Sindh were
captured, their temples broken, their men massacred and their women and
children enslaved. Muhammad bin Qasim was permitted to remain in Sindh
only for a little over three years but Muslims and Islam came to stay in
Sindh permanently. A dent had been made in India's social fabric, and
its wealth looted. Foreign and newly converted Muslims remained confined
mostly to cities, particularly Multan. Multan, according to al-Masudi
(writing about CE 942), remained one of the strongest frontier places of
the Musalmans. Ibn Hauqal who finished his work in CE 976 says, "The
Muslims and infidels of this tract wear the same dresses, and let their
beards grow in the same fashion. They use fine muslin garments on
account of the extreme heat. The men of Multan dress in the same way.
The language of Mansura, Multan and those parts is Arabic and Sindianâ€¦"
This, in brief, was the social change brought about in Sindh after the
introduction of Islam there.

Two points in the destruction of Debal need be taken note of. First, the
carnage there lasted for three days. The conquering Muslim army is
generally allowed three days of pillage. This three day pattern is
repeated in many Muslim massacres, e.g., Timur's massacre in Delhi
(1399) or Sultan Muhammad's in Constantinople (1453). The lust for
slaughter used to assuage in this period and it sufficed the soldiers to
gather captives and precious objects. The second is the destruction of
the temple of Debal. Iconoclasm represented Quwwat-ul-Islam. Muslims
destroyed Hindu temples because of 'dominance urge'. But they did more
harm to themselves than they visualized. Besides earning permanent Hindu
hostility, they harmed their own maritime trade and commerce. For
example, Hindu temples on the seaboard like Debal on the west coast and
Jagannath Puri on the east, served as light houses for the sailing
ships.[33](#33) Muslims destroyed all. They themselves suffered in the
long run. They became weak on the sea so that even the might of Akbar's
empire could not prove equal to the small number of Portuguese who
dominated the Indian seas.

*Mahmud of Ghazni's Campaigns in Punjab*

Amore terrifying wave of Islamic invasion came with Mahmud of Ghazni,
three hundred years after the Arab invasion of Sindh. During this period
Islam was spreading in various regions outside India with varying
degrees of success. Furthermore, the newly converted Turks, the slave
protectors of the pious Caliphs, had carved out their own kingdoms at
the expense of the Caliph's "empire". Alaptigin and Subuktigin belonged
to this class of slaves. They made frequent inroads into Hindu Shahiya
territories of Afghanistan and Punjab. But when Subuktigin's son Mahmud
delivered his first attack in the year 1000 CE, he let loose hell in the
region.

Mahmud could launch forth seventeen expeditions during the course of the
next thirty years. He fulfilled his promise to the Caliph of carrying
out yearly campaigns against the non-Muslims of Hindustan both in letter
and spirit of Islamic theology. For this he has been eulogized sky-high
by Muslim poets and Muslim historians. He was always careful to include
the Caliph's name on his coins, depict himself in his *Fateh-namas* as a
warrior for the faith, and to send to Baghdad presents from the plunder
of his Indian campaigns. The Caliph al-Qadir Billah in turn praised the
talents and exploits of Mahmud, conferred upon him the titles of
*Amin-ul-millah* and *Yamin-ud-daula* (the right hand) after which his
house is known as Yamini Dynasty.

Mahmud Ghaznavi was very successful in the usual fields of Islamic
expansionism - conversions of Hindus to Islam, destruction of temples
and acquisition of wealth. The sack of Somnath in particular came to be
considered a specially pious exploit because of its analogy with the
destruction of the idol of al-Manat in Arabia by the Prophet. This
"explains the idolization of Mahmud by Nizam-ul-Mulk Tusi,[34](#34) and
the ideal treatment he has received from early sufi poets like Sanai and
Attar, not to mention such collectors of anecdotes as Awfi."[35](#35) It
is indeed noticeable that after the Somnath expedition (417H/1026 CE),
"a deed which had fired the imagination of the Islamic world", Caliph
al-Qadir Billah himself celebrated the victory with great Ã©clat. It is
also significant that Mahmud now issued his coins for the first time
from Lahore.

Alberuni writes that "Mahmud utterly ruined the prosperity of the
countryâ€¦ by which the Hindus became like atoms of dust scattered in all
directionsâ€¦ Their scattered remains cherish.. the most inveterate
aversion towards all Muslimsâ€¦ Hindu sciences have retired far away from
those parts of the country conquered by us, and have fled to places
which our hand *cannot yet reach* (italics ours), to Kashmir, Benaras
and other places."[36](#36) Later chroniclers write with a tinge of
pride that fourteen Ghaznavids ruled at Lahore and its environs for
nearly two hundred years. But there was progressive deterioration in
their administration. However, the importance of occupation of most part
of the Punjab lies in the fact that Muslims had come to stay in India.
And these Muslims helped in the third wave of Muslim onrush which swept
northern India under Muhammad Ghauri.

*Muhammad Ghauri's Invasion of India*

Muhammad Ghauri was not as valiant and dashing as Mahmud, but his
knowledge about India and about Islam was much better. He now possessed
Alberuni's India and Burhanuddin's *Hidayah*, works which were not
available to his predecessor invader. Alberuni's encyclopaedic work
provided to the Islamic world in the eleventh century all that was
militarily advantageous to know about India. Equally important was the
*Hidayah*, the most authentic work on the laws of Islam compiled by
Shaikh Burhanuddin Ali in the twelfth century. These and similar works,
and the military manuals like the *Siyasat Nama* and the *Adab-ul-Harb*,
made the Ghauris and their successors better equipped for the conquest
and governance of non-Muslim India. There need be no doubt that such
works were made available, meticulously studied and constantly referred
to by scholars attached to the courts of Muslim conquerors and kings.

Muhammad Ghauri led his first expedition to Multan and Gujarat in 1175
and 1178. In 1191 he attacked Prithviraj Chauhan ruling at Ajmer and
Delhi but was defeated and forced to beat a hasty retreat. Next year he
again started from Ghazni towards Hindustan with full preparations and
with a force of one hundred and twenty thousand Turks, Persians and
Afghans. On reaching Lahore, he sent an ambassador to Ajmer and invited
Prithviraj to make his submission and accept Islam. The arrogant message
met with a befitting retort, and the armies of the two once more
encamped opposite each other on the banks of Saraswati at Tarain, 588
H/1192 CE. The Rajput army was far superior in numbers. Prithviraj had
succeeded in enlisting the support of about one hundred Rajput princes
who rallied round his banner with their elephants, cavalry and infantry.
To counter such a vast number Muhammad Ghauri "adopted a tactic which
bewildered the Rajputs" and they were defeated.

With the defeat and death of Prithviraj Chauhan, the task of the invader
became easy. Sirsuti, Samana, Kuhram and Hansi were captured in quick
succession with ruthless slaughter and a general destruction of temples
and their replacement by mosques. The Sultan then proceeded to Ajmer
which too Witnessed similar scenes. In Delhi an army of occupation was
stationed at Indraprastha under the command of Qutbuddin Aibak who was
to act as Ghauri's lieutenant in Hindustan. Later on Aibak became the
first Sultan of Delhi. That is how the Muslim state was established in
northern India.

Muslim conquest of Sindh and Punjab is an old story. It has been
graphically described by early medieval Muslim chroniclers like al-Kufi,
Utbi, al-Biladuri, Ibn-ul-Asir, Hasan Nizami, Minhaj Siraj, etc. Mahmud
of Ghazni's extraordinary exploits fired the imagination of Muslim
historians and they praised him sky-high for his achievements. He was
their model, their hero. In all spheres of Islamic piety he excelled
over all other Muslim conquerors. His iconoclastic zeal, in particular
his sack of Somnath, won him unlimited praise from poets and historians,
contemporary and later. Mahmud was hailed throughout the Islamic world
as a second Muhammad and his destruction of Somnath was lauded by the
sufi poets Attar, Sanai and Umar Khayyam. These poets equated Somnath
with the temples of the Goddess al-Manat smashed by Muhammad in Arabia.
As the *Dictionary of Islam* says, Muslim writers are "unanimous in
asserting that in the time of the Prophet... the only choice given to
the idolaters of Arabia was death or reception of Islam". Breaking of
temples and forcible conversions at the point of sword were achievements
of all Muslim invaders and most Muslim rulers. Their Jihad spread Islam
in the infidel land of Hindustan and filled the coffers of Muslim
conquerors with immense wealth. However, some modern Muslim apologists
express a view contrary to what has been said by contemporary
chroniclers of the medieval period. Probably they are shocked at the
barbarous conduct of their medieval brethren and want to salvage the
reputation of Islam, although whatever was done was done in accordance
with the canons of their creed. Muslim historians of the medieval period
honestly state that non-Muslims were converted to Islam through force;
modern Muslim apologists claim that conversions were effected through
peaceful means. Medieval chroniclers take pride in the iconoclastic zeal
and achievements of their heroes; modern apologists plead otherwise.
Medieval historians credit Muslim invaders with fighting jihad for
spreading Islam; modern Muslim writers say that their motive was
economic - that the invaders were interested in loot and plunder and had
little to do with religion. It needs to be emphasized that the truth
here does not lie midway. It lies on the side of the medieval
chroniclers. Still, the apologists complicate matters by contradicting
the versions of their own co-religionists who were closer to and more
intimately associated with events about which they wrote than our modern
apologists. The idea of a secular Muslim state is an innovation of a few
modem "progressive" writers who wish to bracket Muslim civilization with
tolerant civilizations. They should remember that there is a difference
between the spread of Islam and, say, spread of Buddhism and no amount
of jugglery of words and "interpretations" can prove that the spread of
Islam was peaceful. All Hadis, and all chroniclers discriminate between
Muslims and non-Muslims, and Islam spread in India through the exertions
of Muslim heroes like Mahmud of Ghazni and through jihad as recommended
by Islamic scriptures.

As Dr. Ali Issa Othman, for some years adviser to UNRWA (United Nations
Relief and Works Agency) on education said: "The spread of Islam was
military. There is a tendency to apologize for this and we should not.
It is one of the injunctions of the Koran that you must fight for the
spreading of Islam."[37](#37) The successes achieved in this fight for
spreading of Islam is also the main story of the medieval Muslim
chronicles. The importance of 'force' in Islam should be acknowledged
rather than minimized. The denial of force as a means of spreading Islam
by a few modem apologists, like Aziz Ahmad and Muhammad Mujeeb[38](#38)
cannot alter the basic truth about the history and philosophy of Islam,
nor the spirit behind words like Kafir, Jihad, Jiziyah, etc.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) The Indian Press, Allahabad, 1936.

[2](#2a) K.M. Munshi, 'End of Ancient India' in Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan's
*Journal*, vol. IV, no. II, December 29, 1959, pp. 8, 14.

[3](#3a) Cited in Ram Swarup, *Hindu View of Christianity and Islam*,
Voice of India, New Delhi, 1992, pp. 48-49.

[4](#4a) P.K. Hitti, *The Arabs*, London, 1948, p. 31.

[5](#5a) Ram Swarup, *Understanding Islam through Hadis*, New Delhi
reprint, 1983, pp. vii, xi.

[6](#6a) Trs. by A. Guillaume under the title *The Life of Muhammad*,
Oxford University Press, 1958.

[7](#7a) Hitti, *op. cit.*, p. 29.

[8](#8a) *Ibid.*, p. 78.

[9](#9a) Trs. by Charles Hamilton, 4 vols. London, 1791.

[10](#10a) Hughes, T.P., *Dictionary of Islam*, p. 174; D.S.
Margoliouth, *Mohammed and the Rise of Islam*, pp. xix-xx..

[11](#11a) It was translated into English by Charles Hamilton of the
East India Company and published in England in 1791. It is easily
available in a recent reprint.

[12](#12a) A. Khuda Bakhsh, *Essays, Indian and Islamic*, London, 1927,
p. 51.

[13](#13a) In the *Legacy of Islam*, Ed. Sir Thomas Arnold and Alfred
Guillaume, Oxford University Press, London, 1931, p. 42.

[14](#14a) T.W. Arnold, *The Preaching of Islam*, London, 1913, pp.
45-101.

[15](#15a) P.K. Hitti, *The Arabs*, p. 44.

[16](#16a) Anwar Shaikh, *Islam, The Arab National Movement*, 1995. It
may be pertinent to mention here that Anwar Shaikh (born 1928) is living
in Britain since 1956 under a *fatwa* of death (April 1994) because he
has candidly written much that is unpalatable to Muslims. He is safe
because he is settled in England and also because the assassins feel
that killing him would draw attention to his ideas and writings more
pointedly. However, a campaign against him is on, For example, Arshad
Ali Khan in *Daily Jang*, London, April 30, 1995, calls on Muslim
scholars of *all sects of Islam* to rebut Anwar Shaikh's views to *save
Islam*.

[17](#17a) *Ibid.*, Preface; also Hagarism; *The Making of Islamic
World* by Patricia Crone and Michael Cook, Cambridge, 1977, p. 78.

[18](#18a) Quran Majid, Rampur, Preface by Muhammad Farukh Khan, p. 11.

[19](#19a) Islam, *The Arab National Movement*, pp. 24, 25, 28, 32, 38.

[20](#20a) *Sunan ibn Majah*, vol. II, p. 259, ahadis 893-94; pp.
261-62, hadis 902.

[21](#21a) *Ibid.*, p. 197, ahadis 663-64.

[22](#22a) *Ibid.*, p. 199, hadis 673, p. 201, *ahadis* 681-682, p. 203,
*hadis* 687-88, p. 224, *hadis* 771.

[23](#23a) The income to Saudi Arabia from Hajj every year is
considerable See also Hajj pilgrimage in Part II - Politics.

[24](#24a) Ruben Levy, *The Social Structure of Islam*, p. 161.

[25](#25a) Anwar Shaikh, *Islam*, p. 54.

[26](#26a) Ibn Warraq, *Why I Am Not A Muslim*, Amhest, N.Y., U.S.A.,
1995, p. 202.

[27](#27a) K.A. Nizami, *Religion and Politics*, p. 1.

[28](#28a) Ibn Warraq, p. 115.

[29](#29a) S.K. Malik, *The Quranic Concept of War*, p. 74.

[30](#30a) Colin Clarke, *Population Growth and Land Use*, p. 64.

[31](#31a) Andre Wink, *Al-Hind*, vol. I, p. 151.

[32](#32a) For a detailed discussion on this phenomenon, see K.S. Lal,
*Growth of Scheduled Tribes and Castes in Medieval India*, pp. 25-27,
88-94.

[33](#33a) Manucci, vol. III, pp. 112, 141, 151 and footnotes, 244-45.

[34](#34a) *Siyasat Nama* (ed. Shefer), pp. 77-80, 138-156.

[35](#35a) Aziz Ahmad, *Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian
Environment*, Oxford, 1964, p. 79.

[36](#36a) *Alberuni's India*, vol. I, p. 22.

[37](#37a) Quoted by Charis Waddy in *The Muslim Mind, Longmans*, 1976
and reproduced in Devendra Swarup (ed.), *Politics of Conversion*,
Deendayal Research Institute, New Delhi, 1986. p. 179 note.

[38](#38a) Aziz Ahmad, *Studies in Islamic Culture*, pp. 81-84; M.
Mujeeb, Indian Muslims, p. 22.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books.html)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
