+++
title = "06 5. Vandalism sanctified by scripture"

+++
**5. Vandalism sanctified by scripture**

*(After Hindu activists demolished a mosque in a small town in
Rajasthan, the on-line magazine “OutlookIndia” published a comment with
an entirely predictable message by the well-known secularist Yoginder
Sikand.  At the editor’s invitation, I wrote the following rebuttal,
published on 31 August 2001.)*

In his article “Sanctified Vandalism As A Political Tool”
(www.OutLooklndia.com, Aug. 23, 2001), Yoginder Sikand tries to explain
away Muslim iconoclasm as marginal and uncharacteristic, all while
accusing “the Hindus and others” of just such iconoclasm.  In both
endeavours, he predictably relies on Richard Eaton’s book *Essays on
Islam and Indian History* (OUP Delhi 2000).

According to Sikand, “Eaton clearly shows that cases of destruction of
places of worship were not restricted to Muslim rulers alone.  He
recounts numerous instances of Hindu kings having torn down Hindu
temples, in addition to Jaina and Buddhist shrines.  He says that these
must be seen as, above all, powerful politically symbolic acts.” Follows
a list of such allegations against historical Hindu kings.

As it takes at least a page to evaluate or refute an allegation uttered
in a single sentence, I cannot discuss those allegations here, so I will
accept for the sake of argument that there have indeed been “instances
of Hindu kings looting Hindu idols and destroying Hindu temples for
political purposes”.  However, it is obvious that these do not create
Sikand’s desired impression of symmetry between Hindu and Muslim
iconoclasm.  Such symmetry would require that like Hindu kings, whose
goal was political rather than religious, Muslim kings also destroyed
places of worship of their own religion.  Eaton and Sikand would succeed
in blurring the contrast between Hindu and Muslim attitudes to places of
worship if they could present a sizable list of *mosques* destroyed by
Muslim conquerors.

In a further attempt to blame even Islamic iconoclasm on the alleged
Hindu example, Sikand quotes Eaton again: “It is clear that temples had
been the natural sites for the contestation of kingly authority well
before the coming of Muslim Turks to India.  Not surprisingly, Turkish
invaders, when attempting to plant their own rule in early medieval
India, followed and continued established patterns.” How strange then
that the Muslim records never invoke the Hindu example: invariably they
cite Islamic scripture and precedent as justification for desecrating
Pagan temples.  As we shall see, the justification was provided outside
of the Hindu sphere of influence in 7th-century Arabia.

But at least Sikand admits the fact of Islamic iconoclasm: “It is true
that, as the historical records show, some Muslim kings did indeed
destroy Hindu temples.  This even Muslims themselves would hardly
dispute.” However, Sikand claims that unnamed “Hindutva sources” have
grossly exaggerated the record of Islamic temple destruction: “Richard
Eaton points out that of the sixty thousand-odd cases of temple
destruction by Muslim rulers cited by contemporary Hindutva sources one
may identify only eighty instances ‘whose historicity appears to be
reasonably certain’.”

In his seminal book *Hindu Temples: What Happened to Them*, independent
Hindu historian Sita Ram Goel has listed two thousand cases where a
mosque was built in forcible replacement of a Hindu temple.  Not one of
these verifiable items has been proven false, not by Sikand nor by Eaton
or other eminent historians.  It is also instructive to see for oneself
what Eaton’s purported “eighty” cases are, on pp. 128-132 of his book. 
These turn out not to concern individual places of worship, but
campaigns of destruction affecting whole cities with numerous temples at
once.  Among the items on Eaton’s list, we find “Delhi” under Mohammed
Ghori’s onslaught, 1193, or “Benares” under the Ghurid conquest, 1194,
and again under Aurangzeb’s temple-destruction campaign, 1669. On each
of these “three” occasions, literally hundreds of temples were sacked. 
In the case of Delhi, we all know how the single Quwwat-ul-Islam mosque
replaced 27 temples, incorporating their rubble.  At this rate, Eaton’s
“eighty” instances easily match Goel’s two thousand, perhaps even the
unnamed Hindutva author’s “sixty thousand”.

Sikand continues with the oft-used argument: “Caution must be exercised
in accepting the narratives provided by medieval writers about the
exploits of kings, including their ‘feats’ of temple destruction.  Most
historians were employees of the royal courts, and they tended to
exaggerate the ‘exploits’ of the kings in order to present them as great
champions of Islam, an image that hardly fits the facts that we know
about them.” So, as Sikand admits in so many words, the Muslim
chroniclers were collectively convinced that they could enhance the
standing of their patrons as “champions of Islam” by attributing to them
“feats of temple destruction”.  Perhaps some of them were liars, as
Sikand alleges, and merely attributed these feats of temple destruction
to kings who had no such merit.  But fact is: all of them, liars as well
as truth-tellers, acted on the collectively accepted premiss that a good
Muslim ruler is one who extirpates idolatry including its material
places and objects of worship.  They all believed that Islam justifies
and requires the destruction of idol temples.  And rest assured that,
like the Taliban, they had received a far more thorough training in
Islamic theology than Eaton or Sikand.

In a further attempt to minimize Muslim iconoclasm, Sikand claims: “As
in the case of Hindu rulers’ attacks on temples, Eaton says that almost
all instances of Muslim rulers destroying Hindu shrines were recorded in
the wake of their capture of enemy territory.  Once these territories
were fully integrated into their dominions, few temples were targetted. 
This itself clearly shows that these acts were motivated, above all, by
political concerns and not by a religious impulse to extirpate
idolatry.”

In fact, there were plenty of cases of temple destruction unrelated to
conquest, the best-known being Aurangzeb’s razing of thousands of
temples which his predecessors had allowed to come up.  But I concede
that stable Muslim kingdoms often allowed less prominent temples to
function, most openly the Moghul empire from Akbar to Shah Jahan.  This
was precisely because they could only achieve stability by making a
compromise with the majority population.

Islamic clerics could preach all they wanted about Islamic purity and
the extirpation of idolatry, but rulers had to face battlefield
realities (apart from being constrained by the never-ending faction
fights within the Muslim elite) and were forced to understand that they
could not afford to provoke Hindus too far.

Akbar’s genius consisted in enlisting enough Hindu support or
acquiescence to maintain a stable Muslim empire.  After Aurangzeb broke
Akbar’s compromise, the Moghul empire started falling apart under the
pressure of the Maratha, Jat, Rajput and Sikh rebellions, thus proving
the need for compromise a *contrario*.

In order to justify this compromise theologically, the *zimma* system
originally designed for Christians and Jews (but excluding polytheists,
a category comprising Hindus) was adapted to Indian conditions.  This
*zimma* or “charter of toleration” implied the imposition of a number of
humiliating constraints on the non-Muslim subjects or *zimmi*-s, such as
the toleration tax or jizya, but at least it allowed them to continue
practising their religion in a discreet manner.  The long-term design
was to make the non-Islamic religions die out gradually by imposing
permanent incentives for conversion to Islam, as witnessed by the slow
plummeting of Christian demography in Egypt or Syria, from over 90% in
the 7th century via some 50% in the 12th century to about 10% today. 
The system had the same impact in South Asia, yielding Muslim majorities
in the areas longest or most intensely under Muslim control.

To varying extents, the *zimma* system could include permission to
rebuild destroyed churches or temples.  But even then, non-Muslim places
of worship, though tolerated in principle, were not safe from Muslim
destruction or expropriation.  The Ummayad mosque in Damascus was once a
cathedral, as was the Aya Sophia in Istambul; the Mezquita of Cordova
was built in replacement of a demolished church.  Eaton and Sikand can
propose their rosy scenario of Islamic iconoclasts emulating an
imaginary Hindu iconoclasm only by keeping the non-Indian part of Muslim
history out of view.  It is entirely clear from the Muslim records that
these temple-destroyers consciously repeated in India what earlier
Muslim rulers had done in West Asia.  The first of these rulers was the
Prophet Mohammed himself.  And this brings us to the crux of Sikand’s
argument.

When the Taliban ordered the destruction of the Bamiyan Buddhas, a
secularist choir assured us that this had nothing to do with “genuine
Islam”.  To me it seems rather pretentious for secularists with their
studied ignorance of religions to claim better knowledge of Islam than
the Taliban, the “students (of Islam)”, whose mental horizon consists of
nothing but the detailed knowledge of Islamic theology and
jurisprudence.  Nonetheless, Sikand repeats the exercise: “Most
importantly, a distinction must be made between Islamic commandments, on
the one hand, and the acts of individual Muslims on the other.  The
Quran in no way sanctions the destruction of the places of worship of
people of other faiths.”

In deciding what is genuinely Islamic and what is not, it must be borne
in mind that Islamic law is very largely based on the precedents set by
the Prophet.  Thus, it is lawful to kill Rushdie because the Prophet
himself had had his critics executed or murdered.  Likewise, the Taliban
could justify their destruction of the Bamiyan Buddhas with reference to
Prophet’s own exemplary iconoclasm.  The primary Islamic sources on the
Prophet’s career (the *Hadis* and *Sira*) teach us that during his
conquest of Arabia, he did destroy all functioning temples of the Arab
Pagans, as well as a Christian church.  When he was clearly winning the
war, many tribes chose to avoid humiliation and martyrdom by crossing
over to his side, but he would only allow them to join him on condition
that they first destroy their idols.  The truly crucial event was
Prophet’s entry into the Kaaba, the central shrine of Arabia’s native
religion, where he and his nephew Ali smashed the 360 idols with their
own hands.

When prophet Mohammed appeared on the scene, Arabia was a multicultural
country endowed with Pagan shrines, churches, synagogues and Zoroastrian
fire-temples.  When he died, all the non-Muslims had been   
converted, expelled or killed, and their places of worship laid waste or
turned into mosques.  As he had ordered before his death, only one
religion remained in Arabia. If we were to believe Yoginder Sikand,
Mohammed’s iconoclasm was non-Islamic.  In reality, Mohammed’s conduct
is the definitional standard of what it is to be a good Muslim.

It is true that the Quran has little to say on temple destruction,
though it is very eloquent on Mohammed’s programme of replacing all
other religions with his own (which obviously implies replacing temples
with mosques).  Yet, the Quran too provides justification for the
smashing of the objects of non-Islamic worship.  It claims that Abraham
was the ancestor of the Arabs through Ismail, that his father had been
an idol-maker, that he himself ordered the idols of his tribe destroyed
(Q.37:93), and that he built the Kaaba as the first mosque, free of
idols. It further describes how Abraham was rewarded for these virtuous
acts.  Obviously it cannot be un-Islamic to emulate a man described by
the Quran as the first Muslim and favoured by Allah.

If Abraham existed at all, the only source about him is the Bible, which
carries none of this “information”.  It tells us that Ismail was the son
of Abraham’s Egyptian concubine Hagar, and that she took her son back to
Egypt; Arabia is not in the picture at all.  Nor do pre-Islamic Arab
inscriptions mention Abraham, or Ismail or their purported aniconic
worship in the Kaaba.  The Quranic story about them is pure myth. 
Considering the secularist record on lambasting “myths”, I wonder why
Sikand has not bothered to pour scorn on this Quranic myth yet.

All the same, Islamic apologists regularly. justify the desecration of
the Kaaba by Prophet Mohammed as a mere restoration of Abraham’s
monotheistic mosque which had been usurped by the polytheists.  This
happens to be exactly the justification given by Hindus for the
demolition of the Babri Masjid, with this difference that the
preexistence of a Hindu temple at the Babri Masjid site is a historical
fact, while the preexistence of monotheistic and aniconic worship
established by Abraham at the Kaaba is pure myth.  At any rate, the
Islamic account itself establishes that the model man Prophet Mohammed
desecrated the Kaaba and forcibly turned it into a mosque, setting an
example, particularly, for Mahmud Ghaznavi, Aurangzeb and the Taliban to
emulate.

Let us conclude with a comment on Sikand’s conclusion: “Hindus and
Muslims alike, then, have been equally guilty of destroying places of
worship, and, in this regard, as in any other, neither has a monopoly of
virtue or vice.  The destruction of the mosque in Rajasthan and building
a temple in its place, like the tearing down of the Babri Masjid by
Hindutva zealots or the vandalism of the Bamiyan Buddhas by the Taliban,
shows how sanctified vandalism and medieval notions of the politics of
revenge are still alive and thriving in our part of the world.”

Look how claims are smuggled into this conclusion which have not been
established in Sikand’s argumentation.  Even by Sikand’s own figures,
Hindus and Muslims were far from “equally” guilty, as a handful of
alleged cases of temple destruction by Hindus do not equal the “eighty”
well-attested Islamic cases.  Also, the notion of revenge, attributed
here to Hindus and Muslims alike, does not apply to both.  The Hindu kar
sevakh in Ayodhya were arguably taking revenge for the destruction of
the preexisting Rama Mandir, but the Islamic destruction of the Bamiyan
Buddhas was not a case of revenge on anyone.  The Taliban or Afghan
Islam in general had not been hurt or threatened by Buddhists or by any
other religion.  Their iconoclasm was not a case of vengeance, but of
unilateral and unprovoked aggression.

Nobody in this forum, or so I hope, claims a “monopoly of virtue” for
the members of one religion, nor that of vice for those of another.  The
problem with religions is that they can make virtuous people commit
vicious acts out of innocent piety, viz. by ordaining vicious behaviour
as divinely sanctioned.  In spite of Sikand’s attempt to whitewash
Aurangzeb, evidence remains plentiful that this Moghul emperor committed
acts of persecution and iconoclasm which would generally be considered
vicious (they certainly would if committed by Hindutva activists,
witness the torrent of abuse after the demolition of the Babri Masjid). 
Yet, by all accounts, Aurangzeb was a virtuous man, not given to
self-indulgence, eager to fulfil his duties.  Likewise, the Kashmiri
“militants” who massacre Hindus are not people of evil character.  They
have left fairly cosy jobs or schools behind to put their lives on the
line for their ideal, viz. bringing Kashmir under Islamic rule.  It is
the *contents* of their religion which makes them cross the line between
their own goodness and the evil of their terrorist acts.  The problem is
not Muslims, the problem is Islam. 

The founding texts as well as the history of Islam testify to the
profound link between iconoclasm and the basic injunction of the
Prophet, viz. that “until ye believe in Allah alone, enmity and hate
shall reign between us” (Q.60:4), i.e. between Muslims and non-Muslims. 
I can understand that a peace-loving Muslim who is comfortable with
religious pluralism would have problems with this quotation, and
generally with the unpleasant record of the founder and role model of
his religion.  Having wrestled with the Catholic faith in which I grew
up, I know from experience that outgrowing one’s religion can be a long
and painful process.  Regarding a Muslim’s reluctance to face these
facts, I would therefore counsel compassion and patience.

But Yoginder Sikand doesn’t have this excuse.  For him as a secularist,
facing and affirming the defects of religions should come naturally. 
One of the best-documented defects of any religion is the role of
Islamic doctrine in the destruction of other people’s cultural
treasures, rivalled only by Christianity in some of its phases, and
surpassed only in the 20th century by Communism.  A secularist should
subject the record of Islam to criticism, not to a whitewash.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI Books]()   [Back to
Home]()**
