+++
title = "09 8. From Ayodhya to Nazareth"

+++
**8. From Ayodhya to Nazareth**

*Indian Cbilstians and their allies in the international media have
mostly taken the Muslim side in the Ayodhya dispute.  This was the
reason for the following open letter to the Church dignitaries, written
in the last days of the year 1999, the occasion being the emergence of a
vaguely similar problem in Nazareth.  Muslims bad illegally started
building a mosque next to a church, and the Israeli authorities bad not
dared to interfere.  It may be added now (February 2002) that in the
context of the “second intifada” and the ongoing Israeli crackdown on
Islamic terrorism, Israeli Minister and former Soviet dissident Nathan
Sharansky bas ordered the construction work to be stopped.*

**8.1. A mosque casts its shadow on a church**

In Nazareth, a church (Basilica) marks the place where the angel
announced to Mary that she was about to be impregnated with Jesus, God’s
only-begotten son, the long awaited messiah.  This church of
Annunciation is one of the foci of Christian life in Palestine. 
However, the Christian community in Palestine and the whole Middle East
is dwindling, in percentage if not in absolute figures, due to their
observing more modern birth rates than their Muslim countrymen, and due
to the emigration of numerous young Christians who see no future for
themselves in a Muslim dominated part of the world.  Even in Nazareth
the Muslims are now in a majority, and with a Muslim-dominated
“Palestinian Authority” now in power, the local Muslim community feels
confident enough for a showdown.

So, on 22 November 1999, the foundation stone for a mighty and
magnificent mosque was laid in a square adjoining the Church.  The
Christian community had planned the construction of a Venice-type plaza
there, to accommodate the numerous Christian and other visitors from all
over the world.  After all, the sacred sites of Christianity are not all
that numerous, and those which exist deserve appropriate care.  If the
Muslims really needed an extra mosque, they could have built it
anywhere.  A diplomatic Saudi prince had even offered to finance the
mosque if it were built elsewhere, but his offer was spurned.  By
contrast, the place of the Annunciation is not moveable, so Christians
could not make any concessions short of allowing the humiliation of
their sacred site as but a stand-in-the-way of the mosque.  The Muslims
would not see reason and went ahead with their confrontational plan.

Most Palestinian Christians find this development gruesome.  According
to local Franciscan nun Sister Renee, “the Muslims want to trample and
humiliate the Christians.  The minaret of the mosque will tower over the
basilica^([1](#1)).” The Pope came out in support of the Christians of
Nazareth, and ordered all Catholic churches in the Holy Land closed for
two days in protest.  Yasser Arafat’s Palestinian Authority (PA)
formally distanced itself from the Islamic ceremony (in order to curry
favour with the Christian world so as to strengthen its own diplomatic
position vis-A-vis.Israel), but did nothing to prevent it.  The
presiding Muslim leader, Ahmad Abu Nawaf, was not troubled for taking a
defiant and confrontational stand, openly exulting in this Islamic
“victory”.

The incident must have reminded the Pope of the Muslim plans for
building a mosque in Rome dwarfing the Pope’s own Saint Peter’s
Basilica.  The Italian authorities disallowed this symbolic show of
strength but the mosque which came up close to the Vatican is still
impressive enough, and contrasts mightily with the absence of any
Christian place of worships for hundreds of miles around Mecca.  Because
Saudi Arabia has declared the whole of its territory to be a mosque, no
expressions of non-Islamic devotion are allowed there in any form
whatsoever.

In the circumstances, I cannot omit a vote of sympathy for the
Palestinian Christians who find themselves besieged by an arrogant
Islamic movement.  However, I also want to propose to the Christian
leadership, including the Pope and Indian Church leaders like Bishop
Alan de Lastic, a few points to ponder.

**8.2. Christians apologizing to Muslims**

First of all, Your Eminences, the last couple of years, the Catholic
Church and many Protestant Churches and Christian laymen’s groups have
been bending over backwards to convince Muslims and others about their
own heartfelt repentance over the crimes committed by Christian states
and institutions in the past centuries.  But it seems this has not moved
the heart of the Muslim world.

The Pope himself  has said sorry for the Crusades, even though these
were but a Christian counter-offensive in a long-drawn-out war which
Islam had unilaterally inflicted on Christianity ever since Prophet
Mohammed’s failed invasion of the East-Roman Empire, not long before his
death in A.D. 632.  Hardly four years later, after suppressing the Arab
national revolt against Islam (the *Ridda*, “return” to the ancestral
religion), Islamic armies invaded and occupied the Levantine part of the
Byzantine empire, and reduced Christians to third-class citizens without
political rights.  During and after this blitz offensive by Caliph Omar
in A.D. 636, many churches were turned into mosques, Christians were
sometimes forced to convert, but more often put under structural
pressure by the imposition of a toleration tax plus a number of
humiliating restraints on their rights.

Next came the conquest of Christian North Africa, effectively destroying
Christianity in Tunisia, Saint Augustine’s homeland, and in the
Maghreb.  Then followed the conquest of Christian Spain, the invasion of
Christian France in A.D. 731 (mercifully defeated by Charles Martel in
Poitiers), the occupation of Christian Sicily, and many other unilateral
Islamic acts of aggression, including the capture and sale of millions
of Christians as slaves.  The invasion of Byzantine Anatolia by Muslim
Seljuqs in Manzikert 1071 was one of the direct causes of the Crusades. 
In spite of regrettable Christian excesses during the reconquest of
Jerusalem in 1099 (easily matched by Sultan Baybars’ atrocities during
the Muslim reconquest of the Crusader states), the Crusades were a
legitimate attempt of the Christians to liberate their Holy Land
forcibly occupied by the Muslims.  Somewhat like the Hindus trying to
liberate Ayodhya from Islamic occupation.

Strategically speaking, the Crusades were a forward strike in a war in
which Christianity had so far been on the defensive.  After the defeat
of the Crusaders, the Islamic world resumed the attacks, especially in
the Balkans where one Christian nation after another came under the
Turkish yoke, and as late as A.D. 1689, the Turks laid siege to Vienna. 
There is no doubt that Christian soldiers have misbehaved during the
conquest of Jerusalem and on other occasions, but so have Muslim armies
on numerous occasions, starting with Prophet Mohammed’s own caravan
raids, murders of skeptics and massacres of recalcitrant tribes.  For
every Muslim gentleman conqueror (e.g. the Kurdish general Saladin who
chased the Crusaders from Jerusalem), there was a Muslim mass murderer
(e.g. the Mamluk sultan Baybars who finished off the last Crusader
strongholds).

All the same, an ecumenical Christian group has even conducted a
pilgrimage along the Crusader route, a Walk for Reconciliation,
everywhere offering apologies for what Christians in the distant past
had done to the Muslims.  This proved to be an exercise in
self-ridicule.  Thus, these self-flagellating Christian peninents went
to offer their apologies to the mayor of istambul for the sack of
Constantinople by the Fourth Crusade, forgetting that the city sacked by
the Crusaders was a Greek Orthodox city where a Muslim Turk like the
present mayor would be the number one enemy.  Constantinople was far
more definitively sacked by the Turks in 1453, and the Turkish mayor
represented the Turkish occupation force which has, unlike the
Crusaders, destroyed the Greek character of the city and nearly
annihilated the millennia-old Greek presence in Constantinople and
nearby lonia.  Addressing an apology for the temporary inconvenience
which the Crusaders had inflicted on the, Greeks to a mayor representing
a conquering nation which definitively destroyed the Greeks of Asia
Minor: only Liberation theologians could get that silly.

So, if apologies have to be tendered, let Muslim dignitaries start the
exchange.  Let the mayor of Istambul apologize to his Christian visitors
for representing a religion which killed and enslaved millions of
Christians.  Let the Turks apologize to the Greeks for sacking and
occupying their capital, Constantinople.  Better still, let them restore
Constantinople to the Greek Orthodox Christians.  But for now, the
position is that the Muslims world is not even willing to refrain from
the provocation in Nazareth.

**8.3. Christian understanding of the Hindu position**

Secondly, Your Eminences, you might reconsider your haughty condemnation
of the Hindu position regarding disputed sacred sites.  In Ayodhya, a
mosque had been imposed right on the site of a destroyed Hindu temple,
but you joined the Muslim-Marxist choir in denouncing these
“petty-minded and fanatical Hindus” reclaiming their sacred site.  “Why
the fuss about a temple when God is everywhere?”, you pontificated.

Now you are being put to a similar test.  In Nazareth, your Basilica was
not even touched.  The Muslims have a place for “the prophet Jesus” in
their system, not for the idolatrous demon Rama, so they showed more
tolerance in Nazareth than in Ayodhya.  And yet, look what a fuss you
are making over a mosque neatly juxtaposed to a church, perfectly
respecting its existence though not perhaps its breathing space.

To be sure, I understand that for Christians, sacred sites are a touchy
issue.  In Islamic and Communist countries, numerous churches have been
destroyed or put to no Christian uses; but on the other hand, so many of
those churches had been built in forcible replacement of Pagan places of
worship.  Thus, the Mezquita, the cathedral of Cordoba, used to be a
mosque, which in turn had been built in forcible replacement of a
church, but that ancient church had in its turn been built in forcible
replacement of a Roman temple.

Just recently, the Greco-Scything city of Chersoness on the Crimea
Peninsula has witnessed a controversy between the Greek Orthodox Church,
which is reclaiming an abbey stolen and abused by the Communists, and
the archaeologists, who first want to find out what exactly is lying
underneath the premises, known to have been a Pagan cultic site.  The
Churches cannot rock the boat of sacred sites controversy too badly, for
there are too many skeletons in their own cupboards.

**8.4. Muslims challenging Christianity in Europe**

Thirdly, Your Eminences, recent developments in Nazareth and many other
places ought to make you more receptive to the general Hindu distrust of
Islam.  In the week before Christmas, some fifty people were killed in
Muslim Christian riots in Indonesia, adding their numbers to the many
hundreds killed during the past year in that country alone, not to speak
of thousands of Christians killed in East Timor, nor of the handfuls of
Christians killed now and then by Islamic guerrilleros in the
Philippines.  Let us not make the picture more complicated by mentioning
the hundreds if not thousands of Hindus killed in India’s Northeast by
Christian separatists, let’s only consider killings of Christians.  We
then see a strange pattern emerge.  Compared with the fuss you made over
the deaths of just two priests, a Keralite Catholic and an Australian
Protestant, plus the two sons of the latter, killings for which you
prematurely blamed the Hindus, your outcry over Islamic atrocities is
remarkably subdued.

In the case of Nazareth, Church dignitaries have indeed spoken out.  But
look, a similarly strange moderation in your anti-Islamic protest
strikes the eye of the beholder.  The sharpest allegation is addressed
not to the Muslims who are encroaching on what you consider to be
Christian territory, but to the Israeli authorities.  “Israel is trying
to drive a wedge between Palestinian Christians and Muslims”, you say. 
But pray, if Israel meant you any harm, why has it left the Annunciation
Basilica in peace for decades?  You might reasonably accuse Israel of
giving in to the party from which it fears the most serious trouble,
viz.  Muslims rather than Christians.  But Israel is not doing more than
that: giving in to pressure exerted by another party, viz. the Muslims. 
If it wasn’t for the Muslims claiming the site, Israel couldn’t have
ruled in their favour.  So, what keeps you from laying blame at the door
where it belongs?

The answer is obvious: fear.  If even combative Israel feels it has to
throw some crumbs to the Islamic fanatics, such as space for a mosque in
Nazareth, what else can we expect of the Church?  The fact is that the
fear of Islam is increasingly gripping our aged Church Fathers by the
throat.  Ancient strongholds of European resistance to Islam are now
home to imposing five-star mosques: Madrid, capital of Reconquista
Spain; Paris, whence the Frankish Crusaders once left to liberate the
Holy Land; even Rome itself.  At the recent Bishops’ Synod in Rome
(October 1999), several Bishops expressed their worries about Islam’s
encroachment on the Christian world.

Consider the warnings by Mgr. Bemardini, Bishop of the Ionian city of
Smyma, now better known as Izmir after the Turks killed and expelled the
Greeks from there in 1922.  To the analysis given by other Bishops, he
added some recent anecdotes from real life, e.g.: “During an official
Christian Muslim meeting, an important Muslim delegate said calmly and
self-assuredly: ‘Thanks to your democratic laws we will conquer you. 
Thanks to out religious laws, we will dominate you.’”^([2](#2))

And this one: “A Catholic monastery in Jerusalem had an Arab servant,
naturally a Muslim.  He was a very courteous, friendly and honest man,
greatly valued by the monks.  But the converse turned out not to apply. 
One day he told them with sadness: ‘Our leaders have convened and have
decided that all infidels must be killed.  But you need not fear: though
I too will be ordered to kill you, I will do it without making you
suffer.’ We know that a distinction must be made between the fanatics
and the more peaceful majority.  But even the latter will rise against
us as one man when Allah so commands.”

In his concluding remarks, Mgr.Bernardini returned to an issue of
disputed places of worship, specifically referring to the practice of
selling the empty churches of European cities to Muslims for use as
mosques: “To conclude, and speaking from my experience, I would at any
rate advise that no Catholic church should ever be handed over to the
Muslims for their worship.  To them this is merely the most convincing
proof of our apostasy.”^([3](#3))

Exactly, Your Eminences, places of worship are a serious business. 
Apart from their symbolic meaning, they also have a tangible political
dimension.  Like Mgr. Bernardini, and like the Christians of Nazareth,
Hindus in Ayodhya don’t want to abandon their temples to eager Muslims. 
And rest assured that unlike churches in Europe, Hindu temples are not
standing empty for lack of devotees.  
 

**Footnotes:**

> ^([1](#1a))Quoted by Salomon Bouman, *De Standard*, 24-11-1999.
>
> ^([2](#2a))Reproduced in the Catholic monthly *Nucleus*, Bruges,
> November 1999.
>
> ^([3](#3a))*Nucleus*, November 1999.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI Books]()   [Back to
Home]()**
