+++
title = "12 11. The Ayodhya evidence debate"

+++
**11. The Ayodhya evidence debate**

This paper was written as an adaptation from an earlier paper, “The
Ayodhya debate”, published in the conference proceedings of the 1991
International Ramayana Conference, which had taken place in my hometown,
Leuven.^([1](#1)) The present version represents my own text prepared
for the October 1995 Annual South Asia Conference in Madison, Wisconsin,
U. S.A. A few notes have been added.

The atmosphere at the conference was frankly hostile.  After the
academic authorities, who may have been ignorant of my controversial
reputation, had allowed my paper to be read, the practical organization
of the panel session was entrusted to graduate students belonging to the
Indian Communist organization, *Forum of Indian Leftists* (FOIL).  They
scheduled me as the last speaker in a panel of four, chaired by an
Indian female graduate student, a nice girl but obviously unable to
perform the most difficult duty of a panel chairperson, viz. keeping the
speakers to their allotted time.  Moreover, they arranged for our
session to be held in a room where another panel was scheduled at noon,
making it impossible for the last speaker to read his paper in excess of
the panel session’s allotted time.  Two panel speakers played along by
comfortably expounding and repeating the points they could easily have
made in half the time.

It was up to people from the audience to protest and oblige the
chairperson to allow me to read out my paper. When it was my turn, I was
heckled somewhat by the Leftist crowd, especially by a well-known
Indo-American Communist academic, who was rolling his eyes like a madman
and making obscene gestures until an elderly American lady sitting next
to him told him to behave.  At the end, Mathew came to collect a copy of
my text (the book version, of which I had some author’s copies handy),
called me a “liar”, and told his buddies that they needed to write a
scholarly rebuttal.  Which is still being awaited today.

**11.1. Introduction**

One of the contenders in the Ayodhya history debate, the “hypothesis”
that the Babri Masjid had been built in forcible replacement of a Hindu
temple, had been a matter of universal consensus until a few years ago. 
Even the Muslim participants in court cases in the British period had
not challenged it; on the contrary, Muslim authors expressed pride in
this monument of Islamic victory over infidelity.  It is only years
after the Hindu take-over of the structure in 1949 that denials started
to be voiced.^([2](#2)) And it is only in 1989 that a large-scale press
campaign was launched to deny what had earlier been a universally
accepted fact.

In normal academic practice, the debate on an issue on which such a
consensus exists, would only have been opened after the discovery of new
facts which undermine the consensus view.  The present debate is between
a tradition which numerous observers and scholars had found coherent and
well-founded, and an artificial hypothesis based on political
compulsions instead of on newly discovered facts.

In an effort to move the debate forward, the Government of India
provided the contending parties with an official forum in which experts
could go through the evidence produced for both sides.  This scholarly
exchange took place around the turn of 1991, and was briefly revived in
the autumn of 1992.  Both rounds of the debate were unilaterally broken
off by the Babri Masjid party.

This paper is intended to fill the gap left by the general media in the
information on the debate about the historical claims concerning the
Rama-Janmabhoomi/Babri Masjid site in Ayodhya.  As the only non-Indian
scholar to have followed this dispute closely, I will argue that the
scholars’ debate has ended in an unambiguous victory for one of the two
parties.^([3](#3))

**11.2.The object of the debate**

As is well-known by now, on Rama’s supposed birthplace in Ayodhya there
used to stand a disputed mosque structure.  It was called the *Babri
Masjid* because according to an inscription on its front wall it was
built at the orders of the Moghul invader Babar in 1528, by his
lieutenant Mir Baqi.  But until the beginning of this century, official
documents called it *Masjid-i-Janamsthan*, “mosque of the birthplace”,
and the hill on which it stands was designated as *Ramkot* (Rama’s fort)
or *Janamsthan* (birthplace).  Since 1949, the building is effectively
in use as a Hindu temple, but many Hindus, and especially the *Vishva
Hindu Parishad* (VHP)^([4](#4)), want to explicitate the Hindu function
of the place with proper Hindu temple architecture, which implied
removing the existing structure.  On the other hand, the *Babri Masjid
Action Committee* (BMAC) and its splinter, the *Babri Masjid Movement
Coordination Committee* (BMMCC), want the building, and after its
demolition at least the site, to be given back to the Muslim community.

In December 1990 and January 1991, at the request of the Chandra Shekhar
Government, the BMAC and the VHP exchanged historical evidence for their
respective cases. it was broken off on 25 January 1991 when the BMAC
representatives, without any explanation, failed to show up at the
meeting scheduled for that day.  The debate was revived in October 1992
by the Narasimha Rao Government, with essentially the same teams, but
the next month, the BMAC withdrew in protest against the VHP’s
announcement of a Kar Seva (building activity) due on 6 December 1992.

It is strange (but perfectly explainable, as we shall see) that this
debate has not received more attention in scholarly and journalistic
writings.  It was, after all, the only occasion where both parties could
not manipulate “evidence” without being subject to pointed criticism
from the opposing side.  Many reporters on the Ayodhya conflict have
made tall claims about the “concoction” of “bogus evidence” (not to
mention “Goebbelsian propaganda”), and to substantiate these, there
could hardly be a better mine of information than this
Government-sponsored debate.  Yet, most of them refuse to even mention
it.

A report on this debate should distinguish between three possible
debating issues:

1\) Is the present-day Ayodhya with all its Rama-related sites, the
Ayodhya described by Valmiki in his Sanskrit Ramayana?  In the course of
this debate, no new facts have been added to Prof. B.B. Lal’s conclusion
that Valmiki’s Ayodhya and present-day Ayodhya are one and the same
place.^([5](#5)) It is a different matter that his conclusions have been
disputed, without any evidence, by the JNU historians among others.  Of
course, it is nobody’s case that the Valmiki connection has been
established in an unassailable manner; but at least, what much of
research is available, points in that direction.  However, even if B.B.
Lal’s assertion is correct, this leaves open the possibility that the
writer who styled himself Valmiki, may have written his version of the
Rama story long after it actually took place, and that he relocated the
scene of a tradition coming from elsewhere into his own area. 
Therefore, the next, more fundamental question might be:

2\) Is the present-day Ayodhya, and more specifically the disputed site,
indeed the birthplace of a historical character called Rama?  The BMAC
has argued that such a thing cannot be proven, assuming that Rama was a
historical character at all.  The VHP has refused to consider this
question, arguing that religions do not have to justify the sacredness
of their sacred sites: if the site was traditionally associated with
sacred events and characters (as it was, at least from Valmiki onwards),
or if it was treated by Rama devotees as somehow sacred (as it was since
at least several centuries), then that should be enough to command
respect, regardless of the historical basis of this claim to sacredness.

Compare with the Muslim sacred places: there is no historical substance
at all in Mohammed’s claim that the Kaaba in Mecca had been built by
Abraham as a place of monotheistic worship.  This story had to justify
the take-over of the Kaaba from its real owners, the “idolaters” of
Arabia.  And yet, in spite of the starkly unhistorical nature of the
Muslim claim to the Kaaba, this claim is not being questioned. Nobody is
saying that the Muslims can only have their Kaaba if they give
historical proof that it was built by Abraham.^([6](#6))

Therefore the VHP insists that if the disputed site is a genuine
traditional sacred site, this must be enough to make others respect it
as such.  However, if it was really a Hindu sacred site, it is
reasonable to expect that this status was explicitated with a temple,
which must have adorned the site before the Babri Masjid was built.  So,
the third question is:

3) Was the Babri Masjid built in forcible replacement of a preexisting
Rama temple?  The Muslim fundamentalist leader Syed Shahabuddin,
convenor of the BMMCC (and initiator of the campaign against Salman
Rushdie)^([7](#7)) agrees with the VHP that this is the fundamental
question.  He has said repeatedly: 

“If it is proven that the Babri Masjid has been built in forcible
replacement of a Hindu temple, I will demolish it with my own
hands.”^([8](#8)) So, the subject matter of the debate can be limited to
the question whether a Hindu temple had been destroyed to make way for
the Babri Masjid.

In November 1990, in a letter to the newly appointed Prime Minister
Chandra Shekhar, the late Sri Rajiv Gandhi (whose Congress Party was
supporting the new Government) had also proposed to narrow down the
debate to this one question.  Sri Gandhi suggested that the decision of
whether to leave the disputed building to the Hindus (who were using it
as a temple) or to give it to the Muslims (who had used it as a mosque),
should be taken on the basis of historical and archaeological evidence
regarding the specific point whether the Babri Masjid had replaced a
preexisting Hindu temple.  It is this letter from Rajiv Gandhi which
prompted Chandra Shekhar to invite the contending parties to have a
scholarly exchange of historical evidence.

**11.3. Chronicle of the semi-official debate**

Both parties met on 1 December and 4 December 1990, and they agreed to
submit and confront historical material supporting their respective
viewpoints.  On 23 December, the VHP and the BMAC submitted their
respective bundles of evidence.  On 10 January 1991, both sides
submitted rejoinders to their opponents’ evidence bundles.  At least,
the VHP scholars gave a detailed reply to all the documents presented by
the BMAC.  But the latter merely handed in yet another pile of newspaper
articles and more- such non-evidential statements of opinion.  This
created the impression that the BMAC was effectively conceding defeat.

On January 24, the parties met in order to discuss the evidence.  But
the BMAC team leader, Prof. R.S. Sharma, a well-known Marxist historian,
said that he and his colleagues had not yet studied the VHP material (to
which the BMAC had agreed to reply by January 10).  This is most
remarkable, because the week before, he had led 42 academics in signing
a much-publicized statement, saying that there was definitely absolutely
no proof whatsoever at all for the preexisting Rama temple.  He had
issued more statements on the matter, and even published a small book on
it.^([9](#9)) There he was, pleading a lack of familiarity with the very
material on which he had been making such tall statements.

The other historians for the BMAC were Athar Ali, D. N. Jha and Suraj
Bhan, apart from the office bearers of the BMAC itself.  The four BMAC
historians have published their argumentation some months later:
*Ramjanmabhumi Babari Masjid, A Historians’ Report to the
Nation*.  Tellingly, they do not mention the outcome of the debate, but
reiterate the ludicrous demand they made while attending the debate as
BMAC advocates, viz. that they be considered “independent historians”
qualified to pronounce scientific judgment in a debate between their
employers and their enemies.^([10](#10))

Of course, the government representative dismissed this demand as
ridiculous.  Yet, the BMAC has continued to call them “the independent
historians”, and they themselves have continued to demand that the VHP
submit its case to “independent arbitration”, i.e. by their own kind. 
These two telling details of the Ayodhya debate story have, of course,
been withheld from the reader in the booklet published by the BMAC team,
and in all subsequent publications by the anti-temple party.

The next meeting was scheduled for the next day, January 25. But there,
the BMAC scholars simply did not show up.  The unambiguous result of the
debate was this: the BMAC scholars have run away from the arena.  They
had not presented written evidence worth the name, they had not given a
written refutation of the VHP scholars’ arguments, they had wriggled out
of a face-to-face discussion on the accumulated evidence, and finally
they had just stayed away.  Thus ended the first attempt by the
Government of India to find an amicable solution on the basis of genuine
historical facts.

In October 1992, the Narasimha Rao Government tried to revive this
discussion forum.  Due to personal differences, Prof. R.S. Sharma stayed
away from the BMAC team, which otherwise consisted of the same people. 
The debate focused almost entirely on the interpretation of the
archaeological findings of June 1992: a large number of Hindu sculptures
and other temple remains, found in the terrain in front of the disputed
building.  The BMAC team argued that these findings had all been
planted.  It also demanded that in view of the ongoing negotiations, the
VHP cancel its programme scheduled for 6 December 1992 in Ayodhya.  When
the VHP refused, the BMAC stayed away from the talks once more.

**11.4. The pro-temple evidence**

On Ayodhya, there has always in living memory been a consensus: among
local Muslims and Hindus, among European travellers and British
administrators.  As late as 1989, the *Encyclopedia Brittannica* (entry
*Ayodhya*) reports without a trace of hesitation that the Babri Masjid
was built in forcible replacement of a temple marking Rama’s
birthplace.  When there is such a consensus on a given issue, the
academic custom is not to reopen the debate until someone comes with
serious evidence that the consensus opinion is wrong and that a
different scenario is indicated by newfound (or newly interpreted)
facts.  But the only evidence to surface during the debate was presented
by the VHP-mandated team and merely reconfirmed the old consensus.

The VHP’s evidence bundle was not just a pile of separate
documents.^([11](#11)) It was centred around a careful argumentation,
which can be summed up in three points:

1\) A single hypothesis.  Only one hypothesis is put forward, viz. that
the disputed place was traditionally (since before the Muslim period)
venerated as Rama’s birthplace, that a Rama temple had stood on it, and
that this temple was destroyed to make way for the Babri Masjid.  All
the material collected goes to confirm this one hypothesis.  Not a
single piece of documentary or archaeological evidence contradicts it.
The contrast with the anti-Janmabhoomi polemists is striking they have
so far not produced any document that positively indicates a different
scenario from the one upheld by the VHP scholars.  The BMAC effort has
been only. negative, viz. trying to pick holes in the pro-temple
evidence, but the VHP has posited its own hypothesis that takes care of
all the relevant data.

2\) Temple foundations.  Archaeological findings in Prof. B.B. Lal’s
excavation campaign *Archaeology of the Ramayana Sites* 1975-80 and more
recent ones as well as a large number of documents written *in tempore
non suspecto* confirm the hypothesis.  Findings of burnt-brick
pillar-bases dated to the 11th century in trenches a few metres from the
disputed structure, prove that a pillared building stood in alignment
with, and on the same foundations system as the Babri Masjid.  The
written documents do not include an eye-witness account of the temple
destruction, the way we have eye-witness accounts of the destruction of
many other temples.  But then, a wealth of documents, written from the
17th century onwards, by European traveller,-, and by local Muslims,
confirm unanimously that the Babri Masjid was considered to have been
built in forcible replacement of a Rama temple.  These witnesses also
describe first-hand how the place was revered by the Hindus as Rama’s
birthsite, and that Hindus always came back to worship as closely as
possible to the original temple site: they would not reasonably have
done this except in continuation of a tradition dating back to before
the Babri Masjid.

3\) The single hypothesis is consistent with known patterns.  No *ad
hoc* hypotheses are needed to support the main hypothesis, no unusual
scenarios have to be invented, no unusual motives have to be attributed
to the people involved, no conspiracy theory has to be conjured up.  The
VHP hypothesis merely says that well-established general patterns of
Hindu and Muslim behaviour apply to the specific case under
consideration.  Among these are to be noted:

Firstly, the fact that a temple stood on the now-disputed site, which is
a hilltop overlooking Ayodhya, is in perfect conformity with a
world-wide practice of putting important buildings, like castles and
temples, on the topographical place of honour.  By contrast, the
hypothesis that the Babri Masjid had been built on an empty spot
presupposes an abnormal course of events, viz. that the people of the
temple city Ayodhya had left the place of honour empty.

Secondly, the demolition of Hindu temples and their forcible replacement
by mosques has been a very persistent behaviour pattern of the Muslim
conquerors.  These temple demolitions were consistent with the
persecution of “unbelief” carried out by Islamic rulers from Mohammed
bin Qasim (who conquered Sindh in 712) to Aurangzeb (the last great
Moghul, d. 1707), and more recently in Pakistan, Bangladesh and
Kashmir.  Though there is no lack of *negationists* who try to deny or
conceal it, the historical record bears out Will Durant’s assessment
that “the Mohammedan conquest of India is probably the bloodiest story
in history”.^([12](#12)) It is safe to affirm that the majority of
pre-1707 mosques in India has been built in forcible replacement of
Hindu temples.  Outside India, the Islamic take-over of the most sacred
sites of other religions was equally systematic, e.g. the *Ka’aba* in
Mecca, the Temple Mount in Jerusalem, the Aya Sophia in Istambul, the
Buddhist monastery in Bukhara etc.

Thirdly, the fact that Hindu temple materials (14 black-stone sculptured
pillars) have been used in the Babri Masjid is not an unusual feature
requiring a special explanation; on the contrary, it was a fairly common
practice meant as a visual display of the victory of Islam over
infidelity.  It was done in many mosques that have forcibly replaced
temples, e.g. the Gyanvapi mosque in Varanasi (in which a part of the
Kashi Vishvanath temple is still visible)^([13](#13)), the
Adhai-Din-ka-Jhonpra mosque in Ajmer, the Quwwat-ul-Islam mosque in
Delhi, or, outside India, the Jama Masjid of Damascus (which was a
Christian cathedral).

Fourthly, the fact that Hindus used to keep on revering sacred sites
even after mosques had been built on them, is attested by foreigners
like Niccolo Manucci in the 17th and Alexander Cunningham in the 19th
century.^([14](#14)) By contrast, the hypothesis that Hindus started
laying an arbitrary claim on a place firmly occupied by the Muslims (so
that they courted repression for no reason at all), is pretty fantastic
and without parallel.

**11.5. No direct evidence**

The VHP evidence bundle also contained a large number of quotes from
ancient literature to prove that the Rama cult is not a recent
development, and that the status of Ayodhya as a sacred city has been
uninterrupted since at least 2000 years.  The one thing that is missing
is the ultimate clinching evidence: a contemporary description of the
forcible replacement of the temple with the mosque.  But even in the
absence of this item of primary evidence, the amount of secondary
evidence is so overwhelming, coherent and uncontradicted, that in
another, less contentious historical search, it would be considered
conclusive.

It may be recalled that, in the course of the public debate on the
opinion pages of the newspapers, the pro-BMAC polemists had at first
demanded non-British evidence, because the whole Janmabhoomi tradition
was merely a British concoction.  In A. G. Noorani’s categorical words:
“The myth is a 19th-century creation by the British.”^([15](#15))

Next, they demanded pre-19th-century evidence, because Hindus and
Muslims had already “interiorized the British propaganda” early in that
century, as is clear from a number of writings by local Muslims, brought
to light by Prof. Harsh Narain.  Thus, Mirza Jan, a Muslim militant who
participated in an attempt to wrest from the Hindus another sacred site
in Ayodhya, the Hanumangarhi, wrote in 1856 that “a lofty mosque has
been built by *badshah* Babar” on “the original birthplace of Rama”, in
application of the rule that “where there was a big temple, a big mosque
was constructed, and where there was a small temple, a small mosque was
constructed”.^([16](#16)) Therefore, Muslim leader Mohammed Abdul Rahim
Qureishi has asked the pro-Janmabhoomi side “to produce any historical
evidence, not only independent of the British sources but also of the
period prior to the advent of the 19th century”.^([17](#17))

But this type of evidence was also produced: most publicly the Austrian
Jesuit Joseph Tieffenthaler’s 1767 account, presented by Mr. Abhas Kumar
Chatterjee in *Indian Express*.  Tieffenthaler describes how Hindus
celebrated *Ram Navami* (commemorating Rama’s birth) just outside the
Babri Masjid, and recounts the local tradition that the mosque was built
in forcible replacement of Rama’s birthplace temple.^([18](#18))

It was also pointed out that the Muslim writer Mirza Jan, already
mentioned, had given an extensive quotation from an (otherwise unknown)
letter by a daughter of Aurangzeb’s son and successor, Bahadur Shah.  He
quotes her as writing in about 1710 that the temples on the sacred sites
of Shiva, Krishna and Rama (including “Sita’s kitchen”, i.e. part of the
Ramkot complex) “were all demolished for the strength of Islam, and at
all these places mosques have been constructed”.  She exhorted the
Muslims to assert their presence at these mosques and not to give in to
Hindu compromise proposals.^([19](#19))

Furthermore, a letter dated 1735 by a Faizabad qazi (judge) was shown,
describing Hindu-Muslim riots in Ayodhya over “the Masjid built by the
emperor of Delhi”, i.e. either a pre-Moghul sultan or Moghul dynasty
founder Babar (Aurangzeb moved the Moghul capital from Delhi/Agra to the
Dekkhan).  This is only a secondary indication for the actual temple
destruction, but it is first-hand evidence for the existence of the
Hindu claim on the Babri Masjid site well before the 19th century.  Only
when this type of evidence was shown, did the pro-BMAC polemists move on
to demand strictly contemporary evidence.

About this demand for eye-witness accounts, Arun Shourie has remarked:
“Today a contemporary account is being demanded in the case of the Babri
Masjid.  Are those who make this demand prepared to accept this as the
criterion - that if a contemporary account exists of the destruction of
a temple for constructing a mosque, the case is made?” Shourie goes on
to quote from Aurangzeb’s court chronicles: “News came to Court that in
accordance with the Emperor’s command his officers had demolished the
temple of Vishvanath at Benares (2/9/1669)… In this month of Ramzan, the
religious-minded Emperor ordered the demolition of the temple at
Mathura… In a short time by the great exertions of his officers the
destruction of this strong centre of infidelity was accomplished... A
grand mosque was built on its site... (January 1670)”^([20](#20)) These
accounts are as contemporary as you can get.

Shourie concludes: “If the fact that a contemporary account of the
temple at Ayodhya is not available leaves the matter unsettled, does the
fact that contemporary accounts are available for the temples at
Kashi, Mathura, Pandharpur and a host of other places settle the
matter?  One has only to ask the question to know that the ‘experts’ and
‘intellectuals’ will immediately ask for something else.”^([21](#21))

**11.6. The anti-temple evidence**

The BMAC presented a pile of some eighty documents, which can be divided
into three groups: legal documents, statements of opinion, and
historical documents.

The largest group consists of court documents, from court disputes over
the Rama-Janmabhoomi and other contentious places in Ayodhya, most of
them from the British period, a few from after independence.  However,
what these court documents prove is:

Firstly, that the Hindus kept on claiming the site in principle, even if
for the time being they were willing to settle for a licence to worship
on a platform just outside the contentious building;

Secondly, that the Muslim pleas always focused, not on questioning the
temple destruction tradition, but on the accomplished fact that they had
owned the place for centuries, long enough to *create* an ownership
title no matter how and from whom they had acquired it;

And thirdly, that the British rulers did not want any raking-up of old
quarrels, and therefore upheld the status-quo, but without questioning
the common belief that the Masjid had replaced a Hindu temple.

British judges have explicitly not subscribed to the thesis, now
defended by the BMAC and the BMMCC, that there had never been a Hindu
temple on the contentious spot.  On the contrary, in his verdict in 1886
a British judge observed: “It is unfortunate that a mosque should have
been built on land held specially sacred by the Hindus, but as that
happened 356 years ago, it is now too late to remedy the
grievance.”^([22](#22)) So, the court verdicts that upheld the Muslim
claim to the site (and have been cited by the BM-AC scholars to this
effect), by no means imply that the judges doubted the contention that a
temple had been demolished to make way for this mosque.  All the British
sources, such as Edward Balfour in 1858 and Archaeological Survey of
India’s field explorer A. Fuhrer in 1891, confirm the tradition that the
Babri Masjid had replaced a Rama temple.

One British source, Francis Buchanan’s survey (written in 1810 and
edited by Montgomery Martin in 1838), has been quoted by pro-BMAC
historians (who have otherwise dismissed British testimonies as
“prejudiced”, “part of a British tactic to foment communalism” etc.) as
calling the tradition of the Rama-Janmabhoomi temple destruction “very
ill-founded”.^([23](#23)) However, Buchanan did not denounce as
ill-founded “the temple-destruction theory”, as the BMAC historians
claim, but only referred to the fact that “the destruction is very
generally attributed by the Hindus to the furious zeal *of
Aurangzeb*”, which allegation was misdirected: as proof for Aurangzeb’s
non-involvement Buchanan cites the inscription attributing the mosque to
Babar.^([24](#24)) As the last large-scale temple-destroyer, Aurangzeb
had become the proverbial representative of the old Islamic tradition of
iconoclasm, which had already destroyed thousands of temples before his
own time.

Buchanan opines that Babar had built the mosque not on empty land, but
on the site of the Ramkot “castle”, which to him may well have been the
very castle in which Rama himself had lived.  This claim only differs
from the local tradition and the VHP position by being even bolder. 
According to him, the black-stone pillars (with Hindu sculptures defaced
by “the bigot” Babar) incorporated in the Masjid had been “taken from
the ruins of the palace”, and at any rate from “a Hindu
building”.  Obviously, the site was considered by the devotees as Rama’s
court, originally a castle and only later a temple.^([25](#25))

At any rate, the quarrel over whether the Babri Masjid replaced a
“castle” or a “temple” is a false problem, considering Rama’s
double-role as a God-King.  Buchanan gives no facts supporting an
alternative origin for the Babri Masjid, and upholds the essence of the
local tradition, viz. that the Masjid has replaced a Hindu
building.^([26](#26)) The British judges have consistently accepted the
view of the British surveyors and scholars.

The second largest group of BMAC documents consisted of book excerpts
and newspaper articles, mere statements of opinion.  They give the
well-known or at least predictable opinions of politicians like
Jawaharlal Nehru and Ramaswamy Naicker, of secularist journalists like
Arvind N. Das and Praful Bidwai, of Marxist intellectuals like the JNU
historians and Prof. R.S. Sharma (who was invited to lead the BMAC team
only after this first round).  In this collection of opinions,
essentially four points have been argued:

Firstly, Rama was not a historical character;

Secondly, Rama may have been a historical character, but Ayodhya is not
his real birthplace;

Thirdly, Rama worship in Ayodhya is fairly recent, and hardly existed
prior to the period when the Babri Masjid was built;

Fourthly, the Babri Masjid was not built in forcible replacement of a
Rama temple.

However, the cited opinions on each of these four points are not even
convergent or in mutual agreement.  For instance, several authors say
that the Babri Masjid was built on empty land; others say it replaced a
“Buddhist stupa”; yet others say it replaced a Jaina temple, or a Shaiva
temple, or a secular building.  About Rama’s birthplace, one source
cited says Rama was born in Nepal; another says it was in Afghanistan;
yet another says it was in Ayodhya, but on a different spot; one writer
says that Rama was in fact a pharaoh of Egypt. in all, the BMAC has
given “proof” that Rama was born at 8 different places.

Methodologically speaking, these documents do not form a body of
evidence supporting one hypothesis.  The BMAC has merely collected all
kinds of opinions which happen to be in conflict with the thesis that
the Masjid replaced a Rama temple, without minding that these opinions
are also in conflict with each other.  Of course, this collection of
contemporary, often politically motivated articles and statements does
not have any proof value.  At best, some of the names under the articles
could constitute an “argument of authority”, but even that is diluted by
their juxtaposition with political agitators and plain cranks.  More
than an argumentation, this presentation of many conflicting opinions is
a dispersionary tactic to keep the opposing party busy with refuting the
weirdest viewpoints.

An important feature of the collected pro-BMAC opinions is that they
have in fact limited themselves to an attempt to discredit the evidence
cited in favour of the Rama-Janmabhoomi tradition.  They have not given
any evidence (valid or otherwise) at all for an alternative scenario
that explains the presence of the Babri Masjid and the well-attested
Hindu opposition against it.  They have tried to explain away the
Janmabhoomi tradition by means of a conspiracy theory: as the outcome of
a 19th century rumour campaign by the British rulers, out to “divide and
rule”.^([27](#27)) In fact, such a rumour campaign is totally unheard of
in the well-documented history of British India, and would have left
testimonies which the pro-BMAC historians have not been able to
produce.^([28](#28)) It is an *ad hoc* hypothesis based on nothing but
the fond belief that India’s “communal problem” is a British creation
and not the necessary result of any religious doctrine of hostility
towards alternative forms of worship.^([29](#29))

The only seemingly valid point scored by some of the BMAC sympathizers
cited in the BMAC evidence bundle, is the *argumentum e silentio* that
the temple destruction is not mentioned in near-contemporary sources,
notably Abul Fazl’s *Ain-i-Akbari* and the poems of Tulsidas.  However,
neither Abul Fazl nor Tulsidas have written catalogues of demolished
temples or even just devoted some pointed attention to the buildings of
the cities mentioned in their works: they are simply not the sources
that are supposed to carry the required information.  Also, they are not
really contemporary with Babar, but with his grandson Akbar (around 1600
A.D.).^([30](#30)) For them too, the temple destruction was history, and
the Babri Masjid just one of the thousands of mosques built on
demolished Hindu temples.

The third part of the evidence bundle for the Babri Masjid side, is the
historical evidence properly speaking.  It consists of three pieces.

One is the text of the inscriptions on the Babri Masjid and its gate,
declaring that the mosque was built in 1528 by Mir Baqi, who worked
under Babar’s command.  Of course the Hindu side has no quarrel with
that: the Babri Masjid was built, so it must have been built by
someone.  However, in spite of the inscription, the identity of the
Masjid’s builder happens to be disputable.  It has been argued (by
Sushil Srivastava and R. Nath, independently)^([31](#31)) that, judging
from the architecture, the mosque must have been built during the
preceding Sultanate period.  Sushil Srivastava even claims that the
inscription attributing the Masjid to Babar (or at least to his
lieutenant Mir Baqi), is a 19th-century forgery.^([32](#32)) At any
rate, the scenario that it was built under Babar is not in conflict with
the thesis that it was built in forcible replacement of a Rama temple. 
This dispute is not about who built the mosque, but about what preceded
the mosque.

The second piece is Babar’s memoirs.  In it, no mention is made of a
temple demolition in Ayodhya.  Unfortunately, the pages for the months
when he must have been in Ayodhya and perhaps also ordered the
demolition of a Hindu temple, are missing from the manuscripts.  So we
simply do not have Babar’s own report on this matter.  And if Sushil
Srivastava and R. Nath are right, Babar was not the builder and his
testimony is irrelevant, except insofar as it might explain why the
already existing mosque got attributed to him.  For instance, the Afghan
rulers (against whom the invader Babar fought) or the city’s inhabitants
may have defended Ayodhya from the Ramkot hill, so that the existing
mosque got damaged in the fighting (Babar was the first one in India to
use cannon), and was subsequently rebuilt by Babar’s men.  But all this
will remain speculation, because the relevant part of Babar’s report is
missing.

The third piece of BMAC evidence is Babar’s testament, in which he
advises his son Humayun to practise tolerance, to respect Hindu temples,
and not to kill cows.  This statement of religious tolerance is very
nice, but unfortunately it has amply been proven to be a
forgery.^([33](#33)) It is quite bizarre that scholars trying to prove a
point discredit their own case by using a proven forgery without any
comment.

And even if Babar’s testament had been genuine, it would only prove that
at the end of his life, Babar had got tired of the jihad which he had
been waging (on top of an inter-Muslim war), or that he had come to
realize that a prosperous kingdom would be better served by religious
amity than by the intolerance of which he himself had given sufficient
proof during his life.  Babar’s emphatical concern for tolerance would
certainly not prove that tolerance had been his way all through his
life.

There are Hindu temple materials in mosques attributed to Babar in
Sambhal (replacing a Vishnu temple, and dated by archaeologists to the
Sultanate period, just like the Ayodhya “Babri” Masjid) and Pilakhana. 
Local tradition affirms that the Babri Masjids in Palam, Sonipat,
Rohtak, Panipat, and Sirsa have replaced Brahminical or Jain temples. 
The contemporary *Tarikh-i-Babari* describes how Babar’s troops
“demolished many Hindu temples at Chanderi” when they occupied it.  Some
tough jihad rhetoric has been preserved from Babar’s war against the
Rajputs, such as the quatrain:

> “For Islam’s sake, I wandered in the wild,  
> prepared for war with unbelievers and Hindus,  
>  resolved myself to meet a martyr’s death.  
> Thanks be to Allah!  A *ghazi* I became.”^([34](#34))

It is quite plain that Babar, even when he had to fight fellow Muslims
(the Afghan Lodi dynasty), never lost sight of his duty of waging war
against the infidels.

So, these three documents do not prove that the Babri Masjid was built
on something else than a Rama temple.  The two other groups of documents
are not even an attempt to give documentary or archaeological evidence,
merely a collection of sympathizing statements of opinion.  What is
worse, the whole collection makes one wonder whether the BMAC experts
had read it at all: not only are many of the documents unconvincing or
beside the point, but some even support the VHP case.

Thus, a court ruling of 1951 cites testimony of local Muslims that the
mosque had not been used since 1936, which means that in 1949 the Hindus
took over an unused building - hardly worth the current Babri Masjid
movement with its cries of “Islam in danger!” (or its newer version,
“Secularism in danger!”) and its hundreds of riot victims.  On 3 March
1951, the Civil Judge of Faizabad observed: “it further appears from a
number of affidavits of certain Muslim residents of Ayodhya that at
least from 1936 onwards the Muslims have neither used the site as a
mosque nor offered prayers there... Nothing has been pointed to
discredit these affidavits.”^([35](#35)) Of course, even a judge may be
misinformed on occasion; but at least, this is the official view,
enunciated by a Court of Law constituted under India’s democratic legal
system.  In particular, those who have been lecturing the Hindu movement
on “abiding by the Constitution” and “respecting Court verdicts” ought
to show some respect for this Court verdict.

Another court document shows that the ongoing court dispute (which is
the only legal obstacle to the replacement of the present structure with
a proper temple) was filed well past the legal time limit.  In any case,
while the BMAC wants to rule out the British Gazetteers as evidence
(because they confirm that the Babri Masjid had replaced a temple), it
cites court documents which reproduce excerpts from the Gazetteers as
evidence and declare in so many words that Gazetteers are admissible as
evidence.  A number of court rulings record that Hindus relentlessly
kept on claiming the site, “most sacred” to them, and made do with as
near a site as possible under prevalent power equations: this refutes
the BMAC claim that the Rama-Janmabhoomi tradition is a recent invention
for political purposes, whether colonial “divide and rule” or Hindu
“communalism”.

The leading political analyst Arun Shourie has commented: “On reading
the papers the BMAC had filed as ‘evidence’, I could only conclude,
therefore, that either its leaders had not read the papers themselves,
or that they had no case and had just tried to over-awe or confuse the
government etc. by dumping a huge miscellaneous heap.”^([36](#36))

When asked in public forums about the results of the scholars’ debate,
both Prof. Irfan Habib (historian at Aligarh Muslim University) and
Subodh Kant Sahay (who was the Home Minister at the time of the debate)
have declared that “the VHP has run away from the debate”.  Leading
newspapers have refused to publish denials of this allegations In fact,
this unfounded allegation provides an interesting illustration of the
psychology of lies.  Liars are often not very creative, and they tend to
say things that are partly inspired on the truth.  Thus, Prof. Habib and
Mr. Sahay are perfectly right in alleging that the debate has ended
because one of the parties has “run away from the debate”: to that
extent, their version is transparent of the truth.  Only, it is not the
VHP but the BMAC which has turned its back on the debate.

**11.7. The anti-temple debating tactics**

Meanwhile, the actual course of the debate both in the official forum
and in the media could have suggested some conclusions even to
non-historians (like the Supreme Court judges who refused to pronounce
an opinion on it in 1994).  The debate has not genuinely altered the old
consensus, but it has been an interesting case-study in manipulation by
unscrupled academics.  That, at least, seems to be a fair description of
learned publications advertising themselves as “objective” studies of
the controversy, but systematically concealing the arguments put forth
by one of the parties.

The VHP has published its argumentation including a detailed refutation
of the Babri Masjid Action Committee’s arguments, and like-minded
scholars have published detailed presentations of specific types of
evidence (e.g. Prof. Harsh Narain and Prof. R. Nath; note how the VHP,
lacking a think-tank of its own, was dependent on the help of people
with no prior connection to it).  By contrast, the BMAC, which had the
support of the Indian Council of Historical Research led by Aligarh
historian Prof. Irfan Habib and of a team of scholars led by Prof. R.S.
Sharma, has not felt sufficiently satisfied with its own performance in
the official debate to publish its argumentation.  Its numerous
supporters have chosen not to refer to the debate at all and to keep the
argumentation of their serious opponents out of view.

Instead, these top academics have chosen the poorest Hindutva
pamphlettists as their opponents and made some, fun of cranky but
irrelevant claims which go around in the semi-literate fringe of the
Hindu movement.  One point they like to highlight is the spurious claim
that on 22 December 1949, the idols “miraculously appeared” in the
disputed building.  I do not know of anyone who would affirm that except
tongue in cheek, but given that placing the idols could be construed as
a criminal offence, it has nonetheless been affirmed - as an obvious ad
hoc fable for purposes of self-exculpation.  But note that this miracle
story has long gone out of fashion: in an interview in the *New York
Times*, “Abbot Ram Chander Das Paramahams of an Ayodhya akhara declared
openly that he was the one who had put the image inside the
mosque.”^([37](#37))

Another fairly common tactic was to lump the temple argumentation with
the fringe school led by P.N. Oak, which holds that every indo-Muslim
building (e.g. the Taj Mahal)^([38](#38)) was in fact a Hindu temple,
not demolished but only transformed.  However, this school happened to
have aligned itself with the eminent historians against the VHP.  Oak
himself explained that the Babri Masjid itself was built by Hindus as a
temple, that “Babar had nothing to do with the Babri Masjid”, and that
neither the Moghul nor any other Muslim ruler had demolished a Hindu
temple at the site.^([39](#39)) Oak’s version of history is of a kind
with the contrived scenarios thought up by the eminent historians.

Another spokesman of this school, Jeevan Kulkarni from Bombay, claimed
that the Babri Masjid was a Hindu temple built by Hindus before the
Muslim conquest.  He even approached the Supreme Court to obtain
permission to prove his point by means of thermo-luminescence and other
advanced archaeological techniques, as well as an injunction to solve
the dispute by preserving the building (as Muslims demand, in the
“mistaken” belief that the building was built as a mosque) but allotting
it to the Hindus to serve as the “restored”  Rama temple which it was
meant to be when it was built.  Again, this school was wrongly
identified with the VHP position.

A similar tactic was to associate the Ayodhya evidence with the
eccentric theory of the non-historian Bal Gangadhar Tilak, later adapted
by the non-historian Madhav Sadashiv Golwalkar in his young days, that
the Aryans came from the Arctic (Tilak’s attempt to harmonize the Aryan
invasion theory with traditional Vedic chronology) or that India itself
had been in the Arctic zone then (Golwalkar’s attempt to harmonize Tilak
with Aryan indigenousness).^([40](#40)) These ideas are simply unrelated
to the more recent history of Hindu-Muslim conflict, and are only
brought into the discussion in order to strengthen the contrast between
Hindu amateurishness and secularist professionalism: “After R.C.
Majumdar, the communal interpretation has been relegated to the world of
school-level textbooks, made-easies, popular magazines, newspapers and
comic strips”, - meaning that the positions of prestige had been
captured by India’s secularists who imposed denial of Hindu-Muslim
conflict as the orthodox explanation.^([41](#41)) This is an argument
not of authority but of status.^([42](#42))

This way, India’s topmost academics and journalists have avoided
confronting the real evidence and concentrated on attacking straw men
instead.  It is clearly an application of Mao Zedong’s dictum: “Attack
where the enemy is weak, retreat where the enemy is strong.” That may be
a legitimate principle in warfare, but in scholarship the goal is not to
score points but to establish the truth.

**11.8. More on the British concoction hypothesis**

The eminent JNU historians have claimed that “it is in the nineteenth
century that the story circulates and enters official records.  These
records were then cited by others as valid historical evidence on the
issue.”^([43](#43)) A few years earlier, they were still far more
circumspect before making this assertion. in the early days of the
Ayodhya dispute, in a letter to the *Times of India*, a group of JNU
academics wrote: “it would be worth enquiring whether there is reliable
historical evidence of a period prior to nineteenth century for this
association of a precise location with the birthplace of
Rama.”^([44](#44))

Lawyer A.G. Noorani comments on the letter: “They were absolutely
right.  The myth is a nineteenth century creation by the
British.”^([45](#45)) Note however that in their 1986 letter, the JNU
historians had only suggested this in question format, but later many of
them, like Noorani in this passage, have asserted it quite
affirmatively.

Noorani then quotes a letter by Indrajit Dutta and nine others: “The
belief that the disputed place of worship in Ayodhya is a mosque built
after destroying a temple consecrating Rama’s birthplace *originates in
the first half of the 19th century*.  In 1813 John Leyden, a British
historian, published his *Memoirs of Zehir-ed-din, Muhammad Babar,
Emperor of Hindustan* (A translation of Babar’s memoirs in Persian).  In
it Leyden had contended that Babar had passed through Ayodhya in March
1528 during his campaign against the Pathans.  This ‘historical
evidence’ of Babar’s presence in the area was destroyed by later British
authorities to propagate the belief that the ‘anti-Hindu’ Babar had
destroyed the Ram Janmabhoomi Temple and got a mosque built on the spot
- though Leyden’s work makes no mention of it.  Sushil Srivastava of the
Department of Medieval and Modern History, University of Allahabad, has
worked extensively on the history of Avadh.  He substantiates his
findings to show how the British authorities, specifically Colonel
Sleeman, then resident of Lucknow, anxious to justify the annexation of
Avadh, exploited. this controversy superbly at a time when rumblings of
the 1857 mutiny were ominous.”^([46](#46))

Remark the illogical claim that the British “destroyed” the document
cited by Leyden to substantiate his hypothesis (and the local tradition)
that Babar had passed through the town of Ayodhya, when that very
document and that very hypothesis would support the theory that Babar
destroyed a Hindu temple in Ayodhya, precisely the theory which the ten
signatories try to “unmask” as a British concoction.  The claim that the
British deliberately “destroyed” this or any other historical evidence
is also unsupported by any evidence.

This is all the more serious considering the fact that the British
archives provide a much more complete testimony of the British policies
than anything from the earlier periods, and considering the ten
signatories’ own contention that their friend Sushil Srivastava has made
a detailed study of the British machinations in Avadh.  There is little
doubt that the British resident was implementing policies designed to
bring Avadh under British control, but what is very much in doubt (at
any rate totally unsubstantiated) is the claim that he used temple
history concoctions to that end.

There is actually some evidence to the opposite effect.  P. Carnegy
wrote in 1970 that up to 1855 both Hindus and Muslims worshipped at the
mosque, which led to a lot of friction, until the British separated
them: “It is said that up to that time \[viz. the Hindu-Muslim clashes
in the 1850s\] the Hindus and Mohamedans alike used to worship in the
mosque-temple.  Since the British rule a railing has been put up to
*prevent dispute*, within which, in the mosque the Mohamedans pray,
while outside the fence the Hindus have raised a platform on which they
make their offerings.”^([47](#47)) As Peter Van der Veer comments on
Carnegy’s testimony, against the British concoction hypothesis: “The
suggestion that the local tradition is entirely invented by the British
thus seems disingenuous.”^([48](#48))

To quote Van der Veer in full: “The implication here is that the British
found the ‘facts’ that fitted their master narrative of the perpetual
hostility between Hindus and Muslims. (…) One of the problems with the
above argument is that the British were not very interested in the Hindu
history of Ayodhya.  The most important British archaeologist of India
in the nineteenth century was Alexander Cunningham.  He did come to
Ayodhya, not to dig up evidence of Hindu-Muslim enmity but to look for
the Buddhist monuments of Saketa/ Ayodhya - monuments that nobody
locally was interested in, then or now.  Patrick Carnegy, the
commissioner, argued that the pillars of the mosque - which are now
ascribed to a Hindu temple by \[B.B.\] Lal and others - strongly
resemble Buddhist pillars, although he did accept the local tradition
that Babar built his mosque on the ‘birthplace’ temple.  However, he
also accepted the local tradition that Hindus and Muslims used to
worship together in this mosque-temple until the disturbances of
1855.  The suggestion that the local tradition is entirely invented by
the British thus seems disingenuous.”^([49](#49))

Many 19th-century scholars had a strong pro-Buddhist bias in their India
studies (setting a trend which continues till today), and the first
Ayodhya surveyors display the same intellectual fashion, rather than the
politically more useful interest in Hindu-Muslim friction.  The dozens
of scholars who have floated the British concoction hypothesis are faced
with a total absence of 19th-century data supporting it.

Patrick Carnegy, the first British commissioner in Faizabad and still
very close in time to the episode of communal violence (1852-57) and the
British take-over after the Mutiny (1857-58), would have emphasized
Hindu-Muslim conflict if the British concoction hypothesis had been
true.  Instead, he highlights the relative Hindu-Muslim harmony which
existed shortly before the time of  the British take-over.

This moment of harmony may well have been exceptional and may have to be
explained by the Muslim rulers’ need to strengthen their position
against British ambitions.  But at any rate it was a fact which the
British would not have highlighted if they had wanted to base their
divide-and-rule policy on false history of Hindu-Muslim conflict. 
Moreover, if they had wanted to use historical cases of Hindu-Muslim
tension to foment more such tension in their own day;  they could have
invoked numerous certified instances rather than having to invent any.

**11.9. Archaeological evidence**

The only serious comment on the VHP evidence bundle published in the
national press (but still not reporting the outcome of the evidence
debate) was a derogatory piece by Bhupendra Yadav in *The Tribune*.  In
his despair at finding that “proven secularists”, like R. Nath and B.B.
Lal, “are now nodding assent to the argument for Ram Janmabhoomi”, Yadav
does try to propose an alternative to the temple destruction scenario. 
Acknowledging Lal’s archaeological finding of 11th-century temple
foundations underneath the Babri Masjid, he comes up with the following
explanation: “After they occupied Ayodhya in 1194 AD, the Turkish
sultans found a vacant mound at Ramkot in which lay buried the burnt
pillar bases.  The sultans encouraged settlements of Muslims on the
mound (... ) To help these Muslims pray, officials of the Babar regime
built a mosque in 1528 AD.”^([50](#50))

Bhupendra Yadav’s nice little scenario is of course purely hyothetical
and unsupported by any document whatsoever, but that doesn’t seem to
trouble him.  At any rate, after the cream of India’s secularist
historians have used all their resources to create a semblance of
credibility for the no-temple case, all that Bhupendra Yadav can come up
with, is the hypothesis that: 1) the Hindus of Ayodhya had left the
geographical place of honour in the middle of their city “vacant”,
unlike the people of every other city in the whole world; 2) they had
laid the foundations (the pillar-bases of burnt brick) for a pillared
building which they never constructed, and waited for others to come and
put these foundations to proper use.  This hypothesis is pretty
farfetched.  But at least Mr. Yadav has the merit of explicitating what
most people who deny the temple destruction scenario only claim by
implication.

A similar howler was launched by archaeologist D. Mandal of Allahabad
University in his booklet *Ayodhya Archaeology after Demolition*
(1993).  In the first week of July 1992, a team of eight reputed
archaeologists, including former ASI directors Dr. Y.D. Sharma and Dr.
K.M. Srivastava, had paid a visit to the Ramkot hill in Ayodhya.  They
went there to verify and evaluate the findings done by labourers who had
been clearing the area around the Babri Masjid on orders of the Uttar
Pradesh Department of Tourism.  The findings included religious
sculptures, among them a statue of Vishnu (of whom Rama is considered an
incarnation), and a lot of rubble thrown together in a deep cavity in
front of the Babri Masjid structure.  Team members said the inner
boundary of the disputed structure rests, at least on one side, on an
earlier existing structure, which “may have belonged to an earlier
temple”.^([51](#51)) They pleaded for a more systematic survey of the
entire hill.

However, Mandal dismisses the post-demolition (and
pre-demolition)^([52](#52)) archaeological evidence for the temple as
invalid because not unearthed in a scientific excavation: they “cannot
be placed in context since the stratigraphical evidence is destroyed by
arbitrary digging or willful destruction”.^([53](#53)) By that
criterion, much of Egyptian and Harappan history should also be
nullified retroactively.  Even a few decades ago, archaeological methods
were unscientific by present-day standards, and the older findings were
therefore not as transparent in terms of stratigraphy and chronology as
desirable, yet the artifacts found were still real and did allow for
certain conclusions even if less compelling or precise.

Moreover, Mandal seems to be trying to over-awe the lay reader with a
distinction between strata which is very important in digging at
prehistorical sites but becomes far less crucial in more recent sites,
where the objects found are known “in context” because a lot of written
evidence attests to their use and meaning and chronology.  When you find
different types of prehistoric stone tools, proper stratigraphy is
essential if you want to know their chronological sequence.  But when
you find (a) a paleolithic flintstone scraper, (b) a medieval metal saw,
and (c) a modern electrical sawing-machine, you can safely deduce that
(a) precedes (b) which in turn precedes (c), even if the stratigraphy of
the site had been messed up.  Likewise, it is not difficult to
distinguish Hindu art from Muslim art. it would be for a Martian who
knows neither religion, but not for us who are familiar with both
religions and their art histories.

Unlike findings at pre-literate sites from unknown cultures, the objects
in Ayodhya were certainly found “in context”.  For starters, they were
Hindu objects found at a site where, after centuries of Hindu presence,
a mosque had been built.  Even if stratigraphically less than perfect,
the fact of this multifarious evidence’s existence, certified by a
number of leading archaeologists, is undeniable.

Mandal also tries to impose a contrived explanation on Prof. B.B. Lal’s
old pillar-bases evidence, claiming that these pillar-bases were
“certainly not contemporaneous with one another” nor even “components of
a single structure”.^([54](#54)) This would mean that every now and
then, these inconsistent Hindus or Muslims just made a hole in the
ground, arbitrarily planted a pillar-base somewhere, never to build a
pillar on it, then forgot about it till a few decades later, another
joker repeated this meaningless ritual, coincidentally yielding an
orderly pattern of pillar-bases.  This is secularist archaeology for
you.

Another strange line of argument which Mandal uses, is this: he first
claims that a demolition must have involved the use of fire, then notes
that “neither are there traces of burning, expected when military
destruction occurs”.^([55](#55))  Now, apart from the fact that fire
would mostly affect the overground parts while we are only left with the
underground remainder, the point is that no one insists that the temple
was destroyed by fire.  Numerous mosques stand on Hindu temples which
were demolished alright without being burnt down.  Indeed, any Kar Sevak
could have told Prof. Mandal that there are other ways to demolish a
building.  Could it be that Mandal is only refuting his own straw-man
hypotheses because he cannot face the real evidence?

For the rest, he repeats the worn-out trick of using the non-mentioning
of certain facts in B.B. Lal’s *brief* (i.e. by definition incomplete)
report to “contradict” B.B. Lal’s and S.P. Gupta’s recent revelations of
findings which would only appear in the full report.^([56](#56)) The
fact of the matter is that the full report of B.B. Lal’s findings was
withheld from publication, and that the brief report which the
journalists had seen explicitly refrains from giving details of the
medieval findings.  It is quite odd to use the brief version of the
report to disprove the detailed version of the *same* report’s relevant
part which B.B. Lal himself had just made public.^([57](#57))

That the full report is still unpublished, is most likely because the
secularist authorities objected to its findings.  As Peter Van der Veer
reported: “However, in this case the government has not allowed the
Department of Archaeology to provide evidence. it has thus fallen to
B.B. Lal to do so.”^([58](#58))

The same counts for the inscription found during the demolition, which
clearly mentions that the site was considered Rama’s
birthplaces.^([59](#59)) At the time, many academics declared without
any examination that the inscription, presented by scholars of no lesser
stature than themselves, was a forgery.  Thus, according to “a group of
historians and scholars” including Kapil Kumar, B.D.
Chattopadhyaya, K.M. Shrimali, Suvira Jaiswal and S.C. Sharma, the
“so-called discoveries of artefacts” during and after the demolition
were “a planned fabrication and a fraud perpetrated, to further
fundamentalist designs”.^([60](#60))

If the secularists had really believed this, they would have requested
access to the findings, which would readily have been granted by the
minister in charge, the militant secularist Arjun Singh.  They would
have invited international scholars as witnesses, and curtly
demonstrated its falseness for all to see. instead, just like B. B.
Lal’s report, this inscription became a skeleton in their closet, which
they have to keep from public view as long as possible.

In fact, the BMAC and secularist side has frequently opposed
archaeological research at the site, while the Hindu side wanted more of
it, e.g.: “Nevertheless, in a BBC interview in 1991, \[B.B.\] Lal argued
that there had been a Hindu temple for Rama/Vishnu on the spot now
occupied by the mosque and that pillars of that temple had been used in
constructing the \[Masjid\].  Lal suggested that further digging should
be carried out in order to come up with more evidence - a suggestion
that was denounced in the press by the historian Irfan Habib and others
as a ploy to demolish the mosque.”^([61](#61))

The whole anti-temple argumentation has nothing more to offer than such
pitiable attempts to wriggle out from under the weight of inconvenient
evidence.  Only media power has so far saved the “eminent historians”
and their ilk from being exposed.

**11.10. “The Shariat does not allow temple demolition”**

Soft-line Hindu nationalists like K.R. Malkani, along with some
secularists and Muslims, have often tried to convince us that Islam
itself opposes the demolition of non-Muslim places of worship.  They
even argue that a mosque built on a demolished Hindu temple would be
unlawful under Islamic law.  The authority claimed as basis for this
offer is the injunction in the *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri* (Aurangzeb’s codex of
applied Islamic jurisprudence): “it is not permissible to build a mosque
on unlawfully acquired land.  There may be many forms of unlawful
acquisition.  For instance, if some people forcibly take somebody’s
house and build a mosque or even a *jama masjid* on it, then *namaz* in
such a mosque will be against the *shari’at*.”

Without reference to the context, this might be read as a prohibition on
forcibly replacing Hindu temples with mosques.  Sushil Srivastava has
even used this injunction as “proof” that mosques simply cannot have
been built in forcible replacement of temples.  He writes that “the
Quran clearly states that prayers offered in a contentious place will
not be accepted (…) Thus, the whole purpose of constructing a *masjid*
on the site of a *mandir* would be self-defeating (…) it is highly
unlikely that even the contentious mosques in Varanasi and Mathura are
located on the *exact* sites of temples.”^([62](#62))

The Gyanvapi mosque in Varanasi is very certainly located on the exact
site of the Vishvanath temple, and visibly includes remains of the old
temple walls.  Numerous other examples can be cited from inside and
outside of India, and more cases keep on being discovered.^([63](#63))
To mention two less-known cases from Iran, the Masjid-i-Biruñ in Abarquh
and the Jami Masjid of Aqda (still a Zoroastrian centre of pilgrimage
with a shrine in use on a mountain outside the town), “whose origin may
be traced back to fire-temples” of the Zoroastrians.^([64](#64)) The
author reporting on them correctly introduces his finding thus: “In the
Islamic world many places of worship belonging to the earlier religion
have been converted to mosques.”

As is clear from the Islamic law books, and as Prof. Harsh Narain has
shown, the injunction against building mosques on unlawfully acquired
land only applies to inter-Muslim disputes, because it was quite lawful
and in fact also quite common to have mosques built on temple sites
grabbed from Hindus and other heathens.^([65](#65)) Indeed, the forcible
takeover of non-Muslim religious places is a practice initiated by
Prophet Mohammed himself.  The best example of the practice is the Kaaba
itself, a Pagan shrine forcibly transformed into the central mosque of
Islam.

**11.11. Tampering with the evidence**

In its presentation of evidence in the Government sponsored scholars’
debate in December 1990, the VHP scholars have pointed out 4 cases of
attempted fraud by their opponents, attempts by BMAC sympathizers to
conceal, obliterate or change evidence: removing relevant old books from
libraries, adding words on an old map.  Recent editions of Urdu books
(by Maulvi Abdul Karim and by Shaikh Md. Azamat Ali Nami) have
suppressed chapters or passages relating the temple destruction on
Ramkot hill which were present in earlier editions or in the
manuscript.  In an English translation of a book by Maulana Hakim Saiyid
Abdul Hai, the relevant passages present in the Urdu original had been
censored out, and an effort was discovered to remove all the copies of
the Urdu original from the libraries.

On maps included in the Settlement Record of 1861, which describe the
disputed area as *Janamsthan*, “birthplace”, someone had added “Babari
Masjid”; the interpolation was obvious after comparison with a copy of
the document kept in another office.  The fact that this official
document could be tampered with, may well be related to the fact that
the then Revenue Minister of Uttar Pradesh was an office-bearer of the
BMAC.

In my opinion, these petty and clumsy attempts to tamper with the corpus
of evidence, are child’s play compared with the concealment of evidence
by professional scholars sympathetic to the Babri Masjid cause.  In
their publications on this dispute, A.A. Engineer and Prof. S. Gopal
have simply kept all the inconvenient (mainly pre-British) testimonies
out of the picture, and just acted as if these did not exist.  In his
reply to the anti-Janmabhoomi statement *The Political Abuse of History*
by 25 historians of JNU, Prof. A.R. Khan shows grounds to accuse *the
eminent JNU historians* of “not only concealment but also distortion of
evidence”.^([66](#66))

It is not unfair to conclude that some of the pro-BMAC authors have
committed serious breaches of academic deontology.  For me personally,
seeing this shameless overruling of historical evidence with a
high-handed use of academic and media power, was the immediate reason to
involve myself in this controversial question.

When A.K. Chatterjee had presented the testimony by 18-century traveller
Father Tieffenthaler as evidence, Syed Shahabuddin revealed in his reply
that he possessed a copy of this text (in German translation) and that
he was thoroughly familiar with the text.^([67](#67)) This seems to
imply that while he was challenging his opponents to come up with any
pre-British evidence, he was fully aware that such evidence did exist
(or at the very least a document which might reasonably be claimed to
contain such evidence, even if one were to be persuaded by Shahabuddin’s
extremely contrived attempt to explain it away), but remained sitting on
top of it in the hope that nobody would discover it.

The above are cases where the attempts to suppress evidence have
failed.  It is quite probable that other attempts have succeeded.  There
may well be documents containing pertinent information, particularly
about the site’s history during the Sultanate period (1206-1525), which
have escaped the notice of Prof. Harsh Narain (the only scholar of
Persian and Arabic in the VHP team) because they had been removed in
time from the places where they could normally be found.  Such documents
would mostly be in Persian and available only in the libraries of Muslim
institutions.  In some of these, Prof. Harsh Narain has effectively been
denied access as soon as his involvement in the Ayodhya argument became
known.  How many pieces of pertinent material have been concealed,
removed, destroyed or altered is anybody’s guess.

**11.12. Conclusion**

The clear-cut result of the Ayodhya evidence debate is still not widely
known.  Most of the Indian English-language papers, as well as the
official electronic media, have all along been on the side of the BMAC,
and they have strictly kept the lid on this information.  Their
reporting on the scholars’ debate has been very partial and, from the
moment the BMAC’s defeat became clear, increasingly vague.

If any proof is needed that the BMAC has been defeated in this de e, it
is this: no one sympathetic to the Babri Masjid cause has made any
reference to the outcome of this debate all through the subsequent
years, eventhough the Ayodhya issue frequently reappeared in the news. 
Politicians have made a show of their “secularism” and their opposition
to “religious fanaticism” by organizing “fact-finding missions” to
Ayodhya and issuing statements on the dispute, but they have not made
any reference to the outcome of the scholars’ debate at all.  When
reading about the subsequent course of the Ayodhya controversy, one
might get the impression that the scholars’ debate never took place.

However, it did take place, and it has yielded sufficient evidence to
consider the matter as practically closed.  The Babri Masjid was built
in forcible replacement of a Hindu temple.  With the historical question
decided, that leaves only the political question to be resolved.

That political question has not been the topic of this paper, but for
those who care to know, I may briefly state my position.  The
Rama-Janmabhoomi site has been a Hindu sacred site since many
centuries.  Even the JNU historians admit that it was a pilgrimage site
since the 13th century.  It may have been one since much earlier, but
alright: Catholic pilgrimage sites like Lourdes and Fatima are not even
two centuries old and still they are respected.  So, seven centuries is
quite sufficient to certify its status of sanctity.  Today, judges and
governments in Australia, New Zealand and the Americas are increasingly
conceding the right of indigenous communities to restart worship at
their sacred sites.  Considering the human right to freedom of religion,
it is obvious that communities have a right to their sacred sites, and
no modem and humane person would ever countenance thwarting this right
for other than the most compelling reasons.

So, it is completely evident that Hindus have a right to use and
properly adorn their own sacred sites, including Rama-Janmabhoomi at
Ayodhya.  The problem with Ayodhya, the cause of all this rioting and
waste of lives and political energy, is not that Hindus want to adorn
their own sacred site with proper temple architecture: that is the most
normal thing in the world.  The problem is that another party, the
Islamist-Christian-Marxist combine in India, is trying to obstruct this
perfectly unobjectionable project of architectural renovation.  Against
the near-universal consensus that all sacred sites are to be respected,
Islam is taking the position that it has the right to occupy and
desecrate the sacred sites of other religions.  Genuine secularists must
oppose and thwart this obscurantist design, and allow the normal process
of Hindu architectural renovation to take its course.  
 

**Footnotes:**

> ^([1](#1a))Koenraad Elst: “The Ayodhya debate”, in Gilbert Pollet,
> ed.: *Indian Epic Values. Râmâyana and Its Impact*, Peeters, Leuven
> 1995.  As is all too common with conference proceedings, this book was
> assembled only three years after the conference, so the published
> version of my paper was finalized only in 1994.
>
> ^([2](#2a))In the 1961 Faizabad Gazetteer, Mrs. E.B. Joshi, while not
> yet denying the traditional account relayed in the earlier Gazetteers,
> suppresses it without giving any reason for doing so, probably on
> orders of the Government of India under Jawaharlal Nehru.  But neutral
> scholarly publications like the 1989 edition of the *Encyclopedia
> Brittannica* (entry *Ayodhya*) confirm the temple destruction
> scenario.
>
> ^([3](#3a))One of the first scholarly publications on the dispute was
> my *Ram Janmabhoomi vs. Babri Masjid, A Case Study in Hindu-Muslim
> Conflict* (Voice of India, Delhi, July 1990), partly a reply to the
> statement *The Political Abuse of History: Babri Masjid/Rama
> Janmabhumi Controversy*, by Bipin Chandra and 24 other historians of
> Jawaharlal Nehru University.  A large part of my book has been
> included in Vinay Chandra Mishra and Parmanand Singh, eds.: *Ram
> Janmabhoomi Babri Masjid, Historical Documents, Legal Opinions &
> Judgments*, Bar Council of India Trust, Delhi 1991.
>
> ^([4](#4a))The VHP (Vishva Hindu Parishad, “World Hindu Council”) was
> founded in 1964 by Guru Golwalkar, chief of the *Rashtriya Swayarwevak
> Sangh* (RSS, “National Volunteer Corps”) as an instrument for the
> spread of Hindu culture and religion.  It takes its guidelines from an
> assembly of traditional religious leaders.
>
> ^([5](#5a))Prof. B.B. Lal has formulated this conclusion on different
> occasions, including articles in *Purâtitattva* no. 16, 1987, and in
> *Manthan*, October 1990.  In a letter to the Times of India, published
> on 1-3-1991, he concludes that “what is known as Ayodhya today was
> indeed the Ayodhya of the Valmiki *Ramayana*”.
>
> ^([6](#6a))Prof. Kamal Salibi of Beirut has proposed the theory that
> all the Biblical sites including Abraham’s Hebron and king David’s
> Jerusalem, were situated in the Hejaz area of Western Arabia (in his
> 1985 book *The Bible Came from Arabia: a Radical Reinterpretation of
> Old Testament Geography*).  The double political motivation is
> obvious: undermining Israel’s historical legitimacy and giving a
> foundation to Islam’s claim to an Abrahamic heritage including the
> *Ka’aba*.  Established Bible scholars have dismissed this theory as
> wishful thinking.
>
> ^([7](#7a))The Ayodhya dispute and the Rushdie affair are indeed
> connected.  The ban on *The Satanic Verses* was part of a package of
> concessions by the Rajiv Gandhi Government to calm down Syed
> Shahabuddin, who had threatened a Muslim “march on Ayodhya” on the
> same day when the VHP would hold a rally there.
>
> ^([8](#8a))Quoted for rebuttal from Shahabuddin’s own monthly Muslim
> India by Harsh Narain in his article *Ram Janmabhoomi: Muslim
> Testimony*, published in the *Lucknow Pioneer* (5-2-90) and in *Indian
> Express* (26-2-90), and included in S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.1,
> 2nd ed., Voice of India, Delhi 1998.  In the ensuing debate between
> Prof. Narain, Mr. A.K. Chatterjee and Syed Shahabuddin, the latter has
> never denied nor cancelled his offer.
>
> ^([9](#9a))Prof. R.S. Sharma: *Communal History and Rama’s Ayodhya*,
> People’s Publishing House, Delhi 1990.
>
> ^([10](#10a))R.S. Sharma et al.: *Ramjanmabhumi Babari Masjid, A
> Historians’ Report to the Nation*, People’s Publishing House, Delhi
> 1991, p.4.
>
> ^([11](#11a))The VHP evidence bundle, its rebuttal of the BMAC
> argumentation, a press brief, and some articles generally supporting
> the VHP viewpoint, have been published as *History versus Casuistry,
> Evidence of the Ramajanmabhoomi Mandir presented by the Vishva Hindu
> Parishad to the Government of India in December-January 1990-91*,
> Voice of India, Delhi 199 1. Most of it was also included in Sita Ram
> Goel: Hindu Temples, vol. 1, at least in its 2nd edition, Voice of
> India, Delhi 1998.  The BMAC evidence bundle has not been published.
>
> ^([12](#12a))Will Durant: *Story of Civilization*, vol. 1, New York
> 1972, p.459.
>
> ^([13](#13a))This incorporation of Hindu temple materials in mosques
> is cynically held up as a showpiece of “composite culture” and a
> “living evidence of secularism” by the friends of Islam such as
> Congress MP Mani Shankar Aiyar, cited to this effect by Swapan
> Dasgupta, *Sunday*, 10-5-1992.
>
> ^([14](#14a))A testimony to the same effect is also given by the
> Portuguese historian Gaspar Correa, who describes how Hindus continued
> their annual procession to the site of the Kapalishwara temple on
> Mylapore beach (Madras), even after the temple had been forcibly
> replaced with a Catholic church, vide Ishwar Sharan: *The Myth of
> Saint Thomas and the Mylapore Shiva Temple*, Voice of India, p.18-19
> (1st ed., 1991) or p-93-94 (2nd ed., 1995).
>
> ^([15](#15a))A.G. Noorani: “The Babri Masjid Ram Janmabhoomi Question”
> (originally published in *Economic and Political Weekly*), in A.A.
> Engineer ed.: *Babri Masjid Ram Janmabhoomi Controversy*, AJanta,
> Delhi 1990, p.66.
>
> ^([16](#16a))Mirza Jan: Hadiqa-i Shahada (“The garden of martyrdom”),
> Lucknow 1856, included in the VHP evidence bundle: *History vs.
> Casuistry*, Voice of India, Delhi 1991, p.14.
>
> ^([17](#17a))*Indian Express*, 13-3-1990.
>
> ^([18](#18a))A.K. Chatterjee: “Ram Janmabhoomi: some more evidence”,
> *Indian Express*, 27-3-1990.  It is included, with the whole ensuing
> polemical exchange with Syed Shahabuddin, as appendix 4 in *History
> versus Casuistry*.
>
> ^([19](#19a))The title of the princess’s text is given as *Sahifa-i
> Chahal Nasaih Bahadur Shahi* (Persian: “Letter of the Forty Advices of
> Bahadur Shah”).  It is included in the VHP evidence bundle: *History
> vs. Casuistry*, p. 13-14.
>
> ^([20](#20a))Percival Spear has the effrontery to declare:
> “Aurangzeb’s supposed intolerance is little more than a hostile
> legend” (*Penguin History of India*, vol.2, p.56). The contemporary
> records show Aurangzeb as a pious man who faithfully practised his
> religion and *therefore* persecuted the unbelievers and destroyed
> their temples by the thousands.  About the denial of Islamic crimes
> against humanity, vide Sita Ram Goel: *Story of Islamic Imperialism in
> India*, Voice of India, Delhi 1984.
>
> ^([21](#21a))A. Shourie: “Take over from the experts”, syndicated
> column, included in History versus Casuistry as appendix 1, and in A.
> Shourie: *Indian Controversies*, ASA, Delhi 1992, p.411-418.
>
> ^([22](#22a))Quoted by the VHP-mandated experts in their rejoinder to
> the BMAC: *History vs. Casuistry*, p.61.
>
> ^([23](#23a))This text does not figure in the original BMAC evidence
> bundle, but its words “very ill-founded” are quoted by Prof. Irfan
> Habib in a speech to the Aligarh Historians Group (12/2/1992,
> published in *Muslim India*, 5/1991).  The paragraph containing these
> words (but not the entire relevant passage) is quoted by R.S. Sharma,
> M. Athar Ali, D.N. Jha and Suraj Bhan, the historians for the BMAC, in
> their joint publication: *Ramjanmabhumi Babari Masjid, A Historians’
> Report to the Nation*, People’s Publishing House, Delhi, May 1991,
> p.20-21.
>
> ^([24](#24a))Cited in Harsh Narain: *The Ayodhya Temple/Mosque
> Dispute*, Penman, Delhi 1993, p.8, emphasis added.  Father Joseph
> Tieffenthaler records that the temple destruction was being attributed
> to Aurangzeb by some, to Babar by others, but this minor confusion
> never affected the consensus that the mosque had forcibly replaced a
> Hindu temple.
>
> ^([25](#25a))In 1608, William Finch (quoted in the VHP evidence
> bundle: *History vs. Casuistry*, p. 19) had witnessed the “ruins of
> Ramkot”, i.e. of the Hindu temple which kept alive the tradition that
> that very site had once been Rama’s castle.  The entire hill was
> called Ramkot, “Rama’s castle”, and the temple complex was certainly
> larger than the Babri Masjid, so that Finch may well have seen some
> leftovers still standing there beside the mosque.
>
> ^([26](#26a))Francis Buchanan’s report has been put into perspective
> by Mr. A.K. Chatterjee, in an article intended as an episode of his
> Ayodhya debate with Syed Shahabuddin on the opinion page of the
> *Indian Express*, sent on 14-8-1990 but not published; but included in
> *History versus Casuistry*, appendix 4.
>
> ^([27](#27a))For instance, Syed Shahabuddin blames “propaganda by the
> British” (*Indian Express*, 12-5-1990), and according to Md.  Abdul
> Rahim Qureshi, secretary of the All-India Muslim Personal Law Board,
> “the Britishers... planted false stories and succeeded in misleading
> the masses to believe that Babri Masjid stood in the premises of a
> Rama temple which was demolished by Babar” (*Indian Express*,
> 13-3-1990).
>
> ^([28](#28a))For a rebuttal of the British conspiracy hyothesis, vide
> K. Elst: “Party-line history-writing”, *The Pioneer* (Lucknow
> edition), 19/20-12-1990, reproduced in *History vs. Casuistry*, app.6.
>
> ^([29](#29a))It should be borne in mind that the *Qur’an* contains
> dozens of injunctions to wage war against the unbelievers, e.g.: “Make
> war on them until idolatry is no more and Allah’s religion reigns
> supreme” (2:193 and 8:39); “Those who follow Mohammed are merciless to
> the unbelievers but kind to one another” (48:29); “Enmity and hate
> shall reign between us until ye believe in Allah alone” (60:4), etc. 
> The same attitude is found in the *jihad* chapters of the Hadis
> collections and the Islamic law codices.  In Indian history, these
> verses and the precedent set by the Prophet have been systematically
> invoked to justify persecutions and temple demolitions.
>
> ^([30](#30a))A.G. Noorani (A.A. Engineer ed.: *Babri Masjid Ram
> Janmabhoomi Controversy*, p.65) claims that Tulsidas “was over thirty
> in 1528 when the mosque was built.  He lived and wrote his great work
> \[the *Rama-Charit Manas*\] in Ayodhya.” In fact, he wrote it in
> Varanasi, on what is now called Tulsi Ghat, and he died in 1623, which
> means that he was born after 1528.
>
> ^([31](#31a))Sushil Srivastava: *The Disputed Mosque*, Vistaar Publ.,
> Delhi 1991, ch.5; R. Nath: *The Babari Masjid of Ayodhya*, Historical
> Research Documentation Programme, Jaipur 1991.  The latter has clearly
> stated that this revision of who built the Masjid, in no way
> invalidates the claim that it had replaced a Hindu temple: “I have
> been to the site and have had occasion to study the mosque, privately,
> and I have absolutely no doubt that the mosque stands on the site of a
> Hindu temple on the north-western corner of the temple-fortress
> Ramkot.” (letter in *Indian Express*, 2-1-91)
>
> ^([32](#32a))Srivastava (in A.A. Engineer ed.: *Babari Masjid/Ram
> Janmabhoomi Controversy*, p.36) quotes Shamsur Rehman Farooqui, a
> scholar of Persian, who considers the inscription written in a younger
> style of calligraphy common in the 19th century, and by someone not
> well-versed in Persian.  The latter observation may as well be
> explained by the fact that Babar’s Turkish scribes had only recently
> learned Persian; whereas most literate Muslims in 19th-century India
> were very well-versed in Persian.
>
> ^([33](#33a))Sri Ram Sharma: *Religious Policy of the Mughal Emperors*
> (1940), p.24-25. The same position has been taken by Mrs. Beveridge,
> the translator of Babar’s memoirs, and other historians.  Several
> hypotheses of who forged this “testament” and why are explored J.N.
> Tiwari and V.S. Pathak (BHU): “Rama Janmabhoomi Bhavana.  The
> testimony of the Ayodhya Mahatmya”, in Lallanji Gopal, ed.: *Ayodhya,
> History, Archaeology and Tradition*, papers presented in the seminar
> held on 13-15 February 1992, All-India Kashiraj Trust, Varanasi 1994,
> p.282-296.
>
> ^([34](#34a))Quoted in Mrs. A.S. Beveridge: *Babur Nama*, Delhi 1970
> reprint, 574-575.  Ghazi has the same meaning as *mujahid*, though it
> is often used in the more precise sense of “one who has effectively
> killed infidels with his own hands”.
>
> ^([35](#35a))Prof. B.P. Sinha claims to know how this disuse of the
> Masjid came about: “As early as 1936-37, a bill was introduced in the
> legislative council of U.P. to transfer the site to the Hindus (... )
> the bill was withdrawn on an unwritten understanding that no *namaz*
> \[be\] performed.” (in annexure 29 to the VHP evidence bundle,
> unpublished)
>
> ^([36](#36a))A. Shourie: “Take over from the experts”, syndicated
> column, 27-1-91, included in *History vs. Casuistry* as appendix 1.
> Arun Shourie was sacked as *Indian Express* editor, apparently under
> government pressure, after revealing that, in October 1990, Prime
> Minister V.P. Singh had aborted his own compromise arrangement on
> Ayodhya under pressure from Imam Bukhari, prominent member of the
> BMAC.
>
> ^([37](#37a))Cited in Peter Van der Veer: *Religious Nationalism*,
> p.157, with reference to *New York Times*, 22-12-1991.
>
> ^([38](#38a))Though the Taj Mahal was obviously never a Hindu temple,
> the story of its construction may be a bit more complicated than
> simply one of an original Indo-Saracen construction on virgin land,
> *vide* Marvin H. Mills (Professor of Architecture, Pratt Institute,
> New York): “An architect looks at the Taj legend”, a review of Wayne
> Edison Begley & Ziyauddin Ahmad Desai: *Taj Mahal, the Illumined
> Tomb*, University of Washington Press, Seattle 1989.
>
> ^([39](#39a))Padmini Kumar: “Babri: another twist to the issue!”,
> *Maharashtra Herald*, 9-12-1990, based on an interview with P.N. Oak.
>
> ^([40](#40a))B.G. Tilak: *Arctic Home in the Vedas*, 1903, and M.S.
> Golwalkar: We, Our Nationhood Defined, 1939.
>
> ^([41](#41a))Aditya and Mridula Mukherjee: “No challenge from
> communalists”, *Sunday Observer*, 15-3-1992.
>
> ^([42](#42a))It may be noted that the no-temple school is not
> necessarily less communalist, for it imposes explanations by religious
> conflict where no such conflicts existed, e.g. in his president’s
> address before the Panjab History Conference held at Patiala in march
> 1999, “Against communalising history”, D.N. Jha communalizes history
> by repeating the myth of Saint Thomas’ “martyrdom” at the hands of
> Hindus as a “well known” fact. \[note added in January 2002\]
>
> ^([43](#43a))Romila Thapar, Bipan Chandra et al.: “The political abuse
> of history”, in Asghar Ali Engineer: *Babri Masjid/Ram Janmabhoomi
> Controversy*, p.235.
>
> ^([44](#44a))Letter signed by Romila Thapar, Muzaffar Alam, Bipan
> Chandra, R. Champaka Lakshmi, S. Battacharya, H. Mukhia, Suvira
> Jaiswal, S. Ratnagar, M.K. Palat, Satish Sabarwal, S. Gopal and
> Mridula Mukherjee, datelined 21-10-1986, published in *Times of
> India*, 28-10-1986.
>
> ^([45](#45a))A.G.Noorani: “The Babri Masjid/Ramjanmabhoomi Question”,
> Asghar Ali Engineer: *Babri Masjid/Ram Janmabhoomi Controversy*, p.66.
>
> ^([46](#46a))Letter in *The Statesman*, 22-10-1989, quoted by A.G.
> Noorani: “The Babri Masjid/Ram Janmabhoomi Question”, Asghar Ali
> Engineer: *Babari Masjid/Ram Janmabhoomi Controversy*, p.66-67.
>
> ^([47](#47a))P. Carnegy: *A Historical Sketch of Tehsil Fyzabad*,
> Lucknow 1870, quoted by Harsh Narain: *The Ayodhya Temple/Mosque
> Dispute*, Penman, Delhi 1993, p.8-9, and by Peter Van der Veer:
> *Religious Nationalism*, p.153; emphasis mine.
>
> ^([48](#48a))Peter Van der Veer: *Religious Nationalism*, p. 160.
>
> ^([49](#49a))Peter Van der Veer: *Religious Nationalism*, p. 159-160.
>
> ^([50](#50a))Bhupendra Yadav: “Temple issue built on weak base”, in
> *The Tribune*, 7-3-1992.
>
> ^([51](#51a))*Indian Express*, 4-7-1992.
>
> ^([52](#52a))Presented in Y.D. Sharma et al.: *Ramajanma Bhumi:
> Ayodhya*.  New *Archaeological Discoveries*, published by Prof. K.S.
> Lal for the Historians’ Forum, Delhi 1992.  An earlier smaller find of
> religious artefacts on 10 March 1992 in diggings by the Uttar Pradesh
> tourism department was reported in the press, e.g. Anil Rana:
> “Artifacts found near Babari Masjid”, *Statesman*, 11-3-1992.  A
> further discovery was made a month after the demolition, vide: “New
> evidence at temple site found”, Pioneer, 8-1-1993.
>
> ^([53](#53a))D.  Mandal: *Ayodhya Archaeology after Demolition.  A
> Critique of the ‘New’ and ‘Fresh’ Discoveries*, Orient Longman, Delhi
> 1993, p.xi.
>
> ^([54](#54a))D. Mandal: *Ayodhya Archaeology after Demolition*, p.63.
>
> ^([55](#55a))D. Mandal: *Ayodhya Archaeology after Demolition*, p.65.
>
> ^([56](#56a))E.g.: “No Pillar-bases at Ayodhya: ASI Report”, *Times of
> India*, 7-12-90, and A.G. Noorani: “The Babri Masjid Ram Janmabhoomi
> question”, in A.A. Engineer: *Babri Masjid Ram Janmabhoomi
> Controversy*, p.64.
>
> ^([57](#57a))B.B. Lal explained this matter and restated his long-held
> positions in his article: “Facts of history cannot be altered”, *The
> Hindu*, 1-7-1998, in reply to a slanderous editorial, “Tampering with
> history”, *The Hindu*, 12-6-1998.  Undaunted, D.N. Jha attempted to
> restore the confusion: “We were not shown Ayodhya notebook”, *The
> Hindu*, 27-7-1998. \[note added in January 2002\]
>
> ^([58](#58a))Peter Van der Veer: *Religious Nationalism*, p-157.  On
> several occasions, Marxist historians had insinuated that B.B. Lal,
> one of the greatest living archaeologists, has changed his conclusions
> about the pre-existent temple in order to satisfy the “requirements of
> VHP politics” (thus the JNU historians Romila Thapar, S. Gopal and
> K.N. Panikkar in *Indian Express*, 5-12-1990).  Among those who came
> out in Prof. Lal’s defence and certified his statements are: K.V.
> Soundarajan (ASI), I. Mahadevan, R. Nath, K.V. Raman, and K. K.
> Mohammed (ASI, the only Muslim who participated in the Ayodhya
> excavations, letter in *Indian Express*, 15-12-1990). In a speech to
> the Aligarh Historians Group (12-2-1991, published in *Muslim India*,
> 5/1991), Prof. Irfan Habib has made similar personal attacks on Prof.
> B.R. Grover, Prof. B.P. Sinha, Prof. K.S. Lal and Dr. S.P. Gupta, who
> have represented the VHP in the scholars’ debate, and on Prof. B.B.
> Lal.
>
> ^([59](#59a))Presented by Dina Nath Mishra: “Writing in the debris”,
> *Telegraph*, 1-1-1993.
>
> ^([60](#60a))“Historians pick holes in ‘evidence’”, *Times of India*,
> 26-12-1992.
>
> ^([61](#61a))Peter Van der Veer: *Religious Nationalism*, p. 1 58-159.
>
> ^([62](#62a))Sushil Srivastava: “The Ayodhya controversy”, in A.A.
> Engineer ed.: *Babri Masjid/Ram Janmabhoomi Controversy*, p.38.
>
> ^([63](#63a))E.g.: “One night during the monsoon of 1991, the rain was
> so heavy that it washed away the wall that was concealing the frontage
> of the Bijamandal mosque raised by Aurangzeb in 1682” in Vidisha, and
> “the broken wall exposed so many Hindu idols that the Archaeological
> Survey of India had no choice but to excavate”, as mentioned by
> Prafull Goradia: “Heritage hushed up”, *Pioneer*, 12-12-2000. \[note
> added in January 2002\]
>
> ^([64](#64a))M. Shokoohy: “Two fire temples converted to mosques in
> central Iran”, *Papers in Honour of Professor Mary Boyce*, EJ.  Brill,
> Leiden 1985, p.546.
>
> ^([65](#65a))Harsh Narain: “Ram Janmabhoomi: Muslim testimony”, in
> *Lucknow Pioneer* (5-2-90) and *Indian Express* (26-2-90), included in
> S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol. 1, 2nd ed. (1998), p. 169-175.
>
> ^([66](#66a))Prof. A.R. Khan: “In the name of ‘history’” (originally
> published in *Indian Express*, 25-2-1990) and the whole subsequent
> exchange with the JNU historians has been included in *History vs.
> Casuistry*, app.2, and in S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol. 1, 2nd ed.
> (Voice of India, Delhi 1998), p. 243-263.  We have to give the JNU
> historians credit for trying at least this once to refute criticism,
> but we cannot commend the secretiveness about this exchange in their
> later writings.  On the other hand, their secretiveness is quite
> eloquent in its own way.
>
> ^([67](#67a))The whole debate between A.K. Chatterjee and Syed
> Shahabuddin is included in S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.1, 2nd ed.,
> p.176-211; Shahabuddin’s claim to “have the German text” is on p. 198.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI Books]()   [Back to
Home]()**
