+++
title = "14 13. Postscript: a lasting solution"

+++
**13. Postscript: a lasting solution**

**13.1. Say it with poetry**

It happened a whole decade ago, but the method could still be tried out
today.  In the dying days of Khalistani terrorism, secularist Prime
Minister V.P. Singh visited Panjab and proposed as his solution for
terror and separatism this colourful formula: “We must open the treasury
of our hearts.” He was indulging in mere poetic sentimentalism to avoid
facing the real problem of Khalistani terrorism.  But it is true that
the Sikh masses had kept the treasury of their hearts open and felt hurt
when the Hindus were victimized.  And a few years later, Khalistan was
only a bad memory.

So who won Panjab back?  There is no doubt that Khalistani terrorism was
defeated by the courage and steadfastness of K.P.S. Gill and other men
in uniform, many of whom gave their lives in the effort.  However, some
people in cosier places decide in favour of the eloquent Prime Minister:
poetry defeated the Kalashnikov.

One these privileged people is Amit Jayaram who knows that India’s
secularism has to appeal to Hinduism to turn Hindus in general against
its vanguard, Hindu Revivalism.  He has tried his armoury on the Ayodhya
controversy with the poem: “Let’s build a temple”.^([1](#1)) I will only
reproduce a few interesting fragments for savouring and comment.

“Let’s build a temple to Lord Rama.

“Let’s build the temple in our hearts,

“A goodly temple, soft and gentle,

“In peace, without these fits and starts.”

None dare object to that. indeed, the secularist campaigners ought to
ask themselves, daily before going to bed: “How many bricks did I lay up
today for this temple of gentleness in my heart?” Now that they are
preaching about how “true Hinduism” amounts to secularism, they too
ought to build this temple in their hearts, chiselling away all the
calumnies and hatred which have disfigured their discourse for too
long.  Instead of clamouring for Stalinist “hard secularism”, they
should develop a kinder, gentler secularism: dialogue with the Kar
Sevaks or, better still, listening sessions where they shut their own
mouths and sincerely try to get a fair understanding of what Hindu
Revivalism is all about.

And why should peace surround only the construction of the temple in the
heart?  Let us be more ambitious and bring peace even where the Rama
temple of stone is built.  Only one factor is standing in the way of
peace in Ayodhya: secularist-backed Islamic intransigence against the
proper Hindu adornment of a Hindu sacred site.  I am happy to enroll
Amit Jayaram in the coalition of people who are trying to make the
Muslim-secularist fanatics see reason, provided he means what he says in
the following lines:

“Let’s build it, in our Hindu vein,

“Without a trace of hate or blame

“Let’s build it with red bricks of love

“And light in it compassion’s flame.”

Note how Amit Jayaram finds something typically Hindu in hatelessness,
love and compassion.  To be sure, there is room for blame somewhere.  If
this controversy exists, it is because someone at some point decided to
trespass against the religious arrangement established on that hill in
Ayodhya.  Someone demolished the temple, and he is to blame, along with
the prophet or doctrine that made him do it.  Alright, in moments of
religious focus and serenity we should keep mundane thoughts of guilt
and blame outside our consciousness.  But when coming down to earth, we
should not delude ourselves that all the religious forces in the field
are equally benevolent.  He goes on:

“We do not need to etch our faith

“With iron on the stones of time

“It’s all around, within, without

“It needs no mortar, bricks or lime.”

The poet has a point: the dharma is the essence of the universe.  It was
there long before anyone built temples or wrote poetry, well before
Prophet Mohammed intoned the Quran, and long before the Muslim
conquerors thought it necessary to impose a structure of brick and
mortar onto a Hindu sacred site.  You can conceive of the dharma as
immaterial, without name or form, without qualities.

However, there is no need to *confine* it to this disembodied existence,
nor is it lowered or deformed by giving it a tangible shape once in a
while.  “Emptiness is not different from form, nor is form different
from emptiness”, as the *Heart Sûtra* says.  Many Hindus have practised
religion without temples or idols for thousands of years, but many
others have decided it was right as well as feasible to express their
experience of the Divine in specific shapes of sculpture and
architecture.  Temples are not necessary, but neither is the absence of
temples that stratospheric bricklessness to which Amit Jayaram is so
attached.  To say that Hindus don’t need a temple just when Muslims are
trying to deny them the right to build a temple sounds like devious
Gandhian submissiveness to the bully: too proud to admit to cowardice,
but cowardly all the same.  We conclude quoting him the following lines:

“We do not need to stress, define

“Our faith against another’s creed

“One of the world’s most ancient faiths

“Has no need to resort to greed.”

Exactly.  Hinduism was there all along, and never needed an “Other”
against which to define itself.  This is in contrast with Islam, which
defined itself from the start as the mortal enemy of the traditional
religion of Arabia and of all other religions.  In its core vow, Islam
swears to eradicate all God-concepts except Allah and narrows down the
ways of knowing God to the so-called revelations transmitted through
Prophet Mohammed.  Hindus will find it heartening to read a secularist’s
plea for the Hindu and against the Islamic approach.

As for “greed”, this word means “desiring what is not yours” or
“desiring what you don’t need”.  According to Jayaram, the Islamic
conquerors were guilty of greed when they took temple sites from the
Hindus.  That is certainly not the whole explanation, as religious zeal
had a lot to do with it too, but let that pass for now.  So, the Muslims
took what was not theirs because they were greedy. it does not follow
that this is a conflict between two greedy parties.

Greed means: wanting what is not yours.  It does not mean: keeping or
reclaiming what is yours.  By definition, a robber is greedy.  His
protesting victim, by contrast, may or may not be a greedy person, but
he is not proven to be greedy merely by his protesting against the
crime.  In reclaiming the Rama-Janmabhoomi site, Hindus have “no need to
resort to greed”.  Amit Jayaram, like most secularists, easily lapses
into the symmetry fallacy, the facile assumption of moral equivalence. 
Well, there is no equivalence between Islamic aggression and Hindu
self-respect.

**13.2. Reject the Indonesian model**

Shortly after taking office as RSS Sarsanghchalak, K.S. Sudarshan gave a
speech in which he developed an idea which had already been popular for
long among soft-line RSS ideologues: Indian Muslims should follow the
example of their Indonesian co-religionists.  These, he said, are
Muslims who tell the Ramayana to their children and who don’t mind a
little Hindu symbolism in the background, particularly Ganesha and the
Garuda bird.  If only the Indian Muslims could be like that, Sudarshan
mused.  For one thing, they would then entertain a certain veneration
for the Ramajanmabhoomi site, so the whole Ayodhya dispute would be
resolved at once.

What is wrong with this idyllic picture?  First of all, the empirical
fact is that even in Indonesia, this open-minded and Hindu-minded Islam
is in decline.  The remaining Hindus in Indonesia have the good fortune
of living separate from the Muslims on their own island (Bali), but with
the ongoing Muslim Javanese immigration there, their peace is by no
means guaranteed.  As the massacres of Christians in Ambon and Sulawesi
demonstrate, the Indonesian variety of Islam is acquiring the same
fanaticism and cruelty as its Pakistani counterpart has always had. 
Does Sudarshan want Indian Muslims to emulate their Pakistani brothers?

Secondly, the Indonesian Muslims, even if open-minded and respectful of
Hinduism, are at any rate Muslims.  Their ancestors gave up Hinduism,
Buddhism or Animism to embrace Islam.  A case may be made (Sudarshan
avoided making it) that these conversions were insincere, prompted as
they were by physical force or social pressure.  But fact remains that
most Indonesians are now Muslims and not Hindus.  Sudarshan sees them as
beaming a message: “Indian Muslims, respect Hindu tradition like we
do.”  However, the message they are sending might just as well be read
as: “You Hindus, convert to Islam like we did.”

Thirdly, as Muslims, Indonesians feel united with a billion people who
don’t share their nationality but do share their religion.  Sudarshan
and other RSS spokesmen like to tell Indian Muslims that they should
join the Indian “mainstream”, and that they would profit from becoming
part of a bigger community.  But if there is any virtue in joining a
larger mainstream, why choose the Hindu mainstream, roughly limited to
just one (admittedly big) country, rather than the larger Islamic
mainstream?

Muslim leaders made short work of Sudarshan’s daydream by pointing out
that the logic of “joining the mainstream” yields a good reason for
staying within Islam.  Or even, in the case of Hindus, for abandoning
their religion and joining Islam.  If all the Hindus converted to Islam,
India would be the leader of the Islamic world, custodian of the Islamic
Bomb, and, reunited with Pakistan and Bangladesh, the most populous
country in the world, free of all this wasteful Hindu-Muslim tension.

The nationalist discourse which avoids questions of religious doctrine,
inevitably fails in convincing Muslims to be more Hindu-friendly or
India-patriotic.  On the contrary, it offers new reasons for preferring
Islam to Hinduism.  The reason for rejecting Islam is not political, is
not a matter of national unity and greatness.  Rather, it is doctrinal,
it is a matter of truth.  If Prophet Mohammed’s belief system is true,
then all Hindus should convert to Islam, and India’s identity be
damned.  If it is untrue, all Muslim inside and outside India should
give up Islam.

**13.3. No more Ayodhya disputes**

I have said it before and I need not apologize for repeating it here: it
is useless to stir up controversies by demanding that temple sites with
mosques on them be given back to the Hindu Gods from whom they were
stolen by Islamic onslaught.  The Ayodhya struggle has been fun, so to
speak, or at least it has been a very instructive episode, but as a
general rule, the Hindu position regarding Islam should not be focused
on real estate disputes.

A good side-effect of the Ayodhya dispute has been the increased
awareness about the ongoing debate over Indian history-writing.  The
“eminent historians” have been complaining that the writers of
evidence-based history are polluting the stream of history scholarship. 
Those who are too remote from the available sources or not
intellectually equipped or simply too lazy to verify these claims may
well be taken in by this allegation.  Those who care to inquire,
however, are bound to find that it the other way around: it is the
“eminent historians” who have polluted the channels of history teaching
with their systematic distortions. I dare hope that the present volume
has contributed to exposing their fraud.

The most important lesson which I personally have drawn from my
involvement with the Ayodhya debate and my acquaintance with India’s
“communal” conflict is that the real struggle is not over real estate,
nor really over history textbooks, but over a fundamental religious and
philosophical commitment.  The problem with Indian Muslims regarding
Ayodhya is ultimately not their aggression and unreasonable claims over
what is not theirs; rather, it is their belief in a religion which
sanctions such behaviour.  The point is not getting the Muslims out of
Ayodhya, it is getting Islam out of the Muslims.

One attempt in this direction, and one of which a Hindutva leader like
Sudarshan must be aware, was pioneered by the Hindu reformist movement,
the Arya Samaj: Shuddhi or “purification” from *adhârmika*
entanglements.  In common English, it would be termed “conversion”, or
in a larger historical perspective, “reconversion” of Indian Muslims to
their ancestral tradition.  Though it was only in the late 19th century
that the Arya Samaj devised the programme of reconversion, the practice
has been attested here and there since the earliest days of Muslim rule
in parts of India.  People forcibly converted to Islam were welcomed
back into Hindu society after going through a purification ritual.

However, as a matter of historical fact, the Shuddhi movement was not a
great success.  One problem was the inertia of Hindu society, which did
not go out of its ways to make the reconverted Muslims feel at home. 
Another was that the national or ancestral argument for reconversion to
one national religion was not good enough. if Islam is the true
religion, sacrificing the link with nation and ancestors may be a fair
price to pay in order to establish a link with God.  Every single Muslim
has a history of severing the link with his national heritage, either he
himself or someone in his family tree.  So, all it took for Islamic
propaganda (*tabligh*) activists to immunize Muslims against the lure of
Shuddhi was to remind them of the truth claims of Islam.  What we have
to do now is to take them at their word and examine these truth claims. 
Once Islam has been disproves for all to see, it is only a matter of
time before it will implode.  With modern communication, it should not
be difficult to provide a billion Muslims with the data necessary to
make them doubt and reject the Islamic beliefs.

In a world-wide perspective, all Muslims should explore their own way
out of Islam, depending on local heritage as well as on the gifts of
modernity.  Westerners are going through the same experience: believing
in the bizarre dogmas of Christianity is no longer tenable, so we are
groping around for new answers to the spiritual needs of Western man and
of mankind in general.  Numerous individuals in the Muslim world are
going through the same process of emancipation from irrational beliefs.

No one can do it for them, they will have to free their minds from the
ideological conditioning instilled in them from childhood.  Non-Muslims
can help them in this process by ensuring that the best scholarship
debunking Islamic beliefs is made available to all, and by opposing and
thwarting policies which shield Islam from rational scrutiny and
strengthen the hold of obscurantist leaders over their flock. it also
helps if the Hindus set an example by freeing their own tradition from
some superstitious deadwood.

The end result will be that the Muslims abandon Islam and the claims
made on behalf of Islam.  They will gladly bring the stolen sacred sites
back into Hinduism.  And they themselves will build a temple in Ayodhya
for Rama, the god who redeems the victims of kidnapping.  Rama will free
the Hindus who were forced into Islam, and their children who were
mentally chained by Islamic indoctrination until they became the Indian
Muslim community.  He will take them back with him to his birthplace
Ayodhya, to celebrate.  
 

**Footnotes:**

> ^([1](#1a))Amit Jayaram: “Let’s build a temple”, *A Temple in Ayodhya
> and Other Poems*, Rupa, Delhi 1993, p-5-6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI Books]()   [Back to
Home]()**
