+++
title = "09 8. Are Sikhs Hindus?"

+++
**8. Are Sikhs Hindus?**

**8.1. The problem of Sikh identity**

In most of the contemporary literature, Sikhism is treated as a separate
religion.  The questioning of this separateness by Hindus is usually
only mentioned in scornful tones, as a sign of “Hindu fundamentalist”
sympathies.  Most non-specialist Western sources implicitly support Sikh
separatism, at least the religious, non-territorial variety.  Thus, the
cover story on India in the non-political American monthly *National
Geographic* carries a picture of a typical-looking Sikh before the Hari
Mandir in Amritsar, with the caption: “The Golden Temple in Amritsar
serves as the spiritual centre for the world’s 20 million Sikhs.  ‘From
Hindus and Muslims have I broken free’, said Arjan Dev Ji, the fifth
Sikh guru, in the 1590s.  The faith holds all people equal in the eyes
of God.”^([1](#1)) Of these three sentences, two are statements of
support to Sikh separatism, and both are open to criticism.

The last sentence highlights equality, obviously contrasting it with the
“Hindu” caste system.  However, the now-popular claim that Sikhism is
caste-free and that this sets it apart from Hinduism (on the assumption
that caste is intrinsic to Hinduism), is simply untrue.  Every Hindu
knows that Sikhs have not ceased practising caste, but for an
authoritative refutation, we may turn to a historian who scrutinized the
record of Sikhism: “The acknowledgement of caste identities was
presumably acceptable to the Gurus, for the Gurus themselves married
their own children according to traditional caste prescriptions.  The
anti-caste thrust of the Gurus’ teachings must be seen as a doctrine
which referred to spiritual deliverance and (…) a firm rejection of
injustice or hurtful discrimination based on caste status.  What is not
implied is a total obliteration of caste identity.”^([2](#2))

Till today, Sikhs marry with Hindus of the same caste, while they still
avoid marriage with Sikhs of different castes.  Likewise, Sikh politics
is largely divided along caste lines, e.g. the Akali movement is one of
Jat Sikhs, shunned by low-caste Sikhs (who are called Mazhabi Sikhs,
that is, Sikhs by religion alone, e.g. former Congress minister Buta
Singh) and by the higher Khatri and Arora castes to which the Gurus
belonged.

The second sentence in the *National Geographic* caption, Guru Arjun’s
statement, is superficially a crystal-clear expression of Sikh
separateness.^([3](#3)) Yet, it is not as straightforward as separatists
might wish.  No Sikh Guru was ever a Muslim, ergo the half-sentence: “Of
Muslims have I broken free”, does not mean that he abandoned Islam. 
Therefore, the other half need not be construed as a repudiation of
Hinduism either.  Rather, it may be read as repudiating the whole
“identity” business including the division of mankind into Hindu and
Muslim categories, on the Upanishadic ground that the Self is beyond
these superficial trappings (the Self being *neti neti*, “not this, not
that”)-but that is a typically Hindu and decidedly un-Islamic position. 
To the Quran, group identity (being a member of the Muslim *ummah* or
not) is everything, is laden with far-reaching consequences including an
eternity in heaven or in hell.  To Hindu society, it is also undeniably
important; but to Hindu spirituality, it is not.  Likewise, another
verse of the same poem, “I will not pray to idols nor say the Muslim
prayer”, is more anti-Islamic than anti-Hindu: it rejects a duty binding
every single Muslim (prayer) and a practice common among Hindus
(idol-worship) but by no means obligatory.

There is enough of a *prima facie* case that Sikhism is a Hindu sect
pure and simple.  And effectively, some Sikhs do claim that they are
Hindus.^([4](#4)) Of course, the Hindutva movement holds the same view:
the Sikhs are just one of the sects constituting the Hindu
Commonwealth.  Or no, not “just” one: they are the “sword-arm” of
Hinduism.  The Sikh Gurus Tegh Bahadur, beheaded by Aurangzeb in 1675
for refusing to convert, and his son Govind Singh, who founded the
military Khalsa order and whose four sons were killed by the Moghul
troops, are very popular in Hindutva glorifications of “national
heroes”.^([5](#5)) Their pictures are routinely displayed at functions
of the RSS and its affiliates, and their holidays celebrated, e.g.:
“Over 650 branches of Bharat Vikas Parishad observe Guru Tegh Bahadur
Martyrdom Day”.^([6](#6))

The Hindu identity of the Sikhs which Veer Savarkar and Guru Golwalkar
simply assumed, Ram Swarup and Arun Shourie have also tried to
demonstrate, and we will consider their argument here, juxtaposed with
some observations by other Hindu Revivalists and with the arguments
given by the famous Sikh author Khushwant Singh, who sometimes defends
and sometimes dismisses the claims of Sikh separateness.

**8.2. Are Sikhs Muslims?**

If we accept the historical definition of *“Hindu”* given by the
Muslims, there is simply no doubt about it: all Sikhs fall under the
heading “Indian Pagans”, for they are neither Muslims nor Christians,
Jews or Parsis.  So, Sikhs are Hindus.  Unless…

Unless Sikhs are some kind of Muslims.  Ram Swarup starts his survey of
the genesis of Sikh separatism with the discovery that T.P. Hughes’
*Dictionary of Islam*, written in the British-Indian colonial context,
devotes the third-longest of its articles (after *Muhammad* and
*Qur’ân*) to the lemma Sikhism.  According to Ram Swarup, “it must be a
strange sect of Islam where the word ‘Mohammed’ does not occur even once
in the writings of its founder, Nanak.”^([7](#7)) Nor did later Gurus
include the praise of Mohammed in the Guru Granth.

Hughes himself admits at the outset that the readers may be surprised to
find Sikhism treated as a sect of Islam, but promises to show that “the
religion of Nanak was really intended as a compromise between Hinduism
and Muhammadanism, if it may not even be spoken of as the religion of a
Muhammadan sect”^([8](#8)).  His endeavour is significant for two trends
affecting the Sikh position in India’s religious spectrum: Sikh
rapprochement with Islam for the sake of distinguishing itself from
Hinduism, and the British colonial policy (which also employed scholars)
of isolating the Sikh community and forging it into a privileged
collaborating enclave in native society.

To start with the first point, it is a general rule that any enumeration
of the distinctive elements of Sikhism by proponents of Sikh
separateness exclusively mentions points which distinguish it from
Hinduism and bring it closer to Islam.  Thus, Khushwant Singh names the
crucial difference: “The revolt of Sikhism was not against Hinduism but
against its Brahminical form.  It was based on two things: the concept
of God as unity, a God who was *nirankâr* (formless).  Therefore,
Sikhism rejected the worship of idols.  It also rejected the caste
system.  It was, as the cliché goes, an acceptance of the fatherhood of
God and the brotherhood of man.”^([9](#9))

The said cliché is actually a self-formulation of Protestant
Christianity; in India, it was also enunciated by Keshub Chunder Sen of
the Brahmo Samaj, but there is nothing particularly Sikh about
it.^([10](#10)) Khushwant Singh also calls Sikhism “prophet-based” and
“monotheistic”, both Biblical-Islamic notions but now central items in
Sikh separatist discourse.^([11](#11))

The question may be asked whether the alleged non-polytheism of Guru
Nanak really is the same thing as the Biblical-Quranic worship of a
“jealous God”.  Sri Aurobindo, for one, insisted on the radically
different spirit in Sikhism as compared with Islam: “Those ways of
Indian cult which most resemble a popular form of Theism, are still
something more; for they do not exclude, but admit the many aspects of
God. (…) The later religious forms which most felt the impress of the
Islamic idea, like Nanak’s worship of the timeless One, *Akâla*, and the
reforming creeds of today, born under the influence of the West, yet
draw away from the limitations of western or Semitic
monotheism.  Irresistibly they turn from these infantile conceptions
towards the fathomless truth of Vedanta.”^([12](#12)) Just as Christians
in debate with Islam affirm: the fact that both your God and my God are
described as single and unique, does not imply that they are the
same.^([13](#13))

The most striking point, however, is that none of the elements of Sikh
doctrine mentioned by Khushwant Singh sets Sikhism apart from Islam; he
could have mentioned the Sikh attachment to the taboo on cow-slaughter,
but significantly overlooks it.  In militant Sikhism, we find a whole
list of concepts and institutions remoulded or newly created in the
image of Islamic (or Christian) counterparts, e.g. *guru* has become a
synonym for *rasûl, hukumnâma* for *fatwa, dharmyuddh* for *jihâd,
pîrî-mîrî* for *khîlafat*.^([14](#14)) And of course *Khâlistân* (from
Arabic khalîs, “unmixed”) is the Sikh separatist equivalent for
Pâkistân, both meaning “land of the pure”.

In order to bolster their separateness from Hinduism, Sikh separatists
magnify the Islamic element in Sikhism.  An element of this tendency is
the replacement of Sanskrit-based terms with Persian terms, e.g. the
*Hari Mandir*, “Vishnu temple”, in Amritsar is preferably called *Darbâr
Sâhib*, “venerable court session (of the Timeless one)”.^([15](#15))
Another expression of this tendency is the induction of Muslim divines
into Sikh history, e.g. the by now widespread story that the foundation
stone of the Hari Mandir was laid by the Sufi *pîr* Mian Mir.  After
this story was repeated again and again in his weekly column by
Khushwant Singh, Sita Ram Goel wrote a detailed survey of the oldest and
modernst sources pertaining to the construction of the Hari Mandir,
found no trace of Mian Mir there, and concluded: “I request you to (…)
stop propping up a blatant forgery simply because it has become popular
and is being patronised by those who control the neo-Sikh
establishment.”^([16](#16)) Khushwant Singh never mentioned Mian Mir
again.

Goel’s general position is that modern Sikh self-historiography is full
of concoction, starting with insertions and changes in 19th-century
editions of older texts, all of it in unsubtle appropriation of the
latest ideological fashions.  He argues that Sikh history was magnified
both by Anglo-secularist authors (Sikhism as a “proto-secular” religion
of “Hindu-Muslim synthesis” free of “Brahminical superstition”) and by
Hindu nationalists (Sikhism as the “sword-arm of Hinduism”) simply
because the Sikhs were a privileged and prosperous community.  As often,
the present power equation determines the relative importance of
individuals and groups in the history books.^([17](#17)) In Goel’s view,
Guru Nanak was by no means greater than other Sants like Garibdas (to
whose *panth* Goel’s own family belonged), he only has the benefit of an
assertive constituency of followers in the present.

Likewise, Rajendra Singh, a Sikh anti-separatist author and regular
contributor to the RSS weekly *Panchjanya*, claims that even (not to say
*especially*) the key moments of Sikh history are often
concoctions.  Thus, the founding of the martial Khalsa order by Guru
Govind Singh in 1699, with the beard as part of its dress code, is put
in doubt by a post-1699 painting of a clean-shaven Govind
Singh.^([18](#18)) He also points out that many stories about the lives
of the Gurus are obvious calks on Puranic or Islamic stories.

Neither Goel nor Rajendra Singh has so far worked out these arguments in
writing, so I will not pursue this line of debate here.  Yet, my
impression from the available literature is that a close verification of
the now-popular version of Sikh history is indeed called for.

Thus, Khushwant Singh relates about the martyrdom of the fifth Guru,
Arjun Dev: “Among his tormentors was a Hindu banker whose daughter’s
hand Arjun had refused to accept for his son.”^([19](#19)) In the main
text, he relates this story as a fact, but in footnote, he adds that
“there is nothing contemporary on record to indicate that the Hindu
banker, Chandu Shah, was in any way personally vindictive towards the
captive Guru”, then justifies the inclusion of the story with reference
to colonial historian Max Arthur Macauliffe.^([20](#20)) And that is one
case where he explicitates the conflict between the assurance given by
his most important secondary source (Macauliffe) and the silence of the
“contemporary records” consulted by himself; in numerous cases, however,
he follows Macauliffe without conveying what the original record has to
say.

Most things in Sikhism can be traced either to Hindu origins or to
borrowings from Islam.  But for centuries, one thing which put the Sikhs
firmly in the Hindu camp was the continuous hostility with the Islamic
Empire of the Moghuls and with the Muslim Afghans.  After Partition,
there were practically no Muslims left in East Panjab, and the contrast
with Hinduism could now receive the full emphasis for the first time. 
In that context, separatist Sikhs resorted to highlighting existing or
introducing new elements borrowed from Islam.  It is typical that in his
overview of the elements which make up Sikh identity, Khushwant Singh
overlooks specific Sikh commandments which set Sikhism apart from Islam,
e.g. the prohibition on marrying Muslim women and on eating *halâl*
meat.^([21](#21)) In his case, I have no reason to surmise any bad
faith: if he conveys this politically sanitized reading of Sikh
identity, it is because that happens to be the received wisdom
now.^([22](#22))

To the extent that Sikhism leans towards Islam, it does undeniably set
itself apart from Hinduism.  The anti-separatist argument will therefore
necessarily consist in branding the Islamic elements in Sikhism as late
and disingenuous borrowings, or as mere externalities not affecting the
essentially Hindu core of Sikhism.  They should at any rate be viewed in
their historical context: by Guru Nanak’s time, Panjab had been under
Muslim rule for five centuries, and a number of Muslim customs had
passed into common use among Hindus, as lamented by Nanak himself. 
Likewise, much Persian and Muslim terminology seeped into the language
of Panjabi Hindus.

**8.3. Hinduism as a boa constrictor**

Ram Swarup relates how the British had been disappointed with the
conclusions of the first scholar who investigated and translated Sikh
Scriptures, the German Indologist and missionary Dr. E. Trumpp, who had
found Guru Nanak a “thorough Hindu” and his religion “a Pantheism
derived directly from Hindu sources”.^([23](#23)) This was not long
after the 1857 Mutiny, when the Sikhs had fought on the British side,
and the British were systematically turning the Sikhs into one of the
privileged enclaves in native society with whose help they wanted to
make governing India easier for themselves.

So, according to Ram Swarup, other scholars were put to work to rewrite
Sikh history in the sense desired by the British: “Max Arthur
Macauliffe, a highly placed British administrator (…) told the Sikhs
that Hinduism was like a ‘boa constrictor of the Indian forest’ which
‘winds its opponent and finally causes it to disappear in its capacious
interior’.  The Sikhs ‘may go that way’, he warned.  He was pained to
see that the Sikhs regarded themselves as Hindus which was ‘in direct
opposition to the teachings of the Gurus’. (…) The influence of
scholarship is silent, subtle and long-range.  Macauliffe and others
provided categories which became the thought-equipment of subsequent
Sikh intellectuals.”^([24](#24))

The “boa constrictor” account is repeated by Khushwant Singh, who is
very attached to “Sikh separate identity which we are trying to, and
perhaps will go on trying to maintain”.^([25](#25))

He is worried by Hindu open-mindedness: “Hinduism has this enormous
capacity of taking everything in its embrace: you can be an idol
worshipper, you can be an idol breaker; you can believe in one god, you
can believe in a thousand gods; you can have a caste system, you can
deny the caste system; you can be an agnostic, atheist, or whatever else
you like, and remain a Hindu.  What can you do about it?  It is this
power of absorption of Hinduism, that it is even willing to recognize
Prophet Mohammed as an Avatar of Vishnu, that poses the real challenge
to other religions.”^([26](#26)) The statement contains exaggerations
(idol breaker, Mohammed as avatar?!)^([27](#27)) , but we get the
message: Hinduism’s accommodation of different spiritual approaches is a
problem for separatists.

This is yet another instance of how Hindus are “damned if they do,
damned if they don’t”: had they been intolerant, this would of course be
held against them, but even when they are found to be tolerant and
accommodating, it is still interpreted as an evil design.  When Hinduism
integrates new elements, it is not proof of broad-mindedness, but of a
strategy of swallowing the minorities.”^([28](#28)) As Arun Shourie
remarks, after describing some examples of how Hindu tradition has
integrated “Dravidian” and “Aryan” elements: “Why is it that (…) for our
columnists and our communists that decision is yet another instance of
the devious devices by which Hinduism has been ‘swallowing up’ other
traditions?”^([29](#29))

In the case of Sikhism, at any rate, the boa metaphor does not really
fit the case: Sikhism has sprung from Hinduism, and it is not as if the
two were strangers who met one day and then the one decided to swallow
up the other.  But it may be said that in the 19th century, Hinduism was
*reabsorbing* Sikhism, and that it may yet complete this process in the
future.

**8.4. Sikhs were Hindus**

That the Sikhs “regarded themselves as Hindus” is confirmed by Khushwant
Singh, who concedes that three centuries of Sikh history after Nanak,
including the creation of the Khalsa as a Sikh martial vanguard by Guru
Govind Singh, were not enough to make Sikhism into a separate religion:
“However, what is worthwhile to bear in mind is that, despite these
innovations, this new community, the Khalsa Panth, remained an integral
part of the Hindu social and religious system.  It is significant that
when Tegh Bahadur was summoned to Delhi, he went as a representative of
the Hindus.  He was executed in the year 1675.  His son who succeeded
him as guru later described his father’s martyrdom as in the cause of
the Hindu faith, ‘to preserve their caste marks and their sacred thread
did he perform the supreme sacrifice’.  The guru himself looked upon his
community as an integral part of the Hindu social system.”^([30](#30))

Tegh Bahadur’s martyrdom is usually interpreted as an act of
self-sacrifice for the sake of the Kashmiri Pandits threatened with
forced conversion.  As such, it is a classic Hindutva proof of the
Hinduness of Sikhism, though it is also a classic neo-Sikh proof of the
“secularism” of Sikhism (“showing concern even for people of a different
religion, viz.  Hinduism”).^([31](#31)) However, this whole debate may
well rest upon a simple misunderstanding.

In most indo-Aryan languages, the oft-used honorific mode of the
singular is expressed by the same pronoun as the plural (e.g. Hindi
*unkâ*, “his” or “their”, as opposed to the non-honorific singular
*uskâ*), and vice-versa; by contrast, the singular form only indicates a
singular subject.  The phrase commonly translated as “the Lord preserved
their tilak and sacred thread” (*tilak-janjû râkhâ Prabh tâ-kâ*),
referring to unnamed outsiders assumed to be the Kashmiri Pandits,
literally means that He “preserved b is tilak and sacred thread”,
meaning Tegh Bahadur’s; it is already unusual poetic liberty to
render *“their* tilak and sacred thread” this way, and even if that were
intended, there is still no mention of the Kashmiri Pandits in the
story.^([32](#32)) This is confirmed by one of the following lines in
Govind’s poem about his father’s martyrdom: “He suffered martyrdom for
the sake of his faith.”^([33](#33)) in any case, the story of forced
massed conversions in Kashmir by the Moghul emperor Aurangzeb is not
supported by the detailed record of *his* reign by Muslim chronicles who
narrate many accounts of his biogorty.

Though Govind Singh is considered as the founder of the Khalsa order
(1699) who “gave his Sikhs an outward form distinct from the
Hindus”^([34](#34)), he too did things which Sikh separatists would
dismiss as “brahminical”.  As Khushwant Singh notes, “Gobind selected
five of the most scholarly of his disciples and sent them to Benares to
learn Sanskrit and the Hindu religious texts, to be better able to
interpret the writings of the gurus, which were full of allusions to
Hindu mythology and philosophy.”^([35](#35)) Arun Shourie quotes Govind
Singh as declaring: “Let the path of the pure \[*khâlsâ panth*\] prevail
all over the world, let the Hindu dharma dawn and all delusion
disappear. (…) May I spread dharma and prestige of the Veda in the world
and erase from it the sin of cow-slaughter.”^([36](#36))

Khushwant Singh notes with a certain disappointment that even when the
Sikhs carved out a state for themselves, they did not separate from
Hinduism: “The Sikhs triumphed and we had Ranjit Singh.  You may feel
that here at long last we had a Sikh monarch, and the Khalsa would come
into their own.  Nothing of the sort happened. (…) Instead of taking
Sikhism in its pristine form, he accepted Hinduism in its brahminical
form.  He paid homage to Brahmins.  He made cow-killing a capital
offence”^([37](#37))

Further, he donated three times more gold to the newly built makeshift
Vishvanath temple in Varanasi than to the Hari Mandir in Amritsar.  He
also threatened the Amirs of Sindh with an invasion if they didn’t stop
persecuting the Hindus.  Even more embarrassing for those who propagate
the progressive non-Hindu image of Sikhism: one of the last and greatest
royal self-immolations of widows ever performed in India took place in
1839 when Ranjit Singh was accompanied on his funeral pyre by four of
his wives and seven maids and concubines.^([38](#38))

By any standard, Ranjit Singh was a Hindu ruler: “He worshipped as much
in Hindu temples as he did in gurudwaras.  When he was sick and about to
die, he gave away cows for charity.  What did he do with the diamond
*Kohi-noor*?  He did not want to give it to the Darbar Sahib at Amritsar
which he built in marble and gold, but to Jagannath Puri as his farewell
gift.  When he had the Afghans at his mercy and wrested Kashmir from
them, he wanted the gates of the temple of Somnath back from them.  Why
should he be making all these Hindu demands?  Whatever the breakaway
that had been achieved from Hinduism, this greatest of our monarchs
bridged in 40 years.”^([39](#39))

A few years after Ranjit Singh’s death, the British annexed his
kingdom.  Khushwant Singh describes how Sikh (more precisely, Khalsa)
identity was fast disappearing when the British occupied Panjab.  To
Hindu Revivalists, this development was perfectly natural: Sikh identity
was not religious but functional, and it disappeared when its
circumstantial *raison d’être* disappeared.  Sikhism was thrown up by
Hindu society as part of the centuries-long “Hindu response to the
Islamic onslaught”^([40](#40)), and now that the *Pax Brittanica* made
an end to the Hindu-Muslim struggle, it was natural that Sikhism was
gradually reabsorbed.

**8.5. Sikh identity and the British**

It is the established Hindu Revivalist position that Sikhism as a
separate religion is a British artefact.  Khushwant Singh confirms this
much, that the British came to the rescue of the dwindling Khalsa by
setting up Sikh regiments to which only observant Khalsa Sikhs were
allowed.  This worked as “a kind of hot-house protection” to Sikh
identity, and “by World War 1, a third of the British Indian Army were
bearded Khalsa Sikhs”.^([41](#41)) This number may be exaggerated: Ram
Swarup counts “19.2% in 1914”, falling to “13.58% in 1930” (because by
then, “the Government was less sure of their unquestioning
loyalty”).^([42](#42)) All the same, to Sikh identity the Army
recruitment was crucial, and our Sikh historian candidly admits: “So the
first statutory guarantee of the continuation of the Khalsa came from a
foreign power.”^([43](#43))

A look at the census figures may be useful here.  In 1881, ca. 41% of
the Panjabis classified themselves as Hindus, only 5.5% as Sikhs; by the
time of Partition, the percentage of “Hindus” had decreased to 26%, that
of “Sikhs” increased to 13%.  This had of course nothing to do with
conversion, merely with the pressure on the Sahajdharis to become
Kesadharis and assume an identity distinct from the Hindus.  On the
downside, however, the polarization imposed by the Khalsa pushed one of
the branches of Sikhism in Sindh, the Amil Nanakpanthis, to rejecting
Sikhism as a separate religion and casting their lot wholesale with
Hinduism.  Among them the family of L.K. Advani, who nonetheless calls
himself “still spiritually a Sikh”.

But even at the stage of the British rewards for Sikh distinctness, the
separation of the Sikhs from Hindu society had not fully succeeded: “To
start with, Hindus did not find this much of a problem.  The Hindu who
wanted to join the army simply stopped shaving and cutting his hair. (…)
Nihal Chand became Nihal Singh and went into the British Army as a Sikh
soldier.”^([44](#44)) According to Hindus, this was natural: Hindus did
not see “becoming a Sikh” as conversion.  The point was made very
clearly by a non-political Hindu leader from Varanasi, who told me: “If
the Sikhs don’t want to call themselves Hindus, I will gladly call
myself a Sikh.”^([45](#45))

According to Khushwant Singh, the loss of these privileges in 1947
undermined Sikh identity by taking its tangible benefits away: “Sikhs
lost their minority privileges because there were going to be no
minority privileges in a secular state (…) Their number in the Army
started to dwindle.  Their number in the Civil Service also began to
come down. (…) The younger \[generation\] did not understand why they
must grow their hair and beard, when they got no economic benefits for
doing so. (…) When a Sikh father is asked: ‘What do I get out of it ?’,
he can no longer say: ‘I can get you a job in the army if you have your
hair and beard.’”^([46](#46))

In a non-Sikh state and society, Sikh identity would probably get
dissolved in the long run, so the Khalsa leadership saw salvation in a
separate state: “External props to the Khalsa separatism started
crumbling.  Leaders of the community felt that their flock was facing
extinction and they must preserve it by whatever means they can.  The
only answer Akali leaders could think of-they are not used to thinking
very deeply-was to have political power in their homeland.”^([47](#47))
It was to safeguard their identity by means of physical separation that
some Akali factions started a movement of armed separatism.

**8.6. Sikhism as the sword-arm of Hinduism**

Ram Swarup adds a psychological reason for the recent Sikh attempt to
sever the ties with Hindu society and the Indian state: “‘You have been
our defenders’, Hindus tell the Sikhs.  But in the present psychology,
the compliment wins only contempt-and I believe rightly.  For
self-despisement is the surest way of losing a friend or even a
brother.  It also gives the Sikhs an exaggerated
self-assessment.”^([48](#48))

Ram Swarup hints at the question of the *historicity* of the belief that
“Sikhism is the sword-arm of Hinduism”, widespread among Hindus.  It is
well-known that the Sikhs were the most combative in fighting Muslims
during the Partition massacres, and that they were also singled out by
Muslims for slaughter.^([49](#49)) The image of Sikhs as the most
fearsome among the Infidels still lingers in the Muslim mind; it is
apparently for this reason that Saudi Arabia excludes Sikhs (like Jews)
from employment within its borders.  Yet, the story for the earlier
period is not that clear-cut.  Given the centrality of the image of
Sikhism as the “sword-arm of Hinduism”, it is well worth our while to
verify the record of Sikh struggles against Islam.

In the Guru lineage, we don’t see much physical fighting for Hinduism. 
Guru Nanak was a poet and a genuine saint, but not a warrior.  His
successors were poets, not all of them saintly, and made a living with
regular occupations such as horse-trading.  Guru Arjun’s martyrdom was
not due to any anti-Muslim rebellion but to the suspicion by Moghul
Emperor Jahangir that he had supported a failed rebellion by Jahangir’s
son Khusrau, i.e. a Muslim palace revolution aimed at continuing the
Moghul Empire but with someone else sitting on the throne. Arjun refused
to pay the fine which Jahangir imposed on him, not as an act of defiance
against Moghul sovereignty but because he denied the charges (which
amounted to pleading his loyalty to Jahangir); it was then that Jahangir
ordered a tougher punishment.  At any rate, Arjun was never accused of
raising the sword against Jahangir, merely of giving temporary shelter
to Khusrau.^([50](#50))

Tegh Bahadur’s martyrdom in 1675 was of course in the service of
Hinduism, in that it was an act of opposing Aurangzeb’s policy of
forcible conversion.  An arrest warrant against him had been issued on
non-religious and nonpolitical charges, and he was found out after
having gone into hiding; Aurangzeb gave him a chance to escape his
punishment by converting to Islam.  Being a devout Muslim, Aurangzeb
calculated that the conversion of this Hindu sect leader would encourage
his followers to convert along with him.  The Guru was tortured and
beheaded when he refused the offer to accept Islam, and one of his
companions was sawed in two for having said that Islam should be
destroyed.

At any rate, he stood firm *as a Hindu*, telling Aurangzeb that he loved
his Hindu Dharma and that Hindu Dharma would never die,-a statement
conveniently overlooked in most neo-Sikh accounts.^([51](#51)) He was
not a Sikh defending Hinduism, but a Hindu of the Nanakpanth defending
his own Hindu religion.  However, even Tegh Bahadur never was a warrior
against the Moghul empire; indeed, the birth of his son Govind in the
eastern city of Patna was a souvenir of his own enlistment in the party
of a Moghul general on a military expedition to Assam.

Tegh Bahadur’s son and successor, Govind Singh, only fought the Moghul
army when he was forced to, and it was hardly to protect Hinduism.  His
men had been plundering the domains of the semi-independent Hindu Rajas
in the hills of northeastern Panjab, *who had given him asylum* after
his father’s execution.^([52](#52)) Pro-Govind accounts in the Hindutva
camp equate Govind’s plundering with the *Chauth* tax which Shivaji
imposed to finance his fight against the Moghuls; they allege that the
Rajas were selfishly attached to their wealth while Govind was risking
his life for the Hindu cause.  The Rajas, after failed attempts to
restore law and order, appealed to their Moghul suzerain for help, or at
least to the nearest Moghul governor.  So, a confrontation ensued, not
because Govind Singh had defied the mighty Moghul Empire, but because
the Moghul Empire discharged its feudal duties toward its vassals, i.c.
to punish what to them was an ungrateful guest turned robber.

Govind was defeated and his two eldest sons killed in battle; many Sikhs
left him in anger at his foolhardy tactics.  During Govind Singh’s
flight, a Brahmin family concealed Govind’s two remaining sons (Hindus
protecting Sikhs, not the other way around), but they were found out and
the boys were killed.^([53](#53))

The death of Govind’s sons provides yet another demythologizing insight
about Govind Singh through its obvious connection with his abolition of
the Guru lineage.  A believer may, of course, assume that it was because
of some divine instruction that Govind replaced the living Guru lineage
with the Granth, a mere book (a replacement of the Hindu institution of
gurudom with the Book-centred model of Islam).  However, a more
down-to-earth hypothesis which takes care of all the facts is that after
the death of all his sons, Govind Singh simply could not conceive of the
Guru lineage as not continuing within his own family.^([54](#54))

After his defeat and escape (made possible by the self-sacrifice of a
disciple who impersonated the Guru), Govind Singh in his turn became a
loyal subject of the Moghul Empire.  He felt he had been treated
unfairly by the local governor, Wazir Khan, so he did what aggrieved
vassals do: he wrote a letter of complaint to his suzerain, not through
the hierarchical channels but straight to the Padeshah.  In spite of its
title and its sometimes defiant wording, this “victory letter” (*Zafar
Nâma*) to Aurangzeb is fundamentally submissive.  Among other things,
Govind assures Aurangzeb that he is just as much an idol-breaker as the
Padeshah himself: “I am the destroyer of turbulent hillmen, since they
are idolators and I am the breaker of idols.”^([55](#55)) Aurangzeb was
sufficiently pleased with the correspondence (possibly several letters)
he received from the Guru, for he ordered Wazir Khan not to trouble
Govind any longer.

After Aurangzeb’s death in 1707, Govind tried to curry favour with the
heir-apparent and effective successor, Bahadur Shah, and supported him
militarily in the war of succession: his fight was for one of the Moghul
factions and against the rival Moghul faction, not for Hinduism and
against the Moghul Empire as such.  In fact, one of the battles he
fought on Bahadur Shah’s side was against rebellious Rajputs.  As a
reward for his services, the new Padeshah gave Govind a fief in Nanded
on the Godavari river in the south, far from his natural constituency in
Panjab.  To acquaint himself with his new property, he followed Bahadur
Shah on an expedition to the south (leaving his wives in Delhi under
Moghul protection), but there he himself was stabbed by two Pathan
assassins (possibly sent by Wazir Khan, who feared Govind Singh’s
influence on Bahadur Shah) in 1708.  His death had nothing to do with
any fight against the Moghuls or for Hinduism.

So far, it is hard to see where the Sikhs have acted as the sword-arm of
Hinduism against Islam.  If secularism means staying on reasonable terms
with both Hindus and Muslims, we could concede that the Gurus generally
did steer a “secular” course.  Not that this is shameful: in the
circumstances, taking on the Moghul Empire would have been suicidal.

In his last months, Govind Singh had become friends with the Hindu
renunciate Banda Bairagi.  This Banda went to Panjab and rallied the
Sikhs around himself.  At long last, it was he as a non-Sikh who took
the initiative to wage an all-out offensive against the Moghul Empire. 
It was a long-drawn-out and no-holds-barred confrontation which ended in
general defeat and the execution of Banda and his lieutenants (1716).
Once more, the Sikhs became vassals of the Moghuls for several decades
until the -Marathas broke the back of the Moghul empire in the mid-18th
century.  Only then, in the wake of the Maratha expansion, did the Sikhs
score some lasting victories against Moghul and Pathan power.  They
established an empire of sorts including most of the North-West, but as
we already saw, its greatest monarch Ranjit Singh was a conscious and
committed Hindu by any definition.

We may conclude that Ram Swarup has a point when he questions the Hindu
attitude of self-depreciation and gratefulness towards the Sikh
“sword-arm”.  Sikh history has its moments of heroism, but not
particularly more than that of the Marathas or Rajputs.  And like the
Rajputs and Marathas, Sikhism also has a history of collaboration with
the Moghul throne.  Those who insist on glorifying Sikh or Rajput
history, ought rather to reflect on the merits (for Hinduism) of
collaboration with an unbeatable enemy: when Moghul power was at its
strongest, collaboration by Hindu princes meant in practice that large
parts of India were only under indirect Muslim control, so that Hindu
culture could be preserved there.^([56](#56)) But of course, in the
rhetoric of heroism dear to nationalist movements, the compromise aspect
of history is not that inspiring, and we should not expect to hear
neo-Sikhs glorify “the wise collaborator Govind Singh”.

**8.7. Hindu role in estranging the Sikhs**

The attitude of cringing Hindu gratitude to the “sword-arm” is not the
only nor even the most important reason for the contempt which some
Khalsa Sikhs developed toward everything Hindu during the past century. 
The British policy of privileging the Sikhs is probably the decisive
factor, but we should not ignore the role which Hindus themselves have
played in the estrangement of the Sikhs with their own type of contempt.

The Arya Samaj, as a genuinely fundamentalist movement, distinguished
between “authentic” (Vedic) Hinduism and “degenerate” (defined as
post-Vedic) forms of Hinduism.  By campaigning for the Shuddhi
(“purification”, effectively conversion) of Sikhs, it implicitly
declared the Sikhs to be either degenerate Hindus or
non-Hindus.^([57](#57)) Khushwant Singh describes the adverse effect of
the Arya Samaj’s campaign: “Fortunately for the Sikhs, Dayanand
Saraswati was also very offensive in the language he used.  He did not
realize that he was treading on soft ground when he described guru Nanak
as a dambi, an impostor.^([58](#58)) (…) The Sikhs rejected Dayanand and
the Samaj, and set up Singh Sabhas and the chief Khalsa Diwan to
counteract Dayanand’s movement.  Kahan Singh of Nabha published a book
entitled *‘Ham Hindu nahin hain’*[59](#59) It was a categorical
statement of rejection of Hinduism.  The Arya Samaj can take the credit
for driving Sikhs away from Hinduism.”^([60](#60))

In the Arya Samaj version, Sikh pro-British “toadyism” versus Arya
nationalism was a more decisive factor in their mutual estrangement. 
After independence, Sikhs started arguing that their own contribution to
the Freedom struggle had been the greatest given the high proportion of
Sikhs among the martyrs.  However, most of these fell during the
Jallianwala Bagh shooting in Amritsar (1919), started as a peaceful
gathering of people who had no intention of giving up their lives (the
responsible officer was removed from his post, for the useless and
unprovoked massacre totally deviated from British policy).  The
proportion of Sikhs who chose to wage their lives for Freedom was quite
small; the one community which was heavily “overrepresented” among the
freedom fighters executed or otherwise punished by the British was the
much-maligned Brahmin caste.^([61](#61)) It is a well-attested
historical fact that the Sikh community as such was firmly loyalist (see
Khushwant Singh, above, on the Sikhs in the British Army), even after
the emotional estrangement from the British which followed the
Jallianwala Bagh massacre.  By contrast, the Arya Samaj can claim to
have stood by the cause of Freedom, though it certainly has a history of
compromise as well.

As for Dayananda’s allegation that Guru Nanak was a pretender, Arya
Samaj authors Pandit Lekh Ram (then) and Kshitish Vedalankar (recently)
have defended it, arguing that Nanak could not read Sanskrit and was
therefore not qualified to speak out on the Vedas and the
Puranas.^([62](#62)) Modernists may sympathize with this irreverent and
down-to-earth critique of a venerated saint, but it has a price, viz.
the hostility of the saint’s followers.

**8.8. The Hindi-Panjabi controversy**

Sikh separatists, and probably Sikhs in general, resented it when Hindus
in Panjab registered Hindi as their mother-tongue in the 1951 and 1961
census.  The Sikh plan was to carve out a Sikh-majority state under a
linguistic cover, viz. as a Panjabi Suba, a Panjabi-speaking province:
“in demanding a Punjabi-speaking state, they were in fact demanding a
Sikh-majority state.  They were giving a linguistic sugar coating to a
basically communal demand.”^([63](#63)) In the 1950s, many provincial
boundaries had been redrawn with the object of creating linguistically
homogeneous states.  Nehru had been opposed to this principle, but his
hand was forced in 1952-53 by the fast unto death (ending in actual
death, followed by widespread violence on government property) of Potti
Sri Ramulu in support of the demand for a Telugu-speaking state.  After
states like Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra had been created on a
linguistic basis, the Sikhs were dismayed that the Government kept on
opposing the creation of a Panjabi-speaking state.

The 1961 census, and in particular its item on language, became a
crucial event in the campaign for the Panjabi Suba.  Since language was
used as a code for religion, Hindus joined the game: “Punjabi Hindus
were persuaded to declare their language to be Hindi, which it is not,
and not Punjabi, which it is.”^([64](#64)) This way, “they played into
the hands of Sikh communalists: ‘How can you trust this community?  They
are even willing to deny their mother tongue’, they said.”^([65](#65))

The Sikhs got their Panjabi Suba anyway, as a reward for their sterling
loyalty to India in spite of Pakistani overtures during the 1965
war.  But twenty years later, Arya Samaj polemicist Kshitish Vedalankar
still defended the claim of the Panjabi Hindus that their mother tongue
is Hindi: “What we call Panjabi today is only a wing of Hindi--Pashchimi
\[= ‘Western’\] Hindi.”^([66](#66)) The difference between language and
dialect is indeed not always clear-cut, and the separate status of
Panjabi is more a matter of politics than of linguistics (somewhat like
the recent decision of the Croats and Bosnian Muslims to develop their
own dialects of Serbo-Croat into separate languages).

What might clinch the issue is that the Gurus themselves also used and
encouraged non-Panjabi styles of Hindi: “Because of this association of
Hindi with the masses, the Gurus found it proper to encourage Hindi
poets and to popularise Hindi poetry.  They themselves adopted
Brajbhasha as the vehicle of their views.”^([67](#67)) By now, however,
the development of Panjabi as a separate language has gone quite far,
the Panjabi Suba is an accomplished fact, and this debate has lost its
relevance.  In Panjab and in Delhi, the BJP is now a great promoter of
Panjabi, if only to humour its numerous Sikh constituents.

**8.9. The message of Sikhism**

Khushwant Singh describes the fact that most outsiders are not aware of
anything constituting Sikh “identity” apart from beards and turbans, as
a serious problem: “Most regard them as no more than a sect of bearded
Hindus.  It is a real problem and in some ways it does sum up the Sikh
dilemma from the very beginning. (…) Any new religious community which
breaks away from its parent body has to establish a separateness from
the parent body.”^([68](#68))

To Hindu Revivalists, this is a false problem: identity is merely the
accidental outcome of historical processes or indeed of religious
practices, but it is not a thing in itself, worth cultivating.  Thus, if
Jain monks want to wear handkerchiefs on their mouths and sweep the
ground in front of their feet in order not to kill any tiny animals,
that may be a fine application of their concept of non-violence, but it
would be absurd if Jains started doing this for no other reason than to
affirm Jain identity.  It is alright if youth gangs impose on themselves
artificial identities with distinguishing marks and signs and rituals,
but that is a passing phase.  Identity for the sake of identity is a
concern of puberty, not more.  “Identitarianism” is but one of the many
fashionable ways to misunderstand and misrepresent Hindu revivalism: the
Hindu problem is not with identity, it is precisely the *anti-Hindu*
separatists in Sikhism, Jainism etc., who make an issue of
identity.^([69](#69))

It reflects favourably on Khushwant Singh’s intellectual honesty that,
while a staunch advocate of separate Sikh identity, he mentions some
facts that seriously undermine the Sikh claim to a separate identity:
“Sikhism did not evolve a distinct theology of its own like Jainism or
Buddhism. It accepted a form of Vaishnavite Hinduism, giving it a new
emphasis.  Basically the gurus’ teachings were Vedantic.  Therefore
there was not the same kind of breach from Hinduism as in the cases of
Jainism and Buddhism.  Sikhism accepted the Hindu code of conduct, its
theory of the origin of the world, the purpose of life, the purpose of
religion, samsara, the theory of birth-death-rebirth-these were taken in
their entirety from Hinduism.”^([70](#70))

That, then, is precisely the point argued by Hindu Revivalists: “Not
only does the Adi Granth reproduce hundreds of passages from the older
scriptures, but like the rest of the Sant literature it also follows the
lead of the Upanishads and the Gita and the Yoga Vasishtha in all
doctrinal points. Its theology and cosmology, its God-view and
world-view, its conception of deity and man and his salvation, its
ethics, philosophy and praxis and Yoga-all derive from that source.  It
believes in Brahma-vada, in Advaita, in So-ham, in Maya, in Karma, in
rebirth, in Mukti and Nirvana, in the Middle Path (in its yogic
sense)”.^([71](#71)) This is a far cry from recent Sikh
self-presentation, when apologists describe Sikhism as “prophetic and
monotheist”, or as “rationaliStl”^([72](#72)), or as
“secular”^([73](#73)), but certainly not as “taken in its entirety from
Hinduism”.

**8.10. Sikh distinctiveness**

Kshitish Vedalankar, the Arya Samajist author of one of the rare
post-Independence anti-Sikh tracts (mainly focusing on Sikh
collaboration with the British), starts out by emphasizing that Guru
Nanak “called himself a Hindu.  According to *Janamsâkhî*, he wore a
sacred thread (*yajñopavît*) and had a lock of hair (*chotî*) on his
head.  After him till the fifth Guru, each had his sacred thread
ceremony performed, were married according to Vedic rites, used to apply
*tilak* and used to hear tales from Vedas and Puranas.”^([74](#74))

But there we already get a hint of an early separation: only until the
fifth Guru did the Sikhs follow Vedic rites.  As Khushwant Singh points
out, the Sikhs have gradually introduced separate rituals: “The third
guru, Amar Das (…) introduced new rituals, new ceremonies to be
performed at birth, marriage and death.”^([75](#75)) It seems that Sikh
separateness does have a pre-British origin.  Or at least, it seems that
early on, the Sikhs developed a certain distinctiveness.  But then, so
many Hindu sects have their distinctive customs, dress codes and other
externals.  The Sikhs have their own Scripture, their own sacred city,
their own chief temple, their own priesthood, but almost by definition,
every Hindu *panth* has some such material things of its
own.^([76](#76)) Kashi is the city of Shiva, Vrindavan is dedicated to
Krishna, Ayodhya to Rama, Kanchipuram to Kamakshi, and they are all
Hindu sacred cities.

The *panths* founded by sants like Kabir, Chaitanya, Ravidas, give a
special place to the writings of their founder, but not an exclusive
place.  The Guru Granth equally contains writings of some non-Sikh
bhakti poets including Kabir, and thousands of references to such Hindu
concepts and characters as Rama, Krishna, Veda, Omkara,
Amrit.^([77](#77)) Sikh names are full of Hindu elements: Hari (=
Vishnu), Rama, Krishna and his epithets (*Har-kishan, Har-govina*),
Arjun, the Vedic god Indra (*Yog-indr, Sur-indr*).^([78](#78)) The Hari
Mandir, dedicated to Hari/Vishnu, is as sacred to Vaishnavas as any of
their non-Sikh temples; its tank was already an old Hindu place of
pilgrimage, where Maharana Ikshvaku is said to have performed yajnas.
(The 1875 edition of the *Encyclopaedia Britannica* says in its entry on
Amritsar that it has sacred tank with a temple *dedicated to Vishnu* in
the middle).

And so on: sects may and do distinguish themselves by a lineage of
gurus, physical marks, specially dedicated places of pilgrimage, and
nobody is disputing the right of the Sikhs to do the same things, but
that does not put them outside the Hindu fold.

**8.11. No Hindu, no Muslim**

Khushwant Singh’s final and decisive argument for the non-Hindu identity
of Sikhism is this: “Guru Nanak did start a new religion.  He said so
clearly in the year 1500 or thereabouts, when he had his mystical
experience.  He went to bathe in a stream and was missing for three
days.  His first statement as he came out was: *‘Na koi Hindu, na koi
Mussalman’*.  You can interpret that statement in many ways.  But you
cannot deny that what he intended to imply was that he was introducing a
new system of ethics and metaphysics.”^([79](#79))

Ethics and metaphysics are serious subjects; three days is a short time
if you want to free yourself from your acquired notions of ethics and
metaphysics, and start a whole new religion. in fact, for all we know,
Guru Nanak continued the practices of the Bhakti saints that had come
before him, starting with the mental or oral repetition of the Divine
Name, *Râma nâma*.  Moreover, isn’t it strange that the statement which
founds a whole new separate religion does not even mention this new
religion?  If Guru Nanak’s discovery, “neither Hindu nor Muslim”, had
meant the founding of a new religion, he might have added a positive
conclusion: “Neither Hindu nor Muslim, but Sikh!”

At any rate, the insight with which he came back from his three days’
retreat, as quoted by Khushwant Singh, was entirely within the Hindu
tradition.  “There is no Hindu, there is no Muslim” (for that is the
literal translation, and it makes a difference) does not mean “I, Nanak,
am neither Hindu nor Muslim”, it means a wholesale rejection of the
Hindu and Muslim identities valid for all self-described Hindus and
Muslims as well.  It means that the Self (*Atman*, the timeless
indweller, the object-subject of his “mystical experience”) is beyond
worldly divisions like those between different religions and sects.  The
Self is neither black nor white, neither big nor small, neither Hindu
nor Muslim, neither this nor that; *neti neti*, in the Upanishadic
phrase.  This insight is as typically Hindu as you can get.

The Self, the objectless self-contained consciousness, is *nirguna*,
beyond the qualities that make for difference between human beings.  As
a contemporary Hindu spiritual teacher said: “What is Self-realization? 
By what does a ‘realized’ person distinguish himself? Very simple, the
special thing about him is this: one who is ‘realized’, realizes that he
is the same as everybody else.”^([80](#80)) The Self has no separate
identity, neither individual nor communal.

When we get to this conceptual level, we can see that *communal
identity* in Hindu-Sikh tradition is a superficial reality, relatively
acceptable and inevitable in the temporal world, but unreal from the
angle of the timeless and colourless Self.  By contrast, it has an
absolute value in Islam, which decides on eternal heaven and eternal
hell on the basis of communal identity: as per the Quran, all
“unbelievers” (Sikhs as much as Hindus) carry a one-way ticket to hell. 
At the fundamental level, for all its adoption of external elements
following Islamic models, Sikhism is not a middling position between
Hinduism and Islam.  Sikhism has never repudiated the doctrine of the
Self, which is entirely non-Islamic and entirely Hindu.^([81](#81))

After reading a bit of Sikh scripture and the arguments put forward by
Hindu and Sikh authors about the roots of Sikhism, it is now my
considered opinion that the profoundly Hindu character of basic Sikh
doctrine is undeniable.  So far, Ram Swarup and his school are right. 
However, Sikhism hasn’t stopped developing with Guru Nanak’s Hindu
utterances, and it has just as undeniably adopted some Islamic elements
and attitudes at the expense of some of its Hindu identity.  Today, it
would therefore be too simplistic to just affirm that “Sikhs are
Hindus”.  For Hindu nationalists, that presents a problem which cannot
be resolved with debates on definitions.  The only solution which could
satisfy them is that Sikhs themselves make a choice to go back to the
original inspiration of Guru Nanak and shrug off the superficial but
ever-hardening separateness which has developed after Nanak had gone,
and particularly after British policy set Sikhs against Hinduism.

**8.12. The Khalistani failure**

To quite an extent, the feeling that “Sikhs are Hindus” is mutual.  Till
today, though on a lesser scale than in the past centuries, Sikh caste
groups continue to intermarry with Hindu non-Sikh members of the same
castes rather than with Sikh members of other castes.  A more
specifically religious indication is that Master Tara Singh, the
acknowledged leader of the Sikhs since at least the eve of Partition,
was a cofounder of the Vishva Hindu Parishad in 1964.

The strongest evidence for Hindu-Sikh unity is certainly the fact that
no matter how hard the Khalistani separatists of the 1980s tried, they
could not get Hindu-Sikh riots going.  Though Hindus became wary of
Sikhs, they never responded to the Khalistanis’ selective massacres of
Hindus with attacks on Sikhs, nor did ordinary Sikhs ever start the kind
of attacks on Hindus commonly witnessed as the opening scene of
Hindu-Muslim riots.  The Khalistani episode was a confrontation between
Sikh separatists and the police and army of the secular Indian state,
not one between Sikhs and Hindus.  The surprising fact is that “there
were no communal riots in Punjab even in the worst days of
terrorism”.^([82](#82))

The massacre of Sikhs by activists of the secularist Congress Party in
Delhi after Indira Gandhi’s murder by her Sikh bodyguards in 1984 was
not a Hindu-Sikh riot, in spite of secularist efforts to “rationalize”
it as one.  Even Khushwant Singh admitted that RSS and BJP activists had
saved many Sikhs while Congress secularists were killing them: “It was
the Congress leaders who instigated mobs in 1984 and got more than 3000
people killed. I must give due credit to RSS and the BJP for showing
courage and protecting helpless Sikhs during those difficult days.  No
less a person than Atal Bihari Vajpayee himself intervened at a couple
of places to help poor taxi drivers.”^([83](#83))

For this very reason, Khushwant Singh himself advised Delhi Sikhs to
vote for BJP candidate L.K. Advani in the 1989 Lok Sabha
elections.^([84](#84)) And so they did.  In the 1991 and 1996 Lok Sabha
elections and in the 1993 Vidhan Sabha elections in Delhi, the Sikh vote
largely went to the BJP.  In 1996, the Akali Dal faction in the newly
elected Lok Sabha was one of a few small parties willing to support the
13-day BJP Government led by A.B. Vajpayee.  An alliance of the BJP and
the moderate Sikh party Akali Dal (Badal) swept the Panjab Vidhan Sabha
elections of 1997, and made new progress in the Lok Sabha elections of
1998.  Only in the last few years, when the memory of the massacres
started to recede, did Sikhs in Delhi relax their collective pro-BJP and
anti-Congress position.

The BJP, for its part, is full of gestures towards its Sikh
constituency, e.g. one of the first things the BJP did after coming to
power in Delhi (union territory), was to declare Panjabi an official
language, so that many signboards in Delhi are now quadrilingual:
English-Hindi-Urdu-Panjabi.  With regret, a Sikh supporter of the United
Front notes how the BJP is attracting the Sikh vote: “The BJP, on its
part, has accommodated Sikhs in several states and even at the central
level.  Gurjant Singh Brar in Rajasthan, Jaspal Singh in Gujarat and
Harcharan Singh Balli are Cabinet rank Ministers in these BJP-ruled
states.  The short-lived Vajpayee Government had a Sikh Minister, Sartaj
Singh from Hoshangabad (Madhya Pradesh). (…) By taking strong action
against the guilty persons of 1984 riots, the BJP has won over the
sympathy of the Sikhs.”^([85](#85))

The VHP and other Hindu organizations have adopted a Sikh innovation
(perhaps a truly original contribution of Sikhism), viz.  Kar Seva,
“hand service”, meaning the collective participation of ordinary Hindus
in the building of temples.  Thus, the unskilled labour in the
construction of the Swaminarayan temple in Neasden (London, 1995) was
performed by Hindu doctors, accountants, shopkeepers and other
amateurs.  The VHP has the same plans for its projected Rama-Janmabhoomi
temple in Ayodhya.  Hindu-Sikh unity celebrations are organized both in
India and abroad, where small numbers in a foreign society force Hindus
and Sikhs to remember their common roots, e.g. in New Jersey:

“The gala event started with chanting of mantras followed by *Vande
Mataram*.  The speakers emphasized the age-old relationship and
similarities that bind Hindus and Sikhs together.  They mentioned the
fact that Lord Rama’s name appears thousands of times in the Guru Granth
Sahib and that the original name of Golden Temple is Hari Mandir
Sahib.  Sardar Jagjit Singh Lamba said that Guru Nanak Dev and Guru
Gobind Singh were the descendants of Lav \[c.q.\] Kush, both sons of
Lord Rama.”^([86](#86))

After the defeat of Khalistani militancy, there has indeed been a
remarkable rapprochement between Hindus and Sikhs.  Whether this will
lead to a full reabsorption of the Sikh community by Hinduism remains to
be seen.

**8.13 Conclusion**

In theory, the case for the basic Hindu identity of Sikhism is
overwhelming.  Unlike Jainism and Buddhism, Sikhism has gone through all
the developments of Hinduism until the Moghul period.  It has no
separate theology or philosophy, no separate ethics or social
structure.  It has borrowed elements from Islam, but not the decisive
ones: belief in a notion of a true God versus false gods, hence in
iconoclasm, and belief in a monopolistic prophethood.  There is nothing
in Sikhism at which a Hindu should feel offended.

In practice, however, Sikh separatism has scored important victories. 
Most Sikhs would object to their inclusion in the Hindu category.  In
this separatist endeavour, they are encouraged by the non-Hindus and the
secularists, whose attitude to religious issues is always one of crass
superficialism.  Looking at the matter superficially, the mere existence
of the labels “Hindu” and “Sikh” is enough to prove the existence of two
distinct entities going by these names.  Any subtler understanding which
sees the profound rootedness of Sikhism in Hinduism is routinely
blackened as a Hindu conspiracy of the “boa constrictor” type.

And yet, such deeper understanding is the only way forwards.  It is
ignoble and below the dignity of human intelligence to remain stuck in
the prevailing situation where a religion is defined as separate on no
better grounds than externalities like turbans and beards.

The case for Sikh separateness is based on nothing more than, firstly, a
handful of ambiguous sentences in the Sikh canon, as against thousands
which unambiguously put Sikhism inside the Hindu fold; and secondly,
puerile loud-mouthing and violence.  Of all the borderline cases
considered in this book, Sikhism is next to Ramakrishnaism by far the
clearest: apart from separatism, its contents are entirely part of
Hinduism even if the latter is narrowly defined.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a)*National Geographic*, May 1997, p.54.

[²](#2a)W.H. McLeod: *Who is a Sikh?*, p.21. The pan-Sikh last names
*Singh*, “lion”, and *Kaur*, “princess”, do not replace but merely
conceal the caste titles (Khattri, Arora etc.) which are the real last
names.  It is a recent development that Singhs have replaced their caste
surnames with the names of their villages, e.g. Badal, Barnala, etc.

[³](#3a)The verse, from the Guru Granth *Bhairav* is quoted in extenso
by Gurdarshan Singh Dhillon: “Perspective on Sikh identity”, *Indian
Express*, 21-5-1991, and in Khushwant Singh: *History of the Sikhs*,
vol.1, p.62. A similar verse was included by Guru Arjun in the Granth
(54:5) but originally written by Kabir: “I am neither Hindu nor Muslim;
body and life belong to Allah-Rama”, see Duncan Greenlees: *The Gospel
of the Guru Granth Sahib*, p. 211.

[⁴](#4a)E.g.: Rajendra Singh Nirala: *Ham Hindû Hain* (Hindi, itself a
translation from the Panjabi original: “We are Hindus”), 1989; *Ham
Hindû Kyon* (“Why we are Hindus”), 1990, both published by Voice of
India.  These hooks were written at the height of Khalistani terrorism
and publishing them was a matter of great personal courage.

[⁵](#5a)Vide e.g. the RSS publication by Ram Prakash: *Tegh Babadur*.

[⁶](#6a)Title in Organiser, 21-12-1997. *Bhârat Vikâs Parishad*: “Indian
Development Council”, yet another RSS front.

[⁷](#7a)Ram Swarup: *Hindu-Sikh Relationship*, p.12.

[⁸](#8a)T.P. Hughes: *Dictionary of Islam*, p.583.

[⁹](#9a)K. Singh: *Many Faces*, p.4,

[¹⁰](#10a)I forego discussion of the apparent contradiction between
Gods’s “fatherhood” (a specific god-form) and His “formlessness”.

[¹¹](#11a)E.g.: “Monotheism (..) culminated in Guru Nanak’s religious
thought”, according to Shashi Bala: T*he Concept of Monotheism*, p.vii.
An explicit claim that Guru Nanak was a prophet receiving divine
revelations is made in D. Greenlees: *Gospel of Guru Granth Sahib*,
p.clxxi ff.

[¹²](#12a)Sri Aurobindo: *Foundations of Indian Culture*, p.135.

[¹³](#13a)See e.g. Dr. Robert Morey: *The Islamic Invasion*, esp. Ch.3:
“The God of Islam: Allah and the God of the Bible”, e.g. p.65: “Many
Westerners assume that Allah is just another name for God.  This is due
to their ignorance of the difference between the Allah of the Quran and
the God of the Bible land to\] the present popularity of religious
relativism”.

[¹⁴](#14a)*Rasûl*: “prophet”. *Pîrî-mîrî*, from Persian *pîr*, Sufi
saint, and Arabic *(a)mîr*, “commander”, means “spiritual-cum-worldly
authority”, proclaimed as his prerogative by Guru Hargovind in ca. 1630
(or so modern Sikh authors claim), and symbolized by the two swords in
the Sikh emblem (as Islam described the Khalifas as *Amir-ul-mominin*
and never as a *pîr*, it never spawned anything like the two-sword
symbol which adorned the pope two-three contries earlier).  *Hukumnâma*,
“ordering letter”, is a written judgment by the *Akâl Takht*, the
“timeless throne”, the highest collective authority of the Sikh
community.  *Dharm-yuddh*, “religious war”, originally not in the sense
of *jihâd*, “war against the unbelievers”, but in the sense of: warfare
conducted within the limits of a chivalrous code of honour.

[¹⁵](#15a)In Sikh terminology, the Arabic-derived term *sâhib*,
“companion \[of the Prophet\]”, hence an honorific for white people
(formerly Turks, then Europeans), serves as a general honorific (like
Hindi *shrî* or -*jî*), e.g. *Gurû Granth Sâhib, Anandpûr Sâhib*.

[¹⁶](#16a)S.R. Goel: “Only the truth is sacred”.  *Sunday Observer*,
2-4-1995.

[¹⁷](#17a)Interview, Delhi, December 1997.

[¹⁸](#18a)Rajendra Singh (not to be confused with RSS supremo Prof. 
Rajendra Singh), interview, Delhi, November 1993; relaying a finding of
his mentor, Sikh author Rajendra Singh Nirala.

[¹⁹](#19a)Khushwant Singh: *History of the Sikhs*, vol. 1, p.60.

[²⁰](#20a)Khushwant Singh: *History of the Sikhs*, vol. 1, p.60-61, n.
29, referring to M.A. Macauliffe: *The Sikh Religion* (Oxford 1909),
vol.3, p.72-75 and p.8990. As we shall see below, Ch.8.3, Macauliffe’s
*bona fides* has been questioned.  At any rate, the near-contemporary
accounts of Arjun Dev’s martyrdom, including Jahangir’s autobiography
(which refers to the Guru as a Hindu), conflict with the now-approved
version, vide Louis E. Fenech: “Martyrdom and the Sikh Tradition”,
*Journal of the American Oriental Society*, 1997/4, p.623-642

[²¹](#21a)*Halâl*, in the case of meat, means that the animal was
slaughtered according to ritual prescriptions borrowed from Judaism (the
term is roughly equivalent to Hebrew *kosher*), esp. in such a way that
the blood drips out as completely as possible.

[²²](#22a)Apart from having read a considerable part of Khushwant
Singh’s work, I have also met him in informal circumstances (on the
airplane, ca.  February 1993), and I was struck by his capacity to take
a laugh at himself, a rare quality among contemporary intellectuals,
particularly those who have made it to the top.  A typical example of
standard neo-Sikh historiography is Gurmit Singh: *History of the Sikh
Struggles*.

[²³](#23a)Quoted from E. Trumpp: *Translation of the Adi Granth*, p.ci,
in T.P. Hughes: *Dictionary of Islam*, p.583, and in Ram Swarup:
*Hindu-Sikh Relationship*, p.11.

[²⁴](#24a)Ram Swarup: *Hindu-Sikh Relationship*, p.12-13. Indeed,
“Macauliffe’s works (…) were reissued in the sixties.  More recent Sikh
scholars wrote histories of the Sikhs which were variations on the same
theme.” (*op.cit.*, P.19)

[²⁵](#25a)K. Singh: *Many Faces*, p. 5.

[²⁶](#26a)K. Singh: *Many Faces*, p.4.

[²⁷](#27a)Mohammed is equated with Vishnu’s tenth incarnation Kalki in
the *Khojâ Vrittânta* scripture of the Ismaili Khojas in Gujarat (M.A.
Jinnah’s community), a kind of inculturation tactic to woo Gujarati
Banias into Islam.  However, the doctrine of incarnation (*avatârvâd*)
is deeply offensive to Islam, which sees *shirk*, “association (of other
beings with God)” as its worst enemy.  Classically, *shirk* has the
general sense of “polytheism”, but originally it meant very specifically
the “association” of a freshly decoded prominent human individual with a
deity (parallel to what the Greeks called *apotheosis*), the way Krishna
got “associated” with Vishnu (i.e. posthumously recognized as partaking
of the essence of that deity); see, for examples of the shirk of
Ugaritic kings with god *Ilu* (Hebrew *El/Eloha*, Arabic *al-Ilâb*,=
*Allâh*), J.C. De Moor: *The Rise of Yahwism*, p.330-331.

[²⁸](#28a)For partisan studies criticizing Hindu “inclusivism” as a
manifestation of their intolerance, vide e.g. W. Halbfass: *India and
Europe*, Ch.22, or G. Oberhammer, ed.: *Inklusivismus, eine indische
Denkform*.

[²⁹](#29a)A. Shourie: *Secular Agenda*, p. 16-17.

[³⁰](#30a)Khushwant Singh: *Many Faces*, p.6.

[³¹](#31a)V.P. Bhatia (“Secularisation of a martyrdom”, Organiser,
11-1-1998) takes offence at the *Times of India’s* claim (11-11-1997)
that Tegh Bahadur “died for other people’s rights”, thus epitomizing
“empathy for fellow human beings, cutting across communal, religious and
political barriers”.  He objects to the “misleading secularist sting”,
viz. the suggestion that Kashmiri Pandits and Sikhs belong to two
distinct religions.

[³²](#32a)That the Kashmiri Pandits are not mentioned in the
contemporaneous accounts is confirmed by Khushwant Singh’s translation
of the whole poem (*History of the Sikhs*, vol. 1, p.74-75, from Govind
Singh’s *Bachitar Nâtak*); and tentatively also by Louis E. Fenech:
“Martyrdom and the Sikh Tradition”, *Journal of the American Oriental
Society*, 1997/4, p.623-642. The Kashmiri Pandits may have been brought
into the account because the history of mass forced conversion in
Kashmir was well-known, even proverbial.  The Pandits, or at least some
of them, escaped by bravery, compromise, bribery, dissimulation or
emigration (hence the presence of the Saraswat Brahmin community in the
Konkan region), but all other communities in Kashmir were islamized; see
e.g. Narender Sehgal: *Converted Kashmir*, p.107-177. However, this
forced mass conversion took place under Sikander Butshikan, centuries
before Aurangzeb; I am not aware of any original accounts of such a
policy concerning the Pandits under Aurangzeb, whose known persecutions
may have been projected onto the Kashmiri situation and conflated with
Sikander Butshikan’s

[³³](#33a)Quoted in Khushwant Singh: *History of the Sikhs*, vol. 1,
p.75.

[³⁴](#34a)Khushwant Singh and Kuldip Nayar: *Tragedy of Punjab*,
p.20-21, quoted by V.P. Bhatia: “Secularisation of a Martyrdom”,
Organiser, 11-11998.  Bhatia merely quotes it for the sake of contrast,
to highlight the Hindu commitment which even these two prominent
secularists concede to Govind Singh: “Guru Govind Singh (…) sought
inspiration from the deeds of martial Hindu deities like goddesses
Chandi, Sri and Bhagwati.(…) the dividing line between Hindus and Sikhs
remained extremely thin. (…) Many Hindu families brought up one of their
sons as a kesadhari Sikh and Hindus and, Sikhs in urban areas continued
to give their children in marriage to each other.” *Kesadhârî*: “one who
keeps his hair”, a Khalsa Sikh.

[³⁵](#35a)Khushwant Singh: *History of the Sikhs*, vol. 1, p.80.

[³⁶](#36a)A. Shourie: *Secular Agenda*, p.11.

[³⁷](#37a)Khushwant Singh: *Many Faces*, p.8.

[³⁸](#38a)Khushwant Singh: *History of the Sikhs*, vol. 1, p. 289.

[³⁹](#39a)Khushwant Singh: *Many Faces*, p.8.

[⁴⁰](#40a)S.R. Goel: introduction to Ram Swarup: *Hindu-Sikh
Relationship*, p.2.

[⁴¹](#41a)K. Singh: *Many Faces*, p.9.

[⁴²](#42a)Ram Swarup: *Hindu-Sikh Relationship*, p. 18.

[⁴³](#43a)K. Singh: *Many Faces*, p.9.

[⁴⁴](#44a)K.  Singh: *Many Faces*, p.9.

[⁴⁵](#45a)Prof. Veer Bhadra Mishra, Mahant of Sankat Mochan Mandir,
Varanasi, talking to me in 1989.

[⁴⁶](#46a)K. Singh: *Many Faces*, p.12.

[⁴⁷](#47a)K. Singh: *Many Faces*, p.12.

[⁴⁸](#48a)Ram Swarup: *Hindu-Sikh Relationship*, p. 19.

[⁴⁹](#49a)In Hindutva writings (e.g. in Jeevan Kulkarni’s Writ Petition
no. 587 of 1989), there is frequent reference to a telegram allegedly
sent by the Pakistani raiders to their military headquarters during the
invasion of Kashmir in 1948: “All women raped, all Sikhs killed.”

[⁵⁰](#50a)All this is according to Khushwant Singh: *History of the
Sikhs*, vol.1, p.60.

[⁵¹](#51a)Tegh Bahadur’s Hindi reply to Aurangzeb is reproduced in full
in Kshitish: *Storm in Punjab*, p.178. In pro-separatist publications,
it is strategically omitted, e.g. in D. Greenlees: *Gospel of Guru
Granth Sahib*, p.xcvii.

[⁵²](#52a)In the modern anti-Hindu variety of Sikh history, this
becomes: “the Guru was forced into resistance by the incessant attacks
of jealous Hill Rgjas, who could not tolerate the rise of Sikhism beside
them”, according to Duncan Greenlees: *Gospel of the Guru-Granth Sahib*,
p.xcix.

[⁵³](#53a)In neo-Sikh historiography, which has a strong anti-Brahmin
bias (e.g. systematically concealing the presence of Brahmin officiants
at the Gurus’ weddings), the capture of the two boys is explained with
the undocumented allegation that these Brahmins who protected them had
“betrayed” them, e.g. Khushwant Singh: *History of the Sikhs*, vol. 1,
p.92.

[⁵⁴](#54a)Incidentally, here again there is an Islamic parallel:
Mohammed himself admitted that he would not have been the final prophet
if Ibrahim, his son by his Coptic wife Mary, had lived.

[⁵⁵](#55a)Translation by Khushwant Singh: *History of the Sikhs*, vol.1,
p.87. *Pâdeshâh*: “sovereign”, official title of the Moghul Emperor.

[⁵⁶](#56a)I mention only Sikhs and Rajputs as wise collaborators, for
the Marathas, who had stood tip to the Moghuls at a time when all the
others felt compelled to collaborate, ended up collaborating with the
Moghul throne at a time when the said justification had disappeared:
given their military superiority in the 1770s and 80s, the Marathas
could have replaced Moghul sovereignty (*pâdeshâhî*) with native
sovereignty, but somehow they dragged their feet and continued to act as
loyal vassals of a Moghul who had lost all military power and was about
to accept a pension from the British East India Company (which continued
the same pretence of respecting Moghul sovereignty until 1857).

[⁵⁷](#57a)In the first years of Arya Samaj activity (and on a smaller
scale even well into the 20th century), by contrast, there had been
plenty of cooperation with the Sikhs, both being aware of the common
ground between them as Hindu reform movements, see Kshitish Vedalankar:
*Storm in Punjab*, p. 166-170.

[⁵⁸](#58a)The allegation that Nanak was a well-intentioned man who
wrongly pretended to be a Vedic scholar is made by Swami Dayananda
Saraswati: *Light of Truth*, p.442-445, though the exact word “impostor”
(*dambhî* should at any rate be translated more precisely as
“pretender”) is not used there.  Dayananda attributed to Nanak some
sentences disparaging the Vedas which are there in the Sikh canon but
not uttered by Nanak himself.  Nonetheless, he appreciated it in Nanak
that he “saved some persons from embracing Mohammedanism” and that he
remained a householder instead of becoming a Sadhu, family life being a
Vedic duty.  He also praised Govind Singh for fighting Islam.

[⁵⁹](#59a)“We are not Hindus”, 1898.  Kahan Singh was royal tutor in the
princely state of Nabha and, in Ram Swarup’s description, “a *pakkâ*
\[impeccable\] loyalist” (*Hindu-Sikh Relationship*, p.14). He was also
a disciple of M.A. Macauliffe, who bequeathed the royalties of his books
to him.

[⁶⁰](#60a)Khushwant Singh: *Many Faces*, p. 10

[⁶¹](#61a)According to Meenakshi Jain (“The Plight of Brahmins”, Indian
Express, 18-9-1990, included in H.P. Lohia, ed.: *Political Vandalism*,
p.56), Brahmins constituted 70% of the freedom fighters executed by the
British; any list of pre-Independence Congress office-bearers confirms
that among non-violent freedom fighters too, Brahmins, from B.G. Tilak
and G.K. Gokhale to C. Rajagopalachari, were enormously
over-represented.  The Brahmin initiative in Hindu nationalism
(Savarkar, Hedgewar) is also part of this phenomenon.

[⁶²](#62a)Kshitish: *Storm in Punjab*, p. 174.

[⁶³](#63a)Khushwant Singh: *Many Faces*, p. 13.  

[⁶⁴](#64a)Khushwant Singh: *Many Faces*, p. 13.  

[⁶⁵](#65a)Khushwant Singh: *Many Faces*, p. 13.

[⁶⁶](#66a)Kshitish: *Storm in Punjab*, p. 179.

[⁶⁷](#67a)Kshitish Vedalankar: Storm in Punjab, p.181, quoting
observations to this effect by E. Trumpp, G.A. Grierson and S.K.
Chatterji (see also Chatterji: *Indo-Aryan and Hindi*, p.188,
enumerating the Hindi dialects including Panjabi).  *Braja-bhâshâ* was
the then dominant Hindi dialect of the Yamuna region and the *lingua
franca* of northern India from Panjab to Assam.

[⁶⁸](#68a)Khushwant Singh: *Many Faces*, p. 2.

[⁶⁹](#69a)After demolishing the Communist rhetoric about the RSS being
“fascist”, Gérard Heuzé (*Où va l’Inde moderne?*, p.123) wonders whether
“the invention of a category of *‘Third-World mass identitarianism’*
would not be more pertinent than the never-ending references to
fascism”.

[⁷⁰](#70a)Khushwant Singh: *Many Faces*, p.4. This point is dramatized
in his joke: Sikh scholars sat down to take Hinduism out of the Granth
Sahib.  They took it out page by page.  In the end, however, they were
left holding the binding cover in their hands.

[⁷¹](#71a)Ram Swarup: “Hindu Roots of Sikhism”, *Indian Express*,
24-4-1991. Brahma-vâda: “doctrine of the Absolute”; *Mâyâ*: “the power
to create delusions”, hence “the world as a delusion created by this
power of the Divine”; *So-’ham*: “Him am I”, statement of monistic
oneness of individual and divine consciousness; *Advaita*:
“non-duality”; *Karma*: “law of cause and effect spanning across
incarnations”: *Mukti*: “liberation”; *Nirvâna*: “blowing out”, hence
“ego annihilation”.

[⁷²](#72a)E.g. Gurnam Kaur: *Reason and Revelation in Sikhism*.

[⁷³](#73a)E.g. V.R. Bhattacharya: *Secular Thoughts of the Sikh Gurus*,
honoured with a foreword by Giani Zail Singh, President of India.

[⁷⁴](#74a)KshitishVedalankar: *Storm in Punjab*, p.19. Janamsâkhî is a
biography of Guru Nanak.

[⁷⁵](#75a)K. Singh: *Many Faces*, p.6. The separate Sikh wedding ritual
was consolidated by the Anand Marriage Act 1909.

[⁷⁶](#76a)For Panth (from Sanskrit *patha*, “path”) or its synonym
sampradaya, I might have used the term “sect”, but in recent decades
this term has been identified with “sectarian” phenomena to the extent
of making it purely pejorative; so I have retained the Hindi term.

[⁷⁷](#77a)An near-exact count is given in K.P. Agrawala: *Adi Shrî Gurû
Granth Sâhib kî Mahimâ* (Hindi: “The greatness of the original sacred
Guru scripture”), p.2, and in Ram Swarup: “Hindu roots of Sikhism”,
*Indian Express*, 24-4-1991.  Examples: ca. 8,300 times Hari (630 times
by Nanak alone), 2,400 times *Râma* (the god-name whose constant
remembrance leads to Liberation), 550 times *Parabrahman* (the
Absolute), 400 times *Omkâra* (the primeval sound Om).

[⁷⁸](#78a)About Sikh devotion to Ram, see Rajendra Singh: *Sikkha
Itihâsa mein Râma Janmabhûmi*.

[⁷⁹](#79a)K. Singh: *Many Faces*, p. 5.

[⁸⁰](#80a)Dr. Pukh Raj Sharma of the Ram-Rukmini Institute, Jodhpur,
speaking in Mechelen (Belgium), May 1988.

[⁸¹](#81a)Sir Mohammed Iqbal, the spiritual father of Pakistan, did
develop a concept of *khudî*, “selfhood”, but he opposed it to Sufi
notions of *fanâ* (ego-extinction and the absorption in God, equivalent
to and possibly evolved from the Buddhist notion of *Nirvâna*, and
similar to the Upanishadic true impersonal Self); his non-mystic al
*khudî* is more akin to modern psychological notions of
“self-actualization” and the like, perhaps best approaching the Hindu
concept of *swadharma*, “one’s own duty”, but more individualistic.

[⁸²](#82a)Manini Chatterjee: “The BJP: Political Mobilization for
Hindutva”, *South Asia Bulletin*, p. 17.

[⁸³](#83a)Khtishwant Singh: “Congress (I) is the Most Communal Party”,
*Publik Asia*, 16-11-1989. In Delhi, taxi drivers are typically Sikhs.

[⁸⁴](#84a)*Sunday*, 26-11-1989: “Veteran journalist Khushwant Singh has
gone public with his support for (…) L.K. Advani.  At considerable
personal expense.”

[⁸⁵](#85a)Swadesh Bahadur Singh (editor of the *Sher-i-Panjâb* weekly):
“Cabinet berth for a Sikh”, *Indian Express*, 31-5-1996.  His point is
that to counter BJP influence, the then United Front Government led by
Deve Gowda should court the Sikhs by inducting a Sikh as Minister.  Note
how this communal demand (viz. for inducting someone on the basis of his
communal identity) is justified: “The UF should gain confidence of
millions of *secular*-minded Sikhs in India and abroad by inducting a
Sikh in its Cabinet.  *Secularism* is a factor in India’s unity and
integrity.  The Sikhs with glorious *secular* traditions have thus a
right to their representation in the Front’s new Cabinet.” (emphasis
added)

[⁸⁶](#86a)Devender Singh Sawhney and Narain Kataria: “Hindu-Sikh Unity
Celebration in America”, *Organiser*, 14-12-1997.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------


