+++
title = "13 12. General conclusion"

+++
**12. General conclusion**

**12.1. A concession to convention**

As part of their entrenched power position, the British colonisers and
later their Nehruvian successors have always tried to control the
discourse on religion.  Among other concerns, they have seen to it that
the term “Hindu” got divorced from its historical meaning, which quite
inclusively encompassed all Indian Pagans, in order to fragment Hindu
society.  In parallel with their effort to pit caste against caste, they
have tried to pit sect against sect, offering nurture to the egos of
sect leaders by telling them that in fact they were popes in their own
right of full-fledged religions, equal in status but morally superior to
Hinduism.  Hindu Revivalists have countered this effort by reaffirming
the basic Hindu character of tribal Animism, Jainism, Buddhism, Sikhism
and more recent reformist sects.  In some cases, the separation of sects
from the Hindu commonwealth was entirely contrived and artificial, in
others it had a partial doctrinal justification, though even there the
proper distinction was never between them and “Hinduism” as historically
conceived, but between them and the Vedic-Puranic “Great Tradition” of
Hinduism.

The reader may have noticed that throughout this book, I have kept on
using expressions like “Buddhists and Hindus” or “Sikhs and Hindus”,
expressions which some Hindu Revivalists reject in favour of “Buddhist
and other Hindus” or “Sikh and non-Sikh Hindus”.  I have done this in
deference to established usage, but also because there really is an
anti-Hindu element in these semi-Hindu religions, whether *ab initio*
(esp. in the case of neo-Buddhism) or as a consequence of relatively
recent innovations.  It is of little practical use to call Buddhists
Hindus when these same Buddhists are attacking Hinduism and defining
Buddhism as the saviour in shining armour for the poor Indians gnashing
their teeth under the mentally and socially oppressive weight of
Hinduism.  Or more briefly, it is not polite to address people by a name
they reject.

It also goes against common sense to include in the Hindu category those
who insist that they don’t belong there and don’t want to belong there. 
We tend to behave as if implicitly assuming the (unhistorical)
definition: “Is Hindu, he who calls himself Hindu”.  In some cases,
analysis may show that this insistence on being labeled non-Hindu is
based on misconceptions, such as the identification of Hinduism with the
caste system, with theism, or with belief in reincarnation. 
Nonetheless, the term “Hindu” is an item of language, i.e. a
conventional system of signifiers, and can therefore not be used in
total disregard of what meaning the language community gives to it.  So,
if people declare that they are not Hindus, for whichever reason right
or wrong, it is at least impractical and possibly unjustified to impose
that label on them.

Along with most Hindus, who are easy-going people not given to fussing
over words, I don’t think the gain of using theoretically defensible
expressions like “Sikhs and other Hindus” outweighs the communal
friction it may generate.  Anti-Hindu separatism is at any rate not
going to be cured by a mere choice of terminology.  To be sure, it is
possible that separatists get persuaded at some point to change their
minds about the Hindu character of their own sect or tradition.  But
that will require better arguments or deeper experiences than mere
verbal expressions like “Buddha the Hindu”.

**12.2. An uncompromising application of definitions**

While something can be said in favour of going with the flow and
acquiescing in the prevalent usage, the inclusive usage adopted by
activist Hindus also has its merits, though in different degrees for the
different communities considered, and also depending on which of the
more inclusive definitions we adopt.  First of all, if we assume the
historical definition of Hinduism as “all Indian Paganism”, we find that
it *does* include (Indian) Buddhists, Jains, Sikhs, tribals, and modem
Hindu reform movements including such starry-eyed all-inclusivisms as
“Ramakrishnaism”.  In that respect, the Hindu Revivalist inclusive usage
is 100% correct, and those who denounce it are 100% wrong.

In accepting the historical definition, Hindus would also avoid the trap
unintentionally present in Savarkar’s definition of the Hindu as “one to
whom India is both Fatherland and Holyland”.  By the latter definition,
communities who expressly identify with only a part of India, rejecting
the rest, such as neo-Sikhs advertising their separatism in secular
terms as “Panjabi nationalism”, or tribals proclaiming themselves
“Jharkhandi nationalists” or “Mizo patriots”, would thereby fall outside
the Hindu fold.  Regardless of whether we share Savarkar’s political
views, and regardless even of whether we consider Sikhs or Mizo and
Jharkhandi tribals as Hindus, everyone can see that this would be a bad
definition because it also excludes people who are Hindus by any account
and who also call themselves Hindus.

Thus, Nepal has a strong tradition of Nepali particularism, with
orthodox Brahmins performing yajnas to prevent India from becoming too
powerful and swallowing Nepal.  It is perfectly possible to be a Hindu
and yet not be a partisan of a state which unites all Hindus.  One can
espouse a Hindu cosmology, observe Hindu ethics, perform Hindu rituals,
and yet not care for the land of India nor for its political unity. 
This is admittedly rare, and in practice Savarkar’s definition does
approximately cover all Hindus, but its inaccuracy in some contentious
corners of the South-Asian land mass or of Hindu society is
consequential.  The idea of defining Hinduism in geographical terms is
not without a basis in reality, and is even better understandable in the
context of the struggle which Savarkar’s generation waged against
British imperialism and Muslim separatism.  But it is inevitably
imperfect, and is becoming obsolete now that more and more Hindus live
outside South Asia and strike roots (or, as converts, even originate) in
distant continents.

Leaving aside the historical and the Savarkarite definition, even
narrower or “credal” definitions (e.g. observance of endogamy, belief in
reincarnation, acceptance of the Vedas) generally imply that the
communities under discussion fall within the ambit of Hinduism, in some
or in all respects.  They do share common origins, or common social
practices, or common doctrines, or common rituals, with a thus defined
Hinduism.  These common elements set them collectively apart, along with
Hinduism, from the Abrahamic family of religions.

To be sure, under narrower definitions, the Indic traditions will fall
inside or outside the domain of the definition to different extents. 
While Buddhism has been a distinctive tradition since the beginning,
Sikhism’s separateness is much younger and more superficial.  In its
prehistory, it shares a much longer common itinerary with the Hindu
mainstream.  If we take reverence for the Vedas as a criterion, Sikhism
is unambiguously Hindus, Buddhism only in an indirect sense (viz. that
crucial ideas of the Buddha are traceable to Vedic literature), while
some tribals may never even have heard of the Vedas, even if their
beliefs (e.g. polytheism or pantheism) happen to be similar to
mainstream Hinduism.

So, we cannot give a simple answer to the question whether Sikhs,
Buddhists, Jains, Animists and Ramakrishnaites are Hindus.  In a way
they are, in a way they *are* not; the question is as complex as the
choice of a definition of “Hindu”.  If we agree to leave the safe ground
of the historical definition, which classifies all the groups under
discussion as Hindus regardless of what they themselves may say, we
cannot escape facing cases where one or more of these communities do
fall outside the definition, and are then entitled to be called
non-Hindu.  If belief in the Vedas is the criterion, Jains will be
non-Hindus; or if the prohibition on cow-slaughter is, many tribals will
be.

The objection to this is that the term “Hindu” was not conceived as a
synonym of “Vedic”,-if that meaning had been intended, the term “Vedic”
itself was already available.  Being derived from the name of the
South-Asian land mass, the term “Hindu” simply happens to connote India
and all religions native to India.

**12.3. Egalitarianism**

Amore practical way of dealing with the question whether given sects are
Hindu or not, is to study the specific claims made by the “separatist”
ideologues of the communities concerned.  When we do so, we find that
Hindu Revivalist critique has pin-pricked (though not yet exhaustively)
some of the cheap modem apologetics by which community leaders want to
affirm the uniqueness and superiority of their own tradition as compared
to Hinduism.  This is especially true of the number one selling argument
of all non-Hindu or would-be non-Hindu religions in India: that they,
unlike Hinduism, are egalitarian.

Most importantly, there is not one pre-20th century sect or religion or
community in India which is egalitarian or caste-free.  The only seeming
exception would be Virashaivism, a sect started by Basava, a Brahmin
Prime Minister of a princely state in Karnataka (ca.  AD 1200), hence
hardly a “revolt” but rather a “royal experiment”.  Even at the height
of his egalitarian innovation, Basava never called himself a
“non-Hindu”.  He did promote intermarriage for one or two generations,
i.e. a caste equality which was more than just spiritual.  This may be
sufficient to serve as a selling proposition in the modem religion
market, at least among people who go by historical anecdote rather than
living social practice.  For, very soon, his sect simply became one more
high and proud Hindu caste, which it has remained till today.  Its
egalitarianism lasted but a brief moment.

The actual history of Virashaivism illustrates how in the context of
premodern Indian religion, the programme of equality has inevitably been
confined to the spiritual sphere or else remained a mirage.  The same is
true for all the other traditions and sects now advertised as
egalitarian, except that they mostly never even began to upset existing
caste practice, not even for that brief moment.

To be sure, some traditions have preached and even practised equality at
the spiritual level, rating spiritual practitioners purely on spiritual
merit and proclaiming the accessibility of Liberation to all regardless
of social or ethnic provenance; but have never endeavoured to actually
destroy the caste system in lay society.  But this purely theoretical
equality was professed as much by fully Hindu sects in the Bhakti
movement as by any would-be non-Hindu sect.

Egalitarianism as a sociopolitical ideal is a modem standard which
pre-modern traditions can only claim as their own original endowment at
the expense of their regard for truth.  If inequality must be outgrown,
then Hindus, semi-Hindus and non-Hindus will have to outgrow it
together.

**12.4. Honour by association**

If a man is poor and without social position, or if he is the target of
accusations and the object of contempt, he finds himself quite alone. 
If he was in a better condition before but has lost his luck, he sees
his friends desert him, except for a hard core of *friend in need,
friends indeed*.  Even his relatives avoid and disown him.  And if later
on his name is cleared and his good fortune returns, the fairweather
friends will again come flocking to his company.

It takes little more than this very elementary psychology to understand
anti-Hindu separatism among the offshoots of Hinduism.  Nobody wants to
get associated with a religion which is hated and held in contempt. 
Conversely, when a religious tradition or doctrine gains prestige,
numerous people and groups will surprise you with their discovery of how
they had essentially been espousing it all along.  We can safely predict
that the day when Hinduism is held in high esteem again, the
Ramakrishnaites will echo Swami Vivekananda’s call to “say with pride:
we are Hindus”.  On that day, Sikhs too will quote the Gurus’ pledges of
loyalty to Hindu Dharma.

At this point I believe it is appropriate even for an outside observer
to become a little judgmental.  After all, it takes a very contrived
neutrality not to be struck by the obvious lack of honour of those who
sail with the winds of dominant opinion like that.

When Ranjit Singh was establishing a Hindu empire in the Northwest, no
Sikh thought of disowning his Hindu religion.  When the anti-imperialist
struggle was revaluating the national religion as a rallying-point and a
source of national pride, no follower of Swami Vivekananda would have
called himself anything except Hindu.  But when the British disparaged
Hinduism, anti-Hindu separatism gained ground among the collaborating
communities.  And when Nehruvian secularism embarked on its long-term
project of making India un-Hindu, the spineless ones in Vivekananda’s
order betrayed their founder’s injunction of pride in Hinduism.  This is
called abject surrender.

There may be situations where surrender is the lesser evil.  Thus, we
should not judge those Hindus too harshly who saved their skins by
succumbing to brutal Islamic pressure to convert.  But in the past two
centuries, when the oppressors were mere liberal Britons and smug
Nehruvians, remaining loyal to Hinduism didn’t take that much bravery. 
The man who sees his friends abandon him when he is out of luck, though
all they risk by keeping his company is a bit of a bad name by
association, has the right to take a skeptical view of not just their
friendship, but of their character as well.  Even his enemy, who sees
the so-called friends cross over to his own side, will not have a high
opinion of them.  If the Sikhs and Ramakrishnaites want to save their
honour, they had better declare themselves Hindu before the anti-Hindu
atmosphere fades away.

The point is valid even for those who have slightly more reason to
profess their non-Hindu identity, such as Buddhists, Jains or the
historically most isolated ones among the Animists.  Even where they do
have a case, it remains in most instances all too obvious that they
profess a non-Hindu identity because this is profitable rather than
because it is truthful. It simply doesn’t feel good to be associated
with the leper among world religions.

We can argue this matter out at great length, but the actual behaviour
of the people concerned, their public assertion of a Hindu or non-Hindu
identity, is rarely going to depend on arguments, be they doctrinal or
historical.  Instead, their choice will depend on considerations of
prestige and, in really pitiable cases, on purely material calculations
pertaining to state funding and sect-based job reservations.  Trying to
set this debate on a better conceptual footing has been an interesting
academic exercise, but we should not expect too many tangible results
from it.  It is the power equation and the distribution of prestige
which will decide the matter.

**12.5. What Hindus can do**

To a restless Westerner like myself, one of the traits in the Hindu
character that seems less commendable is the lack of activism.  In my
experience, Hindus are always elated when they hear that a problem is
going to be solved all by itself. In discussions of the Islam problem, I
have heard so many Hindus predict that “the West will take care of it”,
or “the true tolerant Islam is going to defeat the fanatics”, or some
other scenario in which at any rate the Hindus themselves won’t have to
do anything.

Then again, perhaps they do act to influence matters in their favour,
but in an indirect manner.  Perhaps their fire ceremonies somehow set in
motion an unseen mechanic of destiny (exactly as intended by the
officiants) which subtly directs the course of events in their favour. 
Well, I don’t know what it is, but somehow Hindu non-activism seems to
bear fruit.

Two world wars passed India by, allowing India to profit economically
and politically, and weakening her colonial oppressor to the extent that
he washed his hands off her and quit.  The secession of Pakistan could
not be prevented (and again Hindus didn’t try very hard), but the real
Pakistan was much smaller and weaker than the one planned by its founder
M.A. Jinnah.  Moreover, the Partition turned out to be a blessing in
disguise, dividing and demoralizing the Muslim community, giving Hindus
a breather in remainder-India.  The Chinese invaded and were in a
position to occupy the whole Northeast, but somehow they decided to
withdraw.  Without Hindu intervention, the Bengalis rose up and
partitioned Pakistan in 1971 (with just a little help from India in the
final stage).  Just recently, in the autumn of 2001, a Western
intervention in Afghanistan greatly weakened Pakistan and clipped its
potential for fomenting terrorism.

Given the clumsy performance of Indian governments and the Hindutva
leadership, it is a miracle that there are any Hindus left at all.  But
somehow, without doing much, the Hindus or their Gods seem to get things
done.

In this case too, Hindus don’t have to do very much.  Preaching to the
minorities of how Hindu they really are, will work only with the
already-convinced, and may even be counterproductive.  Instead, at the
practical level, Hindus may explore the common ground with these
borderline-Hindu communities, these “prodigal daughters”, simply by
doing things together.  No matter if neo-Buddhists disown Hinduism but
sit down to practise the Buddha’s spiritual discipline; let Hindus sit
down beside them and also practise what the Buddha taught.  No matter if
Sikhs refuse to visit non-Sikh Vaishnava shrines, Hindus will continue
to visit Sikh Vaishnava shrines, and likewise to offer worship at the
Mahabodhi temple, etc.  Let the others call these places non-Hindu all
they want; Hindus may claim them as their own simply by paying respect
to them.  Daughters may try to break away from their mother, but a
mother cannot disown her daughters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


