+++
title = "72 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
Source: G. Allana, Pakistan Movement Historical Documents (Karachi:
Department of International Relations, University of Karachi, nd
\[1969\]), pp. 129-133. A few long paragraphs have been broken into
shorter ones. All editorial annotations in square brackets are by FWP.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Two letters from Iqbal to Jinnah (1937)

  

28th May, 1937

My dear Mr. Jinnah,

Thank you so much for your letter which reached me in due course. I am
glad to hear that you will bear in mind what I wrote to you about the
changes in the constitution and programme of the League. I have no doubt
that you fully realise the gravity of the situation as far as Muslim
India is concerned. The League will have to finally decide whether it
will remain a body representing the upper classes of Indian Muslims or
Muslim masses who have so far, with good reason, no interest in it.
Personally I believe that a political organisation which gives no
promise of improving the lot of the average Muslim cannot attract our
masses.

Under the new constitution the higher posts go to the sons of \[the\]
upper classes; the smaller go to the friends or relatives of the
ministers. In other matters too our political institutions have never
thought of improving the lot of Muslims generally. The problem of bread
is becoming more and more acute. The Muslim has begun to feel that he
has been going down and down during the last 200 years. Ordinarily he
believes that his poverty is due to Hindu money-lending or capitalism.
The perception that equality \[is (?)\] due to foreign rule has not yet
fully come to him. But it is bound to come. The atheistic socialism of
Jawahar Lal \[Nehru\] is not likely to receive much response from the
Muslims. The question therefore is: how is it possible to solve the
problem of Muslim poverty? And the whole future of the League depends on
the League's activity to solve this question. If the League can give no
such promises I am sure the Muslim masses will remain indifferent to it
as before.

Happily there is a solution in the enforcement of the Law of Islam and
its further development in the light of modern ideas. After a long and
careful study of Islamic Law I have come to the conclusion that if this
system of Law is properly understood and applied, at last the right to
subsistence is secured to every body. But the enforcement and
development of the Shariat of Islam is impossible in this country
without a free Muslim state or states. This has been my honest
conviction for many years and I still believe this to be the only way to
solve the problem of bread for Muslims as well as to secure a peaceful
India.

If such a thing is impossible in India the only other alternative is a
civil war which as a matter of fact has been going on for some time in
the shape of Hindu Muslim riots. I fear that in certain parts of the
country, e.g. N.W. India, Palestine may be repeated..Also the insertion
of Jawarhar Lal's socialism into the body-politic of Hinduism is likely
to cause much bloodshed among the Hindus themselves. The issue between
social democracy and Brahmanism is not dissimilar to the one between
Brahmanism and Buddhism. Whether the fate of socialism will be the same
as the fate of Buddhism in India I cannot say. But it is clear to my
mind that if Hinduism accepts social democracy it must necessarily cease
to be Hinduism.

For Islam the acceptance of social democracy in some suitable form and
consistent with the legal pnncp!es of Islam is not a revolution but a
return to the original punty of Islam. The modern problems therefore are
far more easy to solve for the Musllms than for the Hindus. But as I
have said above in order to make it possible for Muslim India to solve
the problems it is necessary to redistribute the coun.ry and to provde
one or more Muslim states with absolute majorities. Don't you think that
the time for such a demand has already arrived? Perhaps this is the best
reply you can give to the atheistic socialism of Jawahar Lal Nehru.

Anyhow I have given you my own thoughts in the hope that you will give
them serious consideration either in your address or in the discussions
of the coming session of the League. Muslim India hopes that at this
serious juncture your genius will discover some way out of our present
difficulties.

Yours Sincerely,  
(Sd.) Mohammad. Iqbal

P.S. On the subject-matter of this letter I intended to write to you a
long and open letter in the press. But on further consideration I felt
that the present moment was not suitable for such a step.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Private and Confidential  
Lahore  
June 21st, 1937

My dear Mr. Jinnah,

Thank you so much for your letter which I received yesterday. I know you
are a busy man; but I do hope you won't mind my writing to you so often,
as you are the only Muslim in India today to whom the community has a
right to look up for safe guidance through the storm which is coming to
North­West India and perhaps to the whole of India. I tell you that we
are actually living in a state of civil war which, but for the police
and military, would become universal in no time.

During the last few months there has been a series of Hindu-Muslim riots
in India. In North-West India alone there have been at least three riots
during the last three months and at least four cases of vilification of
the Prophet by Hindus and Sikhs. In each of these four cases, the
vilifier has been murdered. There have also been cases of burning of the
Qur'an in Sind. I have carefully studied the whole situation and believe
that the real cause of these events is nither religious nor economic. It
is purely political. I.e., the desire of the Sikhs and Hindus to
intimidate Muslims even in the Muslim majority provinces. And the new
constitution is such that even in the Muslim majority provinces, the
Muslims are made entirely dependent on non-Muslims.

The result is that the Muslim Ministry can take no proper action and are
even driven to do injustice to Musiims partly to please those on whom
they depend, and partly to show that they are absolutely impartial. Thus
it is clear that we have our specific reasons to reject this
constitution. It seems to me that the new constitution is devised only
to placate the Hindus. In the Hindu majority provinces, the Hindus have
of course absolute majorities, and can ignore Muslims altogether. In
Muslim majority provinces, the Muslims are made entirely dependent on
Hindus. I have no doubt in my mind that this constitution is calculated
to do infinite harm to the Indian Muslims. Apart from this it is no
solution of the economic problem which is so acute among Muslims.

The only thing that the communal award grants to Muslims is the
recognition of their political existence in India. But such a
recognition granted to a people whom this constitution does not and
cannot help in solving their problem of poverty can be of no value to
them. The Congress. President has denied the political existence of
Muslims in no unmistakable terms. The other Hindu political body, i.e.,
the Mahasabha, whom I regard as the real representative of the masses of
the Hindus, has declared more than once that a united Hindu­Muslim
nation is impossible in India. In these cirecumstances it is obvious
that the only way to a peaceful India is a redistribution of the country
on the lines of racial, religious and linguistic affinities. Many
British statesmen also realise this, and the Hindu-Muslim riots which
are rapidly coming in the wake of this constitution are sure further to
open their eyes to the real situation in the country. I remember Lord
Lothian told me before I left England that my scheme was the only
possible solution of the troubles of India, but that may take 25 years
to come.

Some Muslims in the Punjab are already suggesting the holding of \[a\]
North-West Indian Muslim Conference, and the idea is rapidly spreading.
I agree with you, however, that our community is not yet sufficiently
organised and disciplined and perhaps the time for holding such a
conference is not yet ripe. But I feel that it would be highly advisable
for you to indicate in your address at least the line of action that the
Muslims of North-West India would be finally driven to take.

To my mind the new constitution with its idea of a single Indian
federation is completely hopeless. A separate federation of Muslim
provinces, reformed on the lines I have suggested above, is the only
course by which we can secure a peaceful India and save Muslims from the
domination of non­Muslims. Why should not the Muslims of North-West
India and Bengal be considered as nations entitled to self-determination
just as other nations in India and outside India are?

Personally I think that the Muslims of North-West India and Bengal ought
at present to ignore Muslim\[-minority\] provinces. This is the best
course to adopt in the interests of both Muslim majority and minority
provinces. It will therefore be better to hold the coming session of the
League in the Punjab, and not in a Muslim minority province. The month
of August is bad in Lahore. I think you should seriously consider the
advisability of holding the coming session at Lahore in the middle of
October when the weather is quite good in Lahore. The interest in the
All-India Muslim League is rapidly growing in the Punjab, and the
holding of the coming session in Lahore is likely to give a fresh
political awakening to the Punjab Muslims.

Yours sincerely,  
(Sd). Mohammad Iqbal  
Bar-at-Law

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- \*[more on Iqbal](../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#iqbal)\* --
\*[Glossary](../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp)\* --

  
  
  
