---
title: Body language
---


## Intro

The body language is indeed a language with words and phrases. The body
can communicate even when there are no spoken words. The primary
function of body language is to express emotions and status among
surrounding animals; and its vocabulary is specialized for that. Using
body language, one can speak multiple words simultaneously.

## Importance of mastering it

Body language is widely understood, often unconsciously. Bad skill at it
is often results in miscommunication. So, its vocabulary should be
mastered systematically.

Just as one can speak words to oneself, one can use the body language to
speak to oneself to great effect\!

Realize that a significant minority does not speak it well.

## Vocabulary

### Confidence

Prolonged eye contact, relaxed but alert posture.

### Friendliness, welcoming interaction

Smile. Nod.

#### Depth, truthfulness

The basic idea in understanding a smile is imitate it. Observe if the
eyes are wrinkled.

### Trustworthiness, appeasement

Mirror others’ body language.

### Acknowledgement of superiority

añjali-mudrA. Back slightly bent forward. Hands folded submissively.

### Doubt or mental processing

One of the eyes narrowed at the outer corner. Raised eyebrows. Pursed
lip.

Lowered eyebrows and squinted eyes illustrate an attempt at
understanding what is being said or going on. It’s usually skeptical.

### Authority, firmness

Act like a statue: Your secure position does not require you to care for
making others comfortable by mirroring. (Observed in bosses of
corporations, mafia and emperors.)

### Boredom and distraction

People who look away while you are talking to them are thinking about
something else.

### Solitude

People with crossed arms are closing themselves to social influence.

### Anger

Bulged eye-balls. Flared nose. Eyes narrowed at the inner corner.

### Fear

Arms fending unseen things away: Adjusting cufflinks, purses etc..
Casual face touching. The hand shrug: palm upward, fingers slightly
curled. Squirming.

### Anxiety

#### Detecting lies

Outward calm and inner turbulance. A trained person can detect lies with
great accuracy. While the other is speaking, look for fear.

#### Uncomfortable truthfulness

When the other person is silent, these could also indicate uncomfortable
truthfulness.

## Expert lying

Sincerity is very important. But, in some situations, lying is
inevitable. Avoid non-verbal leakage.

### Statue strategy

Deadpan face. Eyes concealed by glasses (Pupil dilation is involuntary,
and can reveal interest level). Rigid body, Minimal hand movement. Seen
in dominant males of many species, emperors, corporate heads. Indicates
a lack of need to pander to companions.

### Flase clown strategy

Mock-aggression or mock-friendliness. Throw in much body language noise.
Could even be used as a permanent mask in the Orient (and Iran, I hear).

### Erratic signaling

Deliberately misleading signaling. Very tough to execute correctly, but
very effective.
