+++
title = "02 PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION"

+++
**PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION**

Soon after the first edition of this book was published in July 1986, a
significant judgment on some *Ayats* of the Quran was pronounced by Z.S.
Lohat, metropolitan magistrate of Delhi.  As most of these *Ayats* and
others of a similar sort figure in the Calcutta Quran Petition of
Chandmal Chopra, we thought it relevant to reproduce the impugned poster
in which the *Ayats* were cited.  Operative portion of the judgment is
also being reproduced in order to give a glimpse of the arguments for
and against.

The poster had been published on behalf of the Hindu Raksha Dal, Delhi,
by its President, Indra Sain Sharma, and Secretary, Rajkumar Arya.  Both
of them had been arrested under Sections 153A and 295A of the Indian
Penal Code.  These are the same sections which were invoked by Chandmal
Chopra in his petition for prohibiting publication of the Quran.

The publishers of the poster had cited 24 *Ayats* of the Quran under the
caption, *Why riots take place in the country*.  They had added the
comment that these *Ayats* “command the believers (Musalmans) to fight
against followers of other faiths” and that “so long as these *Ayats*
are not removed \[from the Quran\], riots in the country cannot be
prevented”.

The case acquired considerable weight when it came before the court
because Indra Sain Sharma happened to be Vice-President of the All India
Hindu Mahasabha at that time.  The prosecution seemed to be convinced
that it had caught a big fish.  But the magistrate thought otherwise. 
He found that the prosecution had failed to provide sufficient grounds
such as could enable him to frame charges.  He discharged both the
accused with the observation that “With due regard to the holy book of
‘Quran Majeed’, a close perusal of the ‘Aytes’ shows that the same *are
harmful and teach hatred*, and are likely to create differences between
Mohammedans on one hand and the remaining communities on the other”
(emphasis added).

The poster was printed in Hindi.  The *Ayats* it cited were taken
verbatim from an authentic edition of the Quran published by an orthodox
Muslim organization, Maktaba al-HasnAt of Rampur Uttar Pradesh.  The
edition provides the Arabic text of the Quran together with Hindi and
English translations in parallel columns.  We are reproducing the
English translation of the *Ayats*.

**II**  
**THE POSTER**

“Some *Ayats* of the Quran Majid command the believers (Musalmans) to
fight against followers of other faiths:

1.  Then, when the sacred months have passed, slay the idolaters
    wherever ye find them, and take them (captive) and besiege them and
    prepare for them each ambush.  But if they repent and establish
    worship and pay the poor due, then leave their way.  Lo!  Allah is
    Forgiving, Merciful. (*SUrah* 9, *Ayats* 5)

2.  O ye who believe!  The idolaters only are unclean... (9.28)

3.  In truth the disbelievers are an open enemy to you. (4.101)

4.  O ye who believe!  Fight those of the disbelievers who are near to
    you and let them find harshness in you... (9.123)

5.  Lo! Those who disbelieve our revelations, We shall expose them to
    the Fire.  As often as their skins are consumed We shall exchange
    them for fresh skins that they may taste the torment.  Lo!  Allah is
    ever Mighty, Wise. (4.56)

6.  O ye who believe!  Choose not your father nor your brethren for
    friends if they take pleasure in disbelief rather than faith.  Whoso
    of you taketh them for friends such are wrongdoers. (9.23)

7.  Allah guideth not the disbelieving folk. (9.37)

8.  O ye who believe!  Choose not for friends People of the Book and of
    the disbelievers.  But keep your duty to Allah if ye are true
    believers. (5.57)

9.  Accursed, they will be seized wherever found and slain with a
    (fierce) slaughter. (3 3.61)

10. Lo! Ye (idolaters) and that which ye worship beside Allah are fuel
    of hell. Thereunto ye will come. (21.98)

11. And who doth greater wrong than he who is reminded of the
    revelations of his Lord, then turneth from them.  Lo!  We shall
    requite the guilty. (32.22)

12. Allah promiseth you much booty that ye will capture. (48.20)

13. Now enjoy what ye have won as lawful and good. (8.69)

14. O Prophet!  Strive against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and
    be stem with them.  Hell will be their home, a hapless journey’s
    end. (66.9)

15. But verily We shall cause those who disbelieve to taste an awful
    doom and verily We shall requite them the worst of what they used to
    do. (41.27)

16. That is the reward of Allah’s enemies: the Fire.  Therein is their
    immortal home, payment for as much as they denied Our revelations.
    (41.28)

17. Lo! Allah bath bought from the believers their lives and their
    wealth because the Garden will be theirs.  They shall fight in the
    way of Allah and shall slay and be slain... (9.111) 

18. Allah promiseth hypocrites, both men and women, and the disbelievers
    fire of hell for their abode.  It will suffice them.  Allah curseth
    them and theirs is lasting torment. (9.58) 

19. O Prophet!  Exhort the believers to fight.  If there be of you
    twenty steadfast they shall overcome two hundred, and if there be of
    you a hundred steadfast they shall overcome a thousand of those who
    disbelieve because they (the disbelievers) are a folk without
    intelligence. (8.65) 

20. O ye who believe!  Take not the Jews and Christians for friends. 
    They are friends one to another.  He among you who taketh them for
    friends is (one) of them.  Lo!  Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk.
    (5.51)

21. Fight against such of those who have been given the scripture as
    believe not in Allah nor the Last Day, and forbid not that which
    Allah bath forbidden by His messenger and follow not the religion
    -of truth, until they pay the tribute readily, being brought low.
    (9.29)

22. Therefore, We have stirred up enmity and hatred among them till the
    day of Resurrection, when Allah will inform them of their handiwork.
    (5.14)

23. They long that ye should disbelieve even as they disbelieve that ye
    may be upon a level (with them).  So choose not friends from them
    till they forsake their homes in the way of Allah.  If they turn
    back (to enmity) then take them and kill them wherever ye find them,
    and choose not friend nor helper from among them. (4.89)

24. Fight them!  Allah will chastise them at your hands, and He will lay
    them low and give you victory over them, and He will heal the
    breasts of folk who are believers. (9.14)

“There are numerous (other) *Ayats* of the same sort.  Here we have
cited only twenty-four *Ayats*.  Obviously, these *Ayats* carry
commandments which promote enmity, ill-will, hatred, deception, fraud,
strife, robbery and murder.  That is why riots take place between
Muslims and non-Muslims, in this country as well as \[the rest of\] the
world.

“In the above-mentioned twenty-four *Ayats* of the Quran Majid,
Musalmans are commanded to fight against followers of other faiths.  So
long as these *Ayats* are not removed \[from the Quran\], riots in the
country cannot be prevented.”

**Defects in English Translation**

On comparing the Hindi and English translations of the Ayats under
reference, we find that at places the English rendering does not follow
the Hindi version very faithfully.  We think it worthwhile to point out
as to where the English translation has failed to convey the full
meaning in keeping with the Arabic text and the spirit of Islamic
theology initiated by the Prophet and elaborated by orthodox schools in
subsequent centuries.

For instance, the Hindi translation of *Ayat* 8.69 cited under No. 13 of
the poster uses the words “*ghanImat kA mAl*”.  This is in keeping with
the original Arabic term.  But the English rendering, “what you have
won”, is a very weak version of what is sought to be conveyed.  A closer
rendering would be “war booty” or “plunder acquired through war”.  In
the Quran, Allah promises plenty of plunder to the believers, again and
again.  The Prophet also claimed that one of the six points of his
superiority over earlier prophets was that while plunder was not lawful
for them, Allah had made it so for him.  He also laid down the rule
according to which one-fifth of the plunder belonged to Allah and his
Prophet, while the remaining four-fifth was to be divided among those
who took part in the war which brought the plunder.  This “sacred
one-fifth” came to be known as *khams* which became in later times one
of the four main sources of revenue for the Islamic state, the other
three being *kharAj* (land revenue from the conquered peasantry),
*jizyah* (poll tax from the People of the Book and others who were
accepted as *zimmis*) and *zakAt* (charity from the faithful).

Similarly, the English word “strive” in Ayat 66.9 at No. 14 of the
poster is too innocuous to convey the ringing militancy of “*jihAd
karo*” which is used in. the Hindi translation.  It is true that
literally the Arabic word “*jihAd*” means “to strive”.  But in the mouth
of the Prophet as also in latter-day Islamic theology, *jihAd* is not a
mere word like any other.  It has become a whole institution, namely,
aggressive war for the spread of the “only true faith” till the *kAfirs*
get converted, or humble themselves by agreeing to become *zimmis*, or
are killed *en masse*.  The Prophet minces no words in making *jihAd* an
obligatory duty for every Muslim.  Allah himself harangues the faithful
to vie with each other in spending their wealth and staking their lives
“in the way of Allah” which is only a euphemism for *jihAd*. *Ayats*
cited at Nos. 1, 4, 17, 19 and 21 of the poster make the message from
Allah more than clear.  This aggressive war was held up by the Prophet
as superior to all other meritorious deeds such as prayer, fasting,
pilgrimage, etc.  The believer who kills *kAfirs* in a *jihAd* is
honoured as a *ghAzi* and enjoys a higher status in the Muslim *Ummah*. 
The believer who gets killed in a *jihAd* becomes a *shahId* (martyr)
and goes straight to the Quranic paradise without having to wait for the
Day of Judgment like the rest of the believers.

Again, while the Hindi word “*yAtanA*” in 41.27 at No. 15 of the poster
is quite close to the Arabic word “*azAb*”, the English rendering,
“awful doom”, hardly conveys what is meant.  The word “doom” carries a
sense of finality, however awful.  It happens and the story ends for all
time to come.  But the torments with which Allah threatens the
unbelievers, again and again, are far more formidable.  It is a
continuous process in which the victims are subjected to ever more
terrible modes and doses of torture. *Ayats* 4.56, 21.98, 41.28 and 9.58
cited in Nos. 5, 10, 16, and 18 of the poster tell something of the type
of torment which awaits the unbelievers.  “Terrible and everlasting
torment” would have been a more faithful translation of the Arabic term.

Lastly, the English word “Garden” in 9.111 at No. 17 of the poster is a
poor rendering of the Arabic word “*jannat*” which has been used as such
in the Hindi translation.  “Paradise” would be a more precise English
rendering.  After all, the paradise which Allah promises to the
believers is no mere garden, however green, well-watered and full of
fruit trees as well as fresh breezes it may be.  What has made it
particularly alluring for the faithful throughout the ages is something
else, namely, the bevy of beautiful virgins who never grow old or lose
their charms, and who never tire of providing newer and ever more
plentiful pleasures to those who have lived or died for the faith. 
Lusty and lurid descriptions of paradise comprise a whole corpus of
Islamic lore starting with the Quran and the Hadis.

**III**  
**The Judgment**

“I have heard learned APP \[Assistant Public Prosecutor\] for the state
and counsel of the accused and have gone through the relevant record on
the file.  The main thrust of the prosecution is that the above
words^([1](#1)) in the disputed poster tend to create communal
disharmony and \[the comment\] is an act with deliberate and malicious
intention of outraging the religious feelings of a particular class of
citizens of India and is an attempt to insult the religion or the
religious belief of the said class.  It is also submitted that ‘Aytes’
in the form published in the poster are not available or are the
distorted version of the same...

“There is a dispute that the 24 ‘Aytes’ published in the poster have not
been taken from the ‘Quran Majeed’ translated by Mohammedan writer.  It
is found that they are reproduced in the same form as are translated in
the said ‘Quran Majeed’.  In my opinion the writer by writing the above
words has expressed his opinion or suggestion and at the most it can be
branded as a fair criticism of what is contained in the holy book of
Mohammedans.  By no stretch of imagination the opinion expressed by the
writer that unless these ‘Aytes’ are removed from holy book of ‘Quran
Majeed’ there will be no hope of stopping the communal disturbances in
different parts of India, can be said to promote and attempt to promote
feeling of enmity or hatred between different classes of citizens of
India.  In my opinion it is a sort of suggestion to the readers or at
the most a fair criticism and by publishing such suggestion or
criticism, the writer or publisher has not in any way outraged or
attempted to outrage the religious feelings of Mohammedan community nor
it tends to create communal disharmony or hatred between two classes. 
With due regard to the holy book of ‘Quran Majeed’, a close perusal of
the ‘Aytes’ shows that the same are harmful and teach hatred and are
likely to create differences between Mohammedans on one hand and the
remaining communities on the other.

“I have personally compared the disputed ‘Aytes’ with ‘Quran Majeed’
translated in Hindi with notes by one Mohd.  Farookh Khan and have found
that most of the ‘Aytes’ have been reproduced in the poster in its
original form as is available in the ‘Quran Majeed’...

“The close reading of all the ‘Aytes’ published in the poster and read
from the book do not in any way give different meanings nor suggest
anything that the same were published with malicious intention. 
Therefore, I do not agree with the contention of the learned APP that
‘Aytes’ Nos. 2, 5, 9, 11 to 19 and 22 are either not available in ‘Quran
Majeed’ or they are distorted version of the said ‘Aytes’...

“In view of the above discussion, I am therefore of the view that there
is no prima facie case against the accused as offences alleged against
the accused do not fall prima facie within the four corners of Sections
153-A/295-A and hence both of the accused are discharged.

“dated 31st July, 1986

<div align="right">

Sd/ Z.S. Lohat”

</div>

  

The portions of the judgment we have left out relate to technicalities
such as case law on the subject or the correctness of certain terms used
in the Hindi translation for conveying the spirit of the original in
Arabic.  We thought that while they are not likely to be of much
interest to the lay reader, they mar the smooth flow o f the
magistrate’s observations. Moreover, the magistrate has summed up in his
judgment the substance of arguments advanced by the
prosecution.^([2](#2))

**IV**  
**Banning of Books is Counter-Productive**

When we published for the first time (1986) the documents relating to
the Calcutta Quran Petition, we should have made it absolutely clear
that we do not stand for a ban on the publication of the Quran.  We take
this opportunity to state unambiguously that we regard banning of books,
religious or otherwise, as counterproductive.  In the case of the Quran,
we believe and advocate that more and more non-Muslims should read it so
that they know first hand the quality of its teachings.

Our only intention in publishing the court documents of the Calcutta
Quran Petition and providing a long preface to it, was to promote a
public discussion of Islam as a religion, particularly its claim that
every bit of the Quran and the Hadis has a divine source.  This claim is
used at present to prevent a close examination of what the book contains
and what message Islam has for mankind at large.  While all other
religions have been subjected to such an examination, Islam has so far
managed to remain a closed book.  Our plea in the Preface to the first
edition was that if such commandments as we find in the Quran emanate
from what is proclaimed as a divine source, then the character of that
source should also invite questions.  Our rational faculties and moral
sensibilities should not stop functioning the moment Allah’s name is
mentioned.  The character of Allah as revealed in the Quran also invites
a close examination.

March 20,1987

<div align="right">

**Sita Ram Goel**

</div>

**Footnotes:**

------------------------------------------------------------------------


