+++
title = "05 CHAPTER 3 ENTIRE QURAN IS A MANUAL ON JIHAD"

+++
**CHAPTER 3**

**ENTIRE QURAN IS A MANUAL ON *JIHAD***

Now we can take up the third observation in Justice Basak’s judgement,
namely, that “This book \[The Quran\] is not prejudicial to maintenance
of religious harmony”, and that “Because of the Koran no public
tranquility has been disturbed upto now and there is no reason to
apprehend any likelihood of such disturbance in future”.  He has gone
further and chosen to repeat the etymological exercise which we find in
most of the books written by apologists of Islam in modem times.  We are
informed by Justice Basak that the word “*Muslim*” has been formed from
the word “*IslAm*” which in turn derives from “*as-salam*”, meaning
peace.  The mission of Islam, we are assured by him, is the
establishment of peace, and a Muslim is he who works wholeheartedly for
this fulfilment.  The argument is clever but not consistent either with
what is advocated by the scriptures of Islam or with what we find in the
recorded history of this creed spread over more than fourteen hundred
years.  Human history has known several movements which have used words
to mean exactly the opposite of what those words stand for in common
parlance.  Christianity, Communism and Nazism abound in such
doublespeak.  So also Islam.

The Quran uses the words “*salam*”, “*IslAm*”, and “*Muslim*” in some of
its *Ayats*, but the synonyms of these words - “*ImAn*”, “*DIn*”, and
“*Mu’min*” - occur far more frequently.  There is not a single *Ayat*,
however, in which these words or their synonyms stand or can be
interpreted to stand for peace.

The word “*salam*” means literally “A contract involving an immediate
payment of the price, and admitting delay in the delivery of the article
purchased”.^([1](#1)) It has been used in the Quran (2.131, 3.20) to
mean “bowing down before Allah” or “surrender to Allah”. The word
“*as-salAm*” which has been derived from it is “One of the ninety-nine
names or attributes of Allah” and means according to al-BaizAwI, “He who
is free from all loss or harm.”^([2](#2)) Another word derived from it
is “*taslIm*” which means “The benediction at the close of the usual
form of prayer”, that is, *namAz*.^([3](#3))

Similarly, the word “*IslAm*” in the Quran means “doing homage to Allah”
and “is said to be the religion of all the prophets” who preceded
Muhammad, the Last Prophet.^([4](#4)) According to 3.19, Islam is
Allah’s own religion, and those who reject Allah’s revelations will be
punished soon.  According to 3.85, he who believes in a religion other
than Islam will not be accepted, and will be a loser on the Last Day. 
According to 49.14, the Bedouins say that they have confessed *ImAn* but
they should say instead that they have confessed *IslAm*.

Coming to the word “*Muslim*” it simply means “one who has received
IslAm”.^([5](#5)) We quote a few *Ayats* where the word occurs.  At
2.132, the Quran says, “This is what Abraham and Issac bequeathed to
their sons, ‘Allah has chosen this religion for you.  Die as Muslims.’”
At 3.84, the Quran says, “We believe in what Allah has revealed to us. 
We are his Muslims”, that is, obedient servants.  At 22.78, the Quran
says, “And wage war (*jihAd*)... your religion is the religion of
Abraham.  He named you as Muslims.” At 39.11-12, the Quran commands the
believer to say, “I have been asked to worship Allah alone, and become a
Muslim first of all.”

Now we can take up the synonyms.  The word “*ImAn*” means “belief of the
heart and confession of the lips to the truth of Muslim
religion”.^([6](#6)) The word “*mu’min*” (pl. *mu’minUn*, popular
*momin*) is “A term generally used for Muhammadans in the Quran and all
Muslim books.”^([7](#7))  Two *sUrahs* of the Quran are named after this
word.  SUrah 23, *Al-Mu’minUn*, gives a warning to those Meccans who
argue with Muhammad and ask inconvenient questions, that they will burn
in hell.  And SUrah 40, *Al-Mu'min*, describes the terrible torments of
hell which are waiting for all unbelievers according to the
“revelations” from Allah.

Finally, the word “*DIn*” which occurs quite frequently in the Quran
like the words “*ImAn*” and “*mu’min*”, is “The Arabic word for
‘religion’,” and “is used especially for the religion of the prophets
and their inspired books”.^([8](#8))  Nowhere does it mean 64 peace” or
“religion of peace”.  In fact, in some *Ayats* (2.190-91; 8.39, 72;
9.19-22, 111), it is used for inviting the believers to engage in
*jihAd*.

Sir William Muir writes as follows about the earliest 64 revelations”
received by Muhammad: “There is at this period hardly an allusion to
Jewish and Christian Scripture or legend.  The Kor’An did not as yet
rest its claim on the evidence of previous revelation and its
correspondence therewith.  But the peculiar phraseology of the new faith
has already become fixed.  The dispensation of Mohammad was
distinguished as ISLAM, that is, Surrender of the soul ‘to Allah’; his
followers as MUSALMIN (those who *surrender themselves*), or
as Believers; his opponents as KAFIRIN, that is, *those who reject the
divine message*, or as MUSHRIKIN, such as associate companions with
Allah...”^([9](#9))

Maxime Rodinson defines the new creed in terms of Muhammad’s feeling of
“a sense of subjection to the terrible yet fascinating mysteries which
surrounded him”.  He continues, “Many others besides him have had this
feeling.  But it manifested itself in a form which was peculiar to
himself.  The presence, Allah, was an almighty power which had no limits
of any kind; a will which no bounds could contain... The only possible
attitude towards this Allah was an infinite humility and total surrender
(*islAm*) in anticipation of a terrible judgment of which the outcome
was wholly unpredictable.”^([10](#10))  This attempt to convert Muhammad
into a philosopher and a mystic can be accepted only with a fistful of
salt.  Muhammad never claimed to be either; in fact, he had contempt for
both.  What is, however, quite clear again is that Islam has always
stood for surrender to Allah, that is, Muhammad.

Margoliouth also has something to say on this subject.  He writes,
“Finally a name had to be given to the new sect, and either by accident
or choice led to its being called the sect of the Muslims or *Hanifs*…
no Arab seems to have known any thing about the Hanifs... and since in
Hebrew the word means ‘hypocrite’ and in Syriac ‘heathen’, pious
followers of Mohammed did not care to study its etymology.  The other
word, Muslim, naturally meant ‘traitor,’ and when the new sect came to
be lampooned, it provided the satirists with a witticism; Mohammed
showed some want of humour in adopting it but displayed great ingenuity
in giving it an honourable meaning: *whereas it ordinarily signified one
who handed over his friends to their enemies, it was glorified into
meaning one who handed over his person to Allah*; and though, like
Christian, it may conceivably have been first invented by enemies of the
sect whom it designated, divine authority was presently adduced for the
statement that Abraham coined the name.”^([11](#11))

The reference here is obviously to Muhammad’s Abyssinian connection.

**The Abyssinian Connection**

The Abyssinians who were Christians had invaded and occupied South
Arabia in 525 CE.  They had persecuted and oppressed the Pagan Arabs in
various ways.  An Abyssinian army had moved to Mecca also and threatened
to destroy the Pagan Temple at Ka‘ba in 570 CE, the same year in which
Muhammad was born.  The army had to retreat because of a plague which
broke out soon after.  But it had left a lasting hatred in the minds of
the Meccans for both Abyssinia and Christianity.  Abyssinia had
continued to inspire fear also because it was a powerful kingdom as
compared to Mecca which was a small city state.

It sounds strange that Muhammad should have thought of Abyssinia of all
the places as soon as he met opposition at Mecca.  But it is quite
understandable once we grasp the psychology of those who get alienated
from their own society and culture.  They take little time in ganging up
with the enemy.  Small wonder that Muhammad sent some of his new
converts to the court of Negus, the king of Abyssinia.  The move caused
considerable commotion in Mecca.  His clansmen, the Quraish, hurried an
embassy of their own to the same court in order to counter Muhammad’s
move.

Muhammad’s biographers have presented the Muslim migrants to Abyssinia
as refugees from persecution at Mecca.  But they have concealed the true
story. Margoliouth reveals: “On the analogy of similar scenes we should
suppose that *the envoys of Mohammed urged the Negus to take an active
part in suppressing paganism*, reminding him of the Abyssinian rule in
South Arabia, a fact which gave him some sort of title to the country;
and that the idea of regaining this ancient possession was what led him
to favour the Meccan insurgents.”^([12](#12))  It was, therefore,
natural for the Meccans to describe as “Muslims” the followers of a man
who was inviting a ruthless enemy to slaughter and enslave his
compatriots.

**Curses and Street Brawls**

In any case, Islam could not have sounded anything like a message of
peace to Muhammad’s contemporaries.  He started by cursing that his
clansmen who did not concede his claim, would cook in the fire of hell
for all time to come.  The list included his indulgent uncle and
protector, Abu TAlib.  Before long, he would consign his dead mother
also to the same dreadful place.

The curses were soon backed by street brawls which his boisterous
Muslims managed to provoke.  He had a real tough lot on his side, apart
from his ideology which animated the lowest passions in human nature. 
Margoliouth says: “The persons whose accession to Islam was most
welcomed were men of physical strength, and much actual fighting must
have taken place at Meccah before the Flight; else the readiness with
which the Moslems after the Flight could produce form their number tried
champions would be inexplicable.  A tried champion must have been tried
somewhere: and no external fights are recorded or are even the subject
of an allusion for this period.  The Prophet himself is said on one
occasion after reciting Surah xxxvi to have flung dust on the heads of
his opponents... *The growth of the new religion tended to spread
discord between families and so keep the city in a state of turmoil and
confusion*. Those who for any reason felt aggrieved with their condition
could gratify their ill-will by joining Mohammed; and some probably did
this in momentary pique. *Desperadoes of whom the whole city was ashamed
seem to have been received into the fold of Islam; they could then on
the strength of their faith claim to be better than their
neighbours*.”^([13](#13))

**Wars waged by the Prophet**

Soon after Muhammad migrated to Medina, he started organising surprise
raids on unsuspecting caravans and tribal settlements.  He slaughtered
quite a few of his clansmen at Badr. Waging war on his own countrymen
became his main occupation during the succeeding years.  Slaughter of
those he viewed as his enemies not only satisfied his inflated ego but
also brought to him much plunder.  He also enriched himself by
plundering the prosperous Jews of Medina.  It is reported that his
lieutenant, ‘Umar, had counselled him to wear silk, and live in luxury. 
Muhammad had replied curtly that it was far better to spend the plunder
on buying arms and horses.  He acquired these sinews of war even by
selling women and children captured in war and reduced to slavery.

Biographers of Muhammad have listed as many as eighty-two expeditions
which he mounted against various tribes of Arabia and the neighbouring
lands, in a brief span of ten years between his migration to Medina in
622 CE and his death in 632 CE.  The average comes to two expeditions
every three months.  Twenty-six of these, we are told, were led by him
in person.  After he had reduced Mecca and the rest of Arabia, he
started planning expeditions against the Byzantine and the Persian
empires.  It was only his death which stopped him from waging more wars.

One, therefore, finds it difficult to believe that the word “*IslAm*”
could have meant peace in Muhammad’s life-time, either to his votaries
or to his unwary victims.  Nor did it do so for a long time afterwards,
as the sword of Islam swept east and west spreading death, devastation
and dark terror over many lands.  Muslim historians of those terrible
times have not tried to hide what their “heroes” did to the “infidels”
of all sorts, everywhere.  In fact, they gloat over those gory scenes
with unashamed glee.  Hindus have known for more than thirteen hundred
years what Islam stands for.  It was not very long ago that Islam made
rivers of blood flow on both sides of the borders of what remains of
India today.  Justice Basak’s exercise in etymology cannot wipe out
national memories and put the stamp of peace on an essentially violent
creed.  Islam was born as an ideology of totalitarian terror, and so it
has remained till today.  The key to understanding Islam is not in modem
apologetics but in the life of the Prophet.

**The Prophet’s life-pattern becomes a Theology**

The wars waged by Muhammad in his own life-time turn out to be no more
than minor skirmishes when compared with even the not-so-famous
conflicts of human history.  They would have been forgotten before long
but for the labours of Islamic theologians who transfigured the
triumphant march of Muslim armies into the unfoldment of a divine plan. 
The seeds of this theology were already there in the Quran (33.21) and
Muhammad’s sayings in his normal moments, that is, when he did not speak
in a state of trance (*wahy*).  They flowered into full-fledged faith
when fortune continued to smile on the Muslim military machine for two
long centuries.

Perhaps the men who mattered after Muhammad’s death were awe-struck at
their own victories which followed in quick succession, and could not
help looking at them as a series of miracles.  Or, perhaps, that was
what they could sell more easily to their followers who had become
wide-eyed with wonder.  In any case, it was in this darkroom of
miracle-mongering that the portrait of the Prophet was enlarged to a
fabulous size and painted in superhuman colours.  Even the least little
detail of his life, public and private, was invested with infallibility.

Finally, as the imams and the sufis stood face to face with the finished
product, they were moved irresistibly to the conclusion that the
Prophet’s mode of living (*Sunnah*) was not a personal and passing
phenomenon but a divinely designed pattern of universal and permanent
validity.  All men, everywhere and for all time to come, were now
expected to fashion themselves after that pattern, voluntarily and
willingly.  The “infidels” who demurred were to be forced into this
fixed mould for their own good, here and hereafter.

**Place of War in Islam**

Islam would have been a harmless fossil so far as the non-Muslims are
concerned, if waging of aggressive wars for the spread of the faith had
not occupied the pride of place in the petrified image of the Prophet. 
Presenting this persistent sabre-rattling as *jihAd* or “exertion in the
way of Allah”, does not change the situation.  Nor does the translation
of this term as “holy war” help matters in any manner.  We have to face
the fact that violence and war-mongering have become essential and major
ingredients of the Muslim   
psyche through the medium of the Prophet’s *Sunnah*.

**Teh *MujAhid***

The Quran (9.10) makes the point quite clear.  The *mujAhid* (Muslim who
engages in *jihAd*) is presented as far superior to the mere *mu’min*
(person who affirms that there is no God but Allah and that Muhammad is
the Prophet of Allah).  Allah asks the Prophet (Quran, 9.19), “Do you
make the givers of drink to pilgrims or the maintainers of Scared
Mosques equal to the believers in Allah and Last Day, and the crusaders
(*mujAhids*) in the cause of Allah?” He himself provides the answer in
the same verse.  “They are not,” he announces, “comparable in the sight
of Allah.  And Allah guides not those who do wrong.”

The *Sahih Muslim* is the second most important collection of Hadis.  It
reports the Prophet as saying: “Whoever cheerfully accepts Allah as his
Lord, Islam as his religion and Muhammad as his Apostle is necessarily
entitled to enter paradise... (yet) there is another act which elevates
the position of a man in paradise to a grade one hundred (higher), and
the elevation between one grade and the other is equal to the height of
the heaven from the earth... What is that act?  *JihAd* in the way of
Allah! *JihAd* in the way of Allah !”^([14](#14))

**The *GhAzi***

A still higher grade goes to the *ghAzi*, that is, one who slays an
“infidel” with his own hands.  That is why this appellation was flaunted
by all Muslim sultans who invaded or thrived in India at one time or the
other.  Babur became a *ghAzi* by raising tower after tower of severed
Hindu heads in the wake of his victory over Maharana Sangram Singh of
Mewar.  Akbar also earned the rank when as a boy of only thirteen years,
he was made to cut off the head of a defeated and half-dead Hindu king,
Himu, after the Second Battle of Panipat.  The Later Mughals, some of
whom never went anywhere near a battlefield, claimed that they had
inherited the title from their more renowned ancestors.

**The *ShahId***

It is, however, the *shahId* (martyr) who gets the highest grade in the
Islamic roll of honour.  The *mujAhid* who gets killed in a *jihAd*
becomes a *shahId* and goes straight to *jannat* (paradise) without
having to wait for the Day of Judgment like the rest of the mu’mins. 
Muhammad did not believe in rebirth, nor in traffic between heaven and
earth.  But he forgot his own teaching when he tried to glorify a
martyr. A martyr, he proclaimed, “will desire to return to this world
and be killed ten times for the sake of the great honour that is
bestowed upon him.”^([15](#15))

If one is really interested in getting at the core of the Quran, one
should go to the original sources rather than read the modern apologists
who sell only sweet tales in the name of Islam.  The earlier imams and
sufis were far more honest and straight-forward in stating what the
Quran stands for.  They had no use for twentieth-century humanist
notions which the apologists have been trying to foist on Allah and his
Prophet.

**Modern Islamic Apologetics**

The Apologetics that presents Islam as a mission of peace, human
brotherhood, social equality and the rest, is a recent development in
the history of Islam.  Till the last quarter of the nineteenth century,
Islam had in its armoury only two weapons which have been wielded by all
aggressively imperialistic and totalitarian ideologies - Dogmatics and
Polemics.  Muhammad had started with Dogmatics which we find in the
earlier *sUrahs* of the Quran.  It was not long before he evolved his
poisonous Polemics to be hurled recklessly at what he described as
*kufr* and *shirk* the religion prevailing among the Pagans of Mecca. 
He suffered a setback when the Pagans hit back, asking inconvenient
questions about his pedigree, his person, his prophethood, his mentors,
his promises, and his threats. He was thrown on the defensive, and
displayed the first Apologetics in the history of Islam.^([16](#16)) But
he returned rather fast to Dogmatics and Polemics when his own followers
showed signs of rebellion against him after he “revealed” the famous
verses from Satan in a bid to reach a compromise with the Pagans.  Since
that time, Islam was never in need of Apologetics as its military
machine designed by Muhammad himself continued to march triumphantly in
West Asia, North Africa, and parts of Europe.  The heresies that arose
in subsequent centuries, particularly the Shia sects and the sufi
*silsilas*, were more fanatic and fundamentalist than the four Sunni
*mazhabs* - Hanafi, Hanbali, MAliki, and ShAfii.

The development that really shook Islam for the first time was the
breakdown of the Safavi empire in Iran, the Mughal empire in India, and
the Ottoman empire spread over West Asia, North Africa and southeastern
Europe.  European empires had risen everywhere on the debris.  The
reaction among a section of Muslim “intellectuals” has been what H.
Lammens labels as “modernism” and K.S. Lal describes as “hiding the true
face of Islam”, particularly in Turkey, Egypt, and India.  “The most
moderate amongst them,” observes Lammens, “have undertaken the mission
of showing the complete agreement between IslAm sanely interpreted, and
the progress and aspirations of modem times. They protest that
misunderstanding has given rise to a belief in their antinomy and they
are resolved to dissipate it.”^([17](#17)) Again, “All vie zealously
with one another in the apologia of IslAm.  They often enhance the
credit of Quranic institutions by pointing to the temperance campaign
and the recrudescence of divorce among Christian peoples.  Above all,
the progressivists boast they can prove that as far as liberty of
conscience, the *rights of man* and other ‘conquests’ of modem
civilization are concerned, Islam is several centuries ahead of
Europe... All are agreed in affirming that, judiciously interpreted, the
QorAn not only proclaims the complete equality of sexes, but that in its
efforts to raise the status of woman, it has outstripped all other
religions.”^([18](chi3.htm#18))

Coming to India, Lammens traces the rise of “modernism” to Sir Syed
Ahmad Khan and his Aligarh movement.  “Very eclectic in the matter of
traditions, they do not trouble about the *hadIth*, when the latter fail
to accord with modem progress; they then refute them unhesitatingly by
recourse to inner criticism.  Here again their line of argument which is
entirely subjective, is lacking in logic and does not shrink from
distorting history, for instance, to suit their ends.  They describe the
life of Medina in the first century A.H. and the reign of the four first
Caliphs as inspired by tendencies of the most advanced liberalism. A
Persian newspaper *Al-Habl al-matIn* (27th of May, 1915) \[published in
India\], shows us FAtima and ‘Ayesha in the intimate circle of the
Prophet engaged in philosophical arguments.”^([19](chi3.htm#19))  Again,
“According to them, Muhammad was the declared adversary of slavery.  If
any mistake has been made on the subject, it is through
misinterpretation of the QorAnic texts which appear to make this
institution lawful... The *jehAd* troubles them considerably... Their
theory is that the QorAn contemplated only defining \[defensive?\]
warfare and that its recommendations, were valid only in the Prophet’s
own time.”^([20](#20))

Much water has gone down the Ganges after Lammens wrote in 1929. 
Islamic Apologetics in India since then has progressed by leaps and
bounds.  The Quran has been roped in to prove that Islam stands for
equality of all religions and religious tolerance.  “There are some,”
writes Dr. Harsh Narain (1990), “who find in the Qu’rAn glimpses of
equal respect for all religions, indeed for polytheism and idolatry as
well.  One of its verses relied upon by them runs thus: ‘Unto you your
religion, and unto me my religion.’ But this verse teaches nothing like
respectability of all religions.” After quoting the full verse (109.6),
he cites renowned Islamic theologians - JalAluddin SiyUti, Hussain Waiz
KAshfi, Ibn Kathir, Abul AlA Maududi, Ashraf Ali ThanawI and Abdul Majid
DaryAbAdi - who either say that this verse has been abrogated by the
verse on *jihAd* (*Ayat* as-sayf, 9.5) or that it means the opposite of
what it is being made to mean by modem apologists.  “In other words,
Islam is Islam and Kufr is Kufr, and never the twain can
meet.”^([21](#21))

“Another oft-quoted verse,” he continues, “is, ‘There is no compulsion
in religion.’ From it, too, the unwary or the unscrupulous are wont to
hear a declaration of religious tolerance and peaceful coexistence of
Islam with other religions.” Again, after quoting the full verse
(2.256), he cites Islamic theologians to the effect that this verse,
too, has been abrogated by the aforesaid verse on *jihAd*.  “Shah WalI
AllAh interprets it in such a way, however, that it ceases to rule out
the use of force in propagation of Islam and, instead, provides a basis
for just the use of such force. He writes: ‘There is no compulsion for
the sake of religion, that is, the doctrine of Islam has been
demonstrated.  Hence it is not tantamount to compulsion, as it were,
though compulsion it is, on the whole.’”^([22](#22))

Even if we accept that these verses mean what the apologists say they
mean, it has to be pointed out that the exercise only proves the poverty
of the Quran in matters of tolerance and peaceful coexistence.  One
wonders why it does not occur to them that they are able to quote only
one line each from two long verses out of the more than 6,200 verses
which comprise the Quran.  Why do they fad to take into account the rest
of the Quran which is brimful of transparent intolerance and vociferous
war-mongering?  Are they fools or knaves to go on parroting ad nauseam
these 15 words out of the more than 3,23,600 words which Allah is
supposed to have addressed to their prophet?

Dr. Harsh Narain has not mentioned many other acrobatics of modem
Islamic Apologetics in India because he was dealing only with the myth
of equality of all religions.  That has been taken care of by Prof. K.S.
Lal in his latest (1999) book.  “These days,” he writes, “a group of
Muslim writers is busy making an all out effort to present Islam with a
benign face.  A long series of defeats at the hands of Christian Europe
and persistent resistance of Hindus in India, has resulted in
inculcating in the Muslim masses a hatred of the West and the Hindus. At
the same time it has prompted some Muslim scholars to present Islam as
religion of peace, to put it on par with, say, Hinduism, Jainism or
Buddhism…”^([23](#23)) He quotes at some length the “prolific
writer” Asghar Ali Engineer who says in so many words that “ *jihAd* is
essentially a war for justice, not for aggression or lust for power”,
that sufis practised “absolute nonviolence”, and that “Islam is as
non-violent a religion as any religion can be”.^([24](#24))  And Maulana
Wahiduddin of the Islamic Centre in New Delhi who writes that “Islam is
as tolerant a religion as any other”, that “so far as forced conversion
is concerned it is totally unlawful in Islam”, and that although
the Prophet “was persecuted by others, he strictly avoided
confrontation, and followed the path of forbearance”.^([25](#25)) And
Zafar Jung,  President of the Muslim Mainstream Movement, New Delhi, who
proclaims that “the word Islam means peace”, and that “the Quran and
HadIth foster communal harmony”.^([26](#26))

These writers, observes Prof. Lal, may be sympathised with as they are
not historians and belong to institutions which receive liberal funds
from Gulf states for giving a face-lift to Islam.  What he finds
inexcusable is that renowned historians have joined the game.  “Many
writers on medieval Indian history find in conversion of many low
caste Hindus to Islam a hand of the oppression of Hindu upper castes, or
the Hindu caste system itself, and the attraction of the ‘democratic
spirit of Islamic brotherhood and equality’.”^([27](#27)) He cites
Muhammad Mujeeb in this context who “misinterprets well-known facts in
cleverly carved language”, and tries to prove that “Islam was adopted by
families or groups of families who were regarded as outcasts in Hindu
society”.^([28](#28)) And Mohammad Habib who proclaims that the Muslim
state in medieval India “was not a theocratic state in any sense of the
term” and that “its foundation was non-religious and
secular”.^([29](#29))

Prof. Lal wonders why these Muslim apologists ignore “what has been said
by contemporary chroniclers of the medieval period”.  His explanation is
that “Probably they are shocked at the barbarous conduct of their
medieval brethren and want to salvage the reputation of Islam, although
whatever was done was done in accordance with the canons of their
creed”.  He goes on to show how the two versions of medieval Muslim
history - medieval chroniclers’ and the modem apologists’ - contradict
one another.  “Muslim historians of the medieval period honestly state
that non-Muslims were converted to Islam through force; modern Muslim
apologists claim that conversions were effected through peaceful means. 
Medieval chroniclers take pride in the iconoclastic zeal and
achievements of their heroes; modem apologists plead otherwise. 
Medieval historians credit Muslim invaders with fighting Jihad for
spreading Islam; modem Muslim writers say that their motive was economic
- that the invaders were interested in loot and plunder and had little
to do with religion.  It needs to be emphasized that the truth here does
not lie midway.  It lies on the side of the medieval chroniclers.  Still
the apologists complicate matters by contradicting the versions of their
own coreligionists who were closer and more intimately associated with
events about which they wrote than our modern apologists. The idea of a
secular Muslim state is an innovation of a few ‘progressive’ writers who
wish to bracket Muslim civilization with tolerant
civilizations.”^([30](#30))

He continues, “This phenomenon baffles Indian Muslims to this day - why
could India not be made a Muslim country despite the exertion of more
than a thousand years?  The apologists try to explain it by
‘discovering’ that Muslim state was a secular state. They do not
attribute it to persistent Hindu resistance, nor to the continuance of
the great Hindu civilization to which should go the real
credit.”^([31](#31)) Again: “There is no need to feel apologetic if most
conversions were forcible.  Force and violence have special place in
Islamic history throughout the world.  The heroes of Islam in India are
men like Muhammad bin Qasim, Mahmud of Ghazni, Timur and Aurangzeb. 
They, their poets and chroniclers, all become lyrical when they describe
their achievements in the service of Allah which included conversions by
force. There is no justification for M. Mujeeb to unseat these old
Muslim heroes from their ferocious pedestals and turn them into
pacifists like Hindus and Buddhists.”^([32](#32))

We are afraid, Justice Basak’s comments on the Quran appear to be more
in line with modem Islamic Apologetics than with Islamic Dogmatics and
Polemics which still dominate the overwhelming majority of Muslims in
this country as well as elsewhere.  Modem apologists of Islam have been
increasingly marginalised by the resurgence of Islamic fanaticism since
the seventies of this century.  Oil wealth of the Arab countries has
encouraged and equipped Islam to go on the offensive everywhere,
particularly against the West and Hindu India which it perceives as
stumbling blocks in the way of its triumphant march towards world
domination.  Muslim seminaries everywhere are training terrorists for
doing service to Allah, and Muslim publishing houses are flooding the
markets with primary source materials on Islamic theology and history. 
The Quran is now available in authentic translations undertaken by
orthodox Muslim scholars.  The picture of Islam that emerges from this
material is being presented in the pages that follow.

**Comprehensive concept of *JihAd***

Modem writers by and large including modem apologists of Islam state
that *AyAts* on *jihAd* were “revealed” to the Prophet after his
migration to Medina.  They explain that *jihAd* was the last course to
which the Prophet was forced to resort because his “peaceful preaching
in Mecca” was not only rebuffed but also met with “persecution by the
Meccan pagans”.  They locate and give a count of the *Ayats* on *jihAd*
in the Medinan *surAhs*. Brigadier S.K. Malik has collected these
*Ayats* in the context of military strategy; they add up to 267 spread
over 17 *sUrahs* out of around 1457 *Ayats* spread over 23 *sUrahs*
which were received by the Prophet at Medina.”^([33](#33)) The rest of
the *Ayats* in the Quran - around 4754 in 91 Meccan *sUrahs* and around
1190 in 23 Medinan *sUrahs* -, the apologists insist, pertain to other
subjects such as beliefs, prayers, rituals, ethics, social rules and
regulations etc.

Brigadier Malik, however, does not agree with this concept of *jihAd*
which, according to him, is far more comprehensive.  Let us listen to
what he has to say on the subjects.  He writes:

The first step to this study is to understand the difference between
total strategy, that is Jehad, and military strategy.  *The term, Jehad,
so often confused with military strategy, is, in fact, the
near-equivalent of total or grand strategy or policy in execution*. 
Jehad entails the comprehensive direction and application of ‘power’
while military strategy deals only with the preparation for and
application of force.  *Jehad is a continuous and never-ending struggle
waged on all fronts including politica4 economic, social, psychological,
domestic, moral and spiritual to attain the object of policy*.  It aims
at a g the overall mission assigned to the Islamic State, and military
strategy is *one of the means* available to it to do so.  It is waged at
the individual as well as collective level; and at internal as well as
external front.

Waged in its true spirit, and *with multiple means* available to it, the
Islamic concept of total strategy has the capacity to produce direct
results.  Alternately, however, *it creates conditions conducive to the
military strategy to attain its objectives speedily and economically*. 
Military strategy thus draws heavily on the total strategy (Jehad) for
its successful application.  Any weakness or strength in the
formulation, direction or application of the total strategy would affect
military strategy in like manner. In the absence of Jehad, the
preparation for and application of ‘force’ to its best advantage would
be a matter of exception, not rule.  Conversely, optimum preparation and
application of military instrument forms an integral part of
Jehad.^([34](#34))

The Hadis collections, commentaries on the Quran (*tafsIr*), and
treatises on this specific Islamic lore also proclaim that the so-called
*Ayats* on *jihAd* “revealed” at Medina pertain to only one form of
*jihAd*, namely, *jihAd bil saif* - striving by the sword.  At the same
time they mention three other forms of *jihAd* as follows:

1.  *jihAd bil nafs*: striving by the heart or conscience, that is,
    cursing the KAfirs silently or in private if conditions do not
    permit cursing them publicly by means of speech and writing etc.

2.  *jihAd bil lasAn*: striving by the tongue or word of mouth, that is,
    preaching against the KAfirs publicly, pasting pejorative labels on
    them, and threatening them with the defeat and disgrace which await
    them in this world, and the doom hereafter.

3.  *jihAd bil qalam*: striving by the pen, that is, writing down on
    paper and other materials what one has harboured in one’s heart or
    harangued in one’s speeches or plans to say at the appropriate
    opportunity.  The written material is used for preservation of the
    Polemics as well as for its wider circulation.

Looked at from this comprehensive perspective, the whole of the Quran
comes out unmistakably as a compendium on *jihAd*.  It contains *Ayats*
which were “revealed” to the Prophet vis-à -vis *kufr* (unbelief) and
*shirk* (idolatry) while Islam was preached by him in private, and the
small number of converts were organized in a secret society.  These
*Ayats* were recited by the faithful individually and silently, or in
private gatherings of a few people.  They constitute *jihAd bil nafs*. 
Next, came the *jihAd bil lasAn* either joined to *jihAd bil qalam* or
undertaken separately or simultaneously.  That was when Allah commanded
the Prophet to preach Islam publicly after Muslims had functioned
underground for three years and grown in numbers as well as in terms of
self-confidence.  During the next ten years - from 613 CE to 622 CE -
the Quran grew considerably in size as well as subject-matter as it
included not only those *Ayats* which had been “revealed” before 613 but
also those which “came down” subsequently.

As regards *AyAts* which do not directly denounce or warn the
unbelievers, they are obviously of an auxiliary or supplementary
character; they are meant for marshalling the Muslims into a militant
fraternity (*ummah*) on the basis of a common belief system, a common
set of rituals, and a common code of conduct. *JihAd* in any form can be
practised only when there is an organized and disciplined community,
small or large, to practise it.  And *jihAd* in the service of the *only
god*, the *only prophet*, the *only book*, the *only dIn*, needs above
all an *only ummah*.

So each of the five pillars of Islam - the only themes elaborated in the
Quran - is a component of *jihAd*.  Among them the first and topmost
place goes to *shahAdah* or *Kalimah* (confession of faith, *ImAn*); it
is a loud and clear declaration of *jihAd* or war on the unbelievers,
made repeatedly and endlessly in every tenet and ritual of Islam.  The
other four pillars - *salAt* or *namAz* (prayers), *zakAt* (poor-tax),
*saum* or *rozah* (fasting during Ramzan), and *hajj* (pilgrimage to
Mecca) - are aimed at fortifying the first pillar in the hearts and
minds of the believers so that it becomes a passion and a war-cry.  In
short, we can conclude as follows:

Firstly, the Quran is an exposition of the Kalimah or proclamation of
*jihAd* in all its aspects, implications, dimensions and dynamics.

Secondly, it is an exhortation towards marshalling a gang of desperados
for imposing the *Kalimah* on the rest of mankind by every means
including the sword.

And *jihAd bil saif* prescribed in the *Ayats* “revealed” at Medina and
practised by the Prophet during the last ten years of his life from 622
CE to 632 CE - is only the crowning piece in the Quran.  Let the
crowning piece stand where it does in all its glamour and glory, but the
edifice which sustains it should not be viewed as something different or
alien or antagonistic to it.  The Quran as a whole is a unique piece of
unity which runs throughout its seemingly diverse themes.

***JihAd bil Saif***

The book by Brigadier S.K. Malik to which we have referred above is a
study of “striving by the sword” as elaborated in the Quran.  It carries
a Foreword by the late General Zia-ul-Haq who had seized power in
Pakistan in 1977 after being appointed the Chief of the Army by Z.A.
Bhutto, who was dictator of that country for more than a decade, and who
promoted the concept of “proxy” or “low intensity” war against India - a
war which continues in various forms and on several fronts till today. 
The General says:

*Jehad fi sabilallah* is not the exclusive domain of the professional
soldier, nor is it restricted to the application of military force
alone.

This book brings out with simplicity, clarity and precision the Quranic
philosophy on the application of military force within the context of
the totality that is *Jehad*.  The professional soldier in a Muslim
army, pursuing the goals of a Muslim state, *cannot* become
‘professional’ if in all his activities he does not take the ‘colour of
Allah’. The nonmilitary citizen of a Muslin state must, likewise, be
aware of the kind of soldier that his country must produce and the
*only* pattern of war that his country’s armed forces must
wage.^([35](#35))

Allah Bukhsh K. Brohi who served for some years as the Advocate-General
of Pakistan, and who was that country’s ambassador in India at one time,
has written a Preface for Malik’s book.  He makes the following points:

1.  The book is “a valuable contribution to Islamic
    jurisprudence”.^([36](#36))

2.  “The most glorious word in the Vocabulary of Islam is *Jehad*, a
    word which is untranslatable in English but, broadly speaking, means
    ‘striving’, ‘struggling’, ‘trying’ to advance the Divine causes or
    purposes.”^([37](#37))

3.  “Islam views the world as though it were bipolarised in two opposite
    camps - *Darul-Salam facing Darul-Harb* -; the first one is
    submissive to Allah’s purpose... but the second one is engaged in
    perpetuating defiance of Allah.”^([38](#38))

4.  “The idea of Ummah of Mohammad, the Prophet of Islam, is incapable
    of being realized within the framework of territorial states
    .”^([39](#39)) He being the Last Prophet, his “Ummah participates in
    this (i.e. prophetic) heritage by a set pattern of thought, belief
    and practice ... and supplies the spiritual principle of integration
    of mankind - a principle which is *supra-national, supra-racial,
    supra-linguistic* and *supra-territorial*”.^([40](#40))

5.  The role of Muslim on the earth “is to communicate the same message
    of Allah and his practice (Sunnah) which they have inherited from
    their Prophet and if there be any one who stifles their efforts ...
    he will be viewed as *constituting membership of Darul-Harb and
    liable to be dealt with as such*”.^([41](#41))

6.  “The law of war and peace in Islam is as old as the Quran itself...
    In Islamic international law this conduct \[of one state in relation
    to another\] is, strictly speaking, regulated between Muslims and
    non-Muslims, there being viewed from Islamic perspective, no other
    nation... *In Islam, of course, no nation is sovereign since Allah
    alone is the only sovereign in Whom all authority
    vests*.”^([42](#42))

Malik himself starts his exercise with an Author’s Note in which he
says:

1.  “The Holy Quran is a source of eternal guidance for
    mankind.”^([43](#43))

2.  “As a complete Code of Life, the Holy Quran gives us a philosophy of
    war as well. *This divine philosophy is an integral part of the
    Quranic ideology*.  It is a philosophy which is controlled and
    conditioned by the word of Allah from its conception till
    conclusion.”^([44](#44))

3.  “The Quranic military thought can be studied from several angles. 
    It has its historical, political, legalistic and moralistic
    ramifications.  This study is essentially a technical and
    professional research into the subject... Such a research is
    essential to put our subsequent study of the Muslim military history
    in its correct perspective.”^([45](#45))

The book has ten chapters and seven appendices attached to chapter nine
which deals with ‘The Application of the Quranic Military Thought’ with
particular reference to major battles fought by the Prophet - Badr,
Uhud, Khandaq, Hodaibiyyah, Tabuk. In Appendix I, however, the author
provides a complete fist of ‘The Holy Prophet’s Military Campaigns’ from
622 CE to 632 CE.  It comprises 26 *ghazwahs* (expeditions led by the
Prophet himself) and 55 *saryas* (expeditions sent by the Prophet under
other commanders) - a total of 81 campaigns.  He divides them into six
periods as follows:^([46](#46))

1.  Campaigns after migration to Medina (622 CE) and upto the Battle of
    Badr (624 CE) - 4 *ghazwahs* and 4 *saryas*, a total of 8.

2.  Campaigns from the Battle of Badr (624 CE) to the Battle of Uhud
    (625 CE) – 6 *ghazwahs* and 5 *saryas*, a total of 11.

3.  Campaigns from the Battle of Uhud (625 CE) to the Battle of Khandaq
    (627 CE) - 6 *ghazwahs* and 5 *saryas*, a total of 11.

4.  Campaigns from the Battle of Khandaq (627 CE) to the Conquest of
    Khyber (628 CE) - 5 *ghazwahs* and 14 *saryas*, a total of 19.

5.  Campaigns from the Conquest of Khyber (628 CE) to the Conquest of
    Mecca (630 CE) - 3 *ghazwahs* and 17 *saryas*, a total of 20.

6.  Campaigns from the conquest of Mecca (630 CE) to the time of the
    Prophet’s death (632 CE) - 2 *ghazwahs* and 10 *saryas*, a total
    of 12.

The most significant revelations from the viewpoint of *jihAd bil saif*
are provided by the author in Appendices H, IV, V and VI.  They relate
to the battles of Badr, Uhud, Khandaq, Hodaibiyyah and Tabuk - *sUrahs*
8, 3, 33, 48 and 9 respectively. In Appendix HI, he provides in great
detail ‘A Case Study of the Battle of Uhud’ from 11 March 625 CE when
the Muslim army marched out of Medina, to 24 March when the Quraish
retreated after inflicting a defeat on the faithful.  He lists 6
psychological shocks suffered by the Muslims during this battle.  These
shocks are supposed to carry lessons for Muslims when they are faced
with adversity.^([47](#47))

Now we can take up Malik’s thesis, chapter by chapter.

1\. *Introduction*

“Divine in conception, the Quranic philosophy of war ... can
particularly absorb a great deal of the modem military science at the
operational level, without sacrificing its own distinctive and
fundamental features and principles.”^([48](#48))The Quran “lays down
its own *mystic doctrine as to the three categories of human beings and
how they receive Allah’s message*”^([49](#49))  First, there are the
Faithful who believe in Allah’s revelations and his prophet (2.2-5;
5.17- 18).  Second, there are the -Unbelievers who “reject the Faith”
(2.7). Third, there are the Hypocrites who “outwardly profess Faith but
harbour treacherous designs inwardly” (2.16). The Quranic philosophy of
war has, therefore, to be studied with a view to how the Prophet
conducted his military campaigns with the help of the first category of
people, and against the other two categories.  For the Quran itself says
that the Prophet provides a beautiful pattern for Muslims to copy,
everywhere and at all times (33.21).^([50](#50))

2\. *Historical Perspective*

When the Prophet of Islam “voiced his Divinely-ordained mission in
Arabia” in 610 CE, there were four major global powers - Eastern Roman
empire, the Persian empire, India, and China.  The Romans who were
Christian and the Persians who were Zoroastrian, had been engaged in
mutual warfare from 480 CE onwards.  When the Romans suffered a defeat
at the hands of the Persians in 621 CE, the Arab Pagans and the Jews
were delighted.  But the Prophet predicted a victory for the Romans
(30.1-5), which the latter achieved in 628 CE.  At that time, the
Prophet had not yet turned against the Christians.  But after he started
operating as a warlord from Medina in 622 CE and succeeded in putting
down the Jews and the Pagan tribes of Arabia, he denounced the
Christians also.  In 629 CE, his army started measuring swords with the
Romans.  After the Prophet died in 632 CE, the Muslim armies started
battling simultaneously against both the Romans and the Persians. 
“Under the rising sun of Islam,” brags Malik, “the Persian empire
disappeared from the map of the world by 680 AD. By about that time, the
Muslims had conquered Syria, Egypt, Anatolia, Cyranica, Tripolatania and
Armenia from the Romans as well.”^([51](#51)) He does not say in so many
words that this triumphant sweep of the Islamic sword should be credited
to the “beautiful pattern” followed by the Muslim invaders.  But that is
what he means, following in the footsteps of earlier Muslim historians.

3\. *The Causes of War*

“The central theme behind the causes of war as spelt out by the Holy
Quran, was the cause of Allah (2.190, 244; 4.84).”^([52](#52)) It was
essentially a war fought by the Faithful against the Unbelievers (4.76).
Malik goes on to summarise what another Muslim scholar, Dr. Hamid Ullah,
has stated on the subject.  “In his opinion war could be entered upon if
the enemy physically invaded the Muslim territory or behaved in an
unbearable and provocative manner short of actual invasion.  War could
also be waged for punitive, retaliatory and preventive purposes. 
Permissible also would it be to resume a war stopped temporarily. A
Muslim state could also enter into armed hostilities in sympathy with
their brethren living in another \[no-Muslim\] state...”^([53](#53)) So
the “cause of Allah” gives a very wide latitude to the Faithful to
unleash a war against the Unbelievers on any pretext, whenever the
former find or feel that they are in a position of strategic or tactical
advantage over the latter.

4\. *The Object of War*

The Quran commands the Faithful to keep on fighting “until there is no
more tumult or oppression, and there prevails justice and faith in
Allah” (2.193; 8.40). Here the language is deceptive as in all cases of
double-speak.  The words “tumult and oppression” stand for opposition to
Islam, for whatever reason.  So the Muslims are to continue waging wars
so long as there are non-Muslims anywhere in the world.  Of course,
Muslims are free to sign treaties of peace with non-Muslims whenever
such treaties serve their purpose.  But they are also free to violate
the treaties of peace whenever they find war more profitable than peace;
they can always accuse the Unbelievers of planning treachery
(8.56-58). “The Book, however, kept the doors of compassion and
forgiveness open for those who offered genuine repentance”, that is,
embraced Islam under duress (9.3, 5, 11).^([54](#54)) Another concession
is reserved for those who, though defeated, refuse to become
Muslim. They can pay *jizyah* and live as *zimmis* (non-citizens) in an
Islamic state.^([55](#55))But no quarter is to be given to those who are
suspected of being either “hypocrites” or “hidden enemies”.  They are to
be slaughtered straight-away (4.89, 91).^([56](#56)) And these
guidelines laid down by Allah in the Quran and practised by the Prophet
in his own life-time, are valid for all times and places in a permanent
war which is still being waged by the Faithful on many fronts.

5\. *The Nature and Dimensions of War*

“The dimensions given to war by the Holy Quran,” observes Malik, “take
into account the divine purpose behind the creation of Man and guide him
to his ultimate destiny... the Book commands the Muslims to wage their
war with the spirit of a religious duty and obligation (2.216)… it also
looks upon war as something virtuous for the Faithful and beneficial for
the rest of humanity.”^([57](#57))To those who fight for the “cause of
Allah”, the Quran promises “generous heavenly assistance” (47.7; 3.160;
4.22-23).^([58](#58))In fact, this “divine war” is a profitable bargain
also because Allah guarantees an eternal paradise to those who engage in
it (66.10-13; 9.111).^([59](#59))  At the same time, Allah is committed
to punish with the torments of an everlasting hell those Believers who
refuse to participate in this “holy war” (9.24, 38-39, 81-82).  There
are, however, certain tests which Believers who aspire to obtain
heavenly help, have to pass. Allah expects his flock to remain firm in
their Faith even if they suffer defeat or face adversity (2.214;
3.141-42).^([60](#60))Staying at home when a “holy war” is on or running
away from the battlefield serves no purpose because death is inevitable,
and it is better to die for “Allah’s cause” than without hope for his
grace (2.28, 218; 3.156-57; 4.74, 77; 22.58).^([61](#61)) The “divine
reward” varies according to the “performance of the Believers”.  Those
who participate in the “divine war” stand higher in the eyes of Allah
than those who stay at home even if the latter are pious otherwise and
practise other tenets of Islam. (4.95-96). And the highest favour from
Allah goes to those who are slain in Allah’s cause; for they are not
dead but very much alive in Allah’s presence, that is, in paradise
(2.154; 3.157, 169-70).^([62](#62))

Strangely enough, Malik does not mention in this context the worldly
rewards like plunder including prisoners of war who can be sold as
slaves, and living on the fat of the lands conquered and labour of the
subjugated people.  He has a lot to hide because Islam has to be
presented as a “noble and humanitarian” religion and it is no more
*correct* to glorify what was glorified till only the other day.

6\. *The Ethics of War*

This is the briefest chapter in Malik’s vociferous book on the “divine
war”.  He cites only four verses from the Quran, three of which exhort
Muslims “not to commit aggression” (2.190-91, 194) and the fourth one
(47.4) recommends “generosity or ransom” after the Faithful have had
their fill of slaughter and taken prisoners.  It is obvious that he has
not found any verses about the “ethics of war” in the Quran, because he
is palpably dishonest in interpreting the verses he has cited.  Yet he
concludes, “A Muslim’s cause of war is just, noble, righteous and
humanitarian. A victory in Islam is a victory of Islam.  So noble and
humanitarian a cause cannot be allowed to be attained through inhuman
and undignified ways.”^([63](#63)) Instead of delivering a sermon, he
should have cited some verses of the Quran which sound “just, noble,
righteous and humanitarian”.  Or has he made a mistake by talking about
ethic of war vis-à-vis the Quran?  In any case, we see in the next
chapter the ethics which the Quran stands for.

7\. *The Strategy of War*

“Instructions pertaining to the divine theory of military strategy are
found in the revelations pertaining to the battles of Badr, Ohad,
Khandaq, Tabuk and Hodaibiyya” (3.124-26; 8.9-10, 11, 59-60). All these
“revelations” urge the Faithful “*to prepare for war to the utmost in
order to strike terror into the hearts of the enemies…*”^([64](#64))

Malik elaborates as follows:

Terror struck into the hearts of the enemies is not only a means, it is
the end in itself… It is the point where the means and the end meet and
merge.  Terror is not a means of imposing decision upon the enemy.  It
is the decision we wish to impose upon him...

Terror... can be instilled only if the opponent’s Faith is destroyed. 
Psychological dislocation is temporary; spiritual dislocation is
permanent.  Psychological dislocation can be produced by a physical act
but this does not hold good of the spiritual dislocation.  To instill
terror into the hearts of the enemy, it is essential, in the ultimate
analysis, to dislocate his Faith ... ^([65](#65))

Does it sound diabolical?  Not to Muslim ears, for sure.  Terrorism in
all its forms has been the most effective weapon in the armoury of Islam
ever since its advent.  Great terrorists have been the heroes whom
Muslims cherish the most.  And it is terror which has seen to it that
the victims do not remember what they were subjected to before they were
forced into the fold of the Faithful.  The victims are expected and
exhorted to become - and do become in most cases - terrorists in their
own turn!

8\. *The Conduct of War*

“The Holy Quran wishes to see the Muslim armies always in an uppermost,
dominating and commanding position over those of the adversaries
(9.5)... The Book wants the Muslims to retain the initiative to
themselves through bold, aggressive but calculated and deliberate
planning and conduct of war.”^([66](#66)) The Muslims are to be
harangued constantly and roused to commit aggression again and again
(8.65). A determined minority always succeeds if the victims of
aggression do not understand the game, even if the latter are larger in
number and more prosperous.  That is how the Christians succeeded in the
Roman empire, the Muslims in Arabia, the Communists in Russia and China,
and the Nazis in Germany.  It is as simple as that. And Malik does not
have more than that to say in this chapter except for invoking the Quran
to call upon the Believers “to display the highest standards of mutual
love, affection, respect and concern” (3.200) and warn them “to guard
against disunity among their ranks” (8.46).^([67](#67))

But history of Islam is a witness that the call as well as the warning
failed whenever Muslims could not target or were incapable of fighting
Unbelievers. Prof.  K.S. Lal observes, “Such is the important place
given to violence in Islam that when there are no non-Muslims to fight,
the Muslims call one another Kafir and fight Jihad.”^([68](#68)) Malik
does not deal with this boomerang as is the case with other Muslim
savants who use it in order to explain away the defeats and decline of
Islam.

9\. *The Application of Quranic Military Thought*

This chapter with seven appendices deals with the career of the Prophet
as a warlord from 622 CE to 632 CE.  Malik and Muslim scholars of his
ilk want us to believe that the Muslim armies succeeded in these
campaigns because they practised the strategies of war reposited in the
Quran.  This is a Big Lie.  They succeeded because the Pagan Arabs lived
in a series of tribal settlements and did not understand Muhammad’s
game, while Muslims at Medina built up a formidable war machine with the
help of plunder obtained in raids, and by recruiting desperadoes from
all over Arabia through lure of loot and bloodlust.  Later on, the
militarized Arabs succeeded in overrunning the Persian and Roman empires
because the two empires had exhausted themselves through mutual warfare
for a thousand years.

First of all, it has to be pointed our that the Prophet did not evolve
the so-called strategies on the eve of battles he fought.  The
strategies were “revealed” to him after the battles were over.  Which
means that in every case, the strategy was an after-thought on the part
of Muhammad.  The only credit he can take is as a perceptive person who
learnt from his experience, while the Arab Pagans failed to do so. 
Secondly, Malik and his tribe have to explain why the same strategies
failed when it came to Christianized Europe, China and India.  In
Europe, Muslim armies were driven out of Spain and, later on, from the
Balkans.  In China, those armies failed even to make a dent.  In India,
the Muslim sword took 500 years to reach Delhi, and another 500 to sweep
over the South.  But it failed to convert the country to Islam even
after invoking the Quran and practising its strategies for more than a
thousand years.  Lastly, what happened to those strategies when Muslims
were faced with the Mongols of Chingiz Khan and Halaku who massacred
millions of Muslims, sacked many a metropolis of Islamdom and finished
the Abbasid Caliphate by beating the last Caliph to pulp?  And why did
those strategies fail to work when a resurgent Christian imperialism
swept over the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean, and crushed Turkish
and Arabian navies from the fifteen the century of the Christian era
onwards?  Why did the mighty Muslim empires crumble and disappear from
the map when faced with superior art of warfare developed by modem
Europe?

10.  *Summary and Major Conclusions*

This chapter in Malik’s book has nothing new to say.  He repeats what he
has already said in the earlier chapters.  He, however, continues in
this chapter the message that the Quran is a Manual on War.  That is
what we also say, except that it is not the only Manual of its kind nor
the best known to the history of mankind.  There are many other Manuals
in comparison to which the Quran stands reduced to no more than childish
prattle, and which do not need an Almighty Allah or his Last Prophet for
elucidating what has always been and remains a mundane theme.  Looking
at the advances made by the modem art of warfare, the Quran as a Manual
on War can serve only one purpose -it can spread an epidemic of madness
among the Muslim masses so that creed-drunk mullahs and cynical
adventurers can use them as cannon-fodder in private bids for power and
pelf.  There can be nothing more foolish than presenting madrasas and
masjids as training camps for warriors who will conquer the world for
Islam.  These institutions can train only terrorists and assassins who
waste their own lives and inflict wanton suffering on their innocent
victims, here and there.  They can never match the military academies of
the modem world or the arsenals produced by armament industries in the
advanced countries.

**The Ideology of Islam**

Taking into account the character of the basic text of Islam - the Quran
- as a Manual on War, Islam cannot pass as a spiritual doctrine in any
sense of the term.  On the contrary, it stands exposed as a political
ideology of predatory imperialism like

Christianity, Communism and Nazism with all of which its shares its
source, namely, the Bible, as well as many psychopathological traits. 
Professor K.S. Lal has studied and taught the history of Islam in India
for the last more than fifty years.  He has written a dozen books,
starting with his famous *History of the Khaljis* (1950).  In his latest
book (1999), he has reviewed the history of Islam in India in the light
of Islamic scriptures - the Quran, the Hadis, the Sunnah, and the
Shariat.  His characterization of Islam as an ideology is being
presented below:

1.  “Islam is understood more correctly when it is called
    Muhammadanism.  Muhammad is the central figure in Islam.  He
    controls the hearts and minds of all Muslims
    everywhere...”^([69](#69)) 

2.  “Fundamentalism is not accidental but essential to Islam… It sees
    unchangeability as strength.  That is why the word reform is so
    abhorrent to Muslim thinkers and religious leaders ...”^([70](#70))

3.  “In Islam truth is established by the sword... dissent is hated as
    heresy and stamped out as infidelity ...^([71](#71)) early medieval
    Indian Muslim chronicles mention the sword as the greatest harvester
    of converts. Islam was made to spread, as the old saying goes, with
    Quran in one hand and sword in the other.  Sword was freely used in
    forcing people to become Musalmans…”^([72](#72))

4.  “There is a uniqueness about Islam.  Non-Muslims are to be converted
    to Islam freely.  But once a Kafir becomes a Musalman, he has to
    remain one for ever thereafter.  He is not permitted to renounce
    Islam or revert to his original faith.  Punishment for such apostasy
    is death...”^([73](#73))

5.  “Islam lacks any doctrine of coexistence... Muslim madrasas cannot
    shed their Kafir complex... The present adjustment of coexistence is
    a temporary expediency in India...^([74](#74)) It is the teaching of
    Islam to shun contact with non-Muslims except with a view to
    converting them… Muslim separatism expresses itself in many
    ways…”^([75](#75))

6.  “In Islam all human beings are not treated as equals.  It makes a
    distinction between Muslims and non-Muslims.  A non-Muslim is a
    Kafir, an inferior being.  Non-Muslims do not enjoy any human right
    in this world; they cannot enter Paradise after
    death…^([76](#76)) Islam has two sets of principles of morality,
    ethics and justice: one is for Muslims and the other for
    non-Muslims.  Sincerity, well-wishing and brotherhood are for the
    believers and faithful…^([77](#77)) Islamic scriptures recommend
    setting Muslims against non-Muslims, believers against infidels to
    defend Islam and destroy unbelief.  Individual and group killings of
    Kafirs is encouraged…”^([78](#78))

7.  “Islam recommends Jihad or permanent war on adherents of other
    religions… This makes Islam a totalitarian and terrorist cult which
    it has remained ever since its birth.^([79](#79))… There have been
    wars but wars fought by Muslims are in the service of Allah.  This
    gives Islamic belligerency divine sanction and terrorism becomes a
    divine command…”^([80](#80))

8.  “Like proselytization, desecrating and demolishing the temples of
    non-Muslims is also central to Islam.  Iconoclasm derives its
    justification from the Quranic revelations and the Prophet’s Sunnah
    or practice ...^([81](#81)) non-Muslims cannot reclaim their
    desecrated temples.  This is the law of Islam...”^([82](#82))

9.  “Islam has all the ingredients of imperialism found anywhere in the
    world in any age... ^([83](#83)) By destroying the national spirit
    of non-Arab Muslims, Islam has demolished the Asian centres of
    civilization such as Egypt, Iran and India...”^([84](#84))

10. “The Islamic principles of denigrating the non-Muslims, of
    aggression and violence against them - principles that perpetually
    incite to riot and rapine - have boomeranged.  However brave face
    the fundamentalists may try to put up, the victims of Islam today
    are by and large Muslims themselves.  The Prophet must have known
    that violence begets violence and repeatedly exhorted Muslims not to
    kill one another after his death.  He also had a premonition that
    violence of Islam against non-Muslims will be met with a backlash. 
    There is a *hadis* in *Sahih Muslim* which says that once the Rasul
    opined that Islam which began in poverty in Medina would one day
    return to Medina in poverty. ‘Just as a snake crawls back and coils
    itself into a small hole, so will Islam be hunted out from
    everywhere and return to be confined to Mecca and Medina.’  The
    increasing power of the non-Muslim West and the disenchantment of
    Muslim dissidents point towards that possibility, howsoever
    remote.”^([85](#85))

Prof Lal has presented many other facets of Islam such as that Islam has
no word for democracy; that secularism and Islam are mutually exclusive;
that Islam can set up only a theocratic state; that Islam has
institutionalised slavery and degraded women; and that Islam has laid
waste many countries.  But here we have been discussing Islam as “a
religion of peace”.  
 

**Footnotes: **

^([1](#1a))T.P. Hughes, *Dictionary of Islam*, op. cit., p. 561.  
 

^([2](#2a))Ibid.  
 

^([3](#3a))Ibid., p. 628.  
 

^([4](#4a))Ibid., P. 220.  
 

^([5](#5a))Ibid., p. 423.  
 

^([6](#6a))Ibid., p. 204.  
 

^([7](#7a))Ibid., p. 419.  
 

^([8](#8a))Ibid., p. 84.  
 

^([9](#9a))*Life of Mahamet*, op. cit., p. 79.  Italics in the
original.  
 

^([10](#10a))*Mohammad*, op. cit., p. 235.  
 

^([11](#11a))*Mohammed and the Rise of Islam*, op. cit., pp. 116-17. 
Emphasis added.  
 

^([12](#12a))Ibid., pp. 161-62.  Emphasis added.  
 

^([13](#13a))Ibid., pp. 154-55.  Emphasis added.  
 

^([14](#14a))Cited in Ram Swarup, *Understanding Islam Through Hadis*,
op. cit., pp. 126-27.  
 

^([15](#15a))Cited in Ibid., p. 127.  
 

^([16](#16a))See Sita Ram Goel, *Hindu Temples: What Happened to Them*,
Second Enlarged Edition, New Delhi, 1993, Volume II, Section IV, Chapter
15, ‘Muhammad and the Meccans’, pp. 327-40.  
 

^([17](#17a))H. Lammens, *Islam: Beliefs and Institutions*, London,
1929, New impression, 1968, p. 206.  
 

^([18](#18a))Ibid., pp. 214-15.  Italics in the original.  
 

^([19](#19a))Ibid., p. 209.  
 

^([20](#20a))Ibid., pp. 214-15.  
 

^([21](#21a))Harsh Narain, *Myths of Composite Culture and Equality of
Religions*, Voice of India, New Delhi, 1990 (reprinted 1997), pp.
57-59.  
 

^([22](#22a))Ibid., pp. 59-60.  
 

^([23](#23a))K.S. Lal, *Theory and Practice of Muslim State in India*,
op. cit., pp. 285-86.  
 

^([24](#24a))Ibid., p. 286.  
 

^([25](#25a))Ibid., p. 288.  
 

^([26](#26a))Ibid., p.289.  
 

^([27](#27a))Ibid., p. 120.  
 

^([28](#28a))Ibid., p. 289.  
 

^([29](#29a))Ibid., p. 25.  
 

^([30](#30a))Ibid., pp.22-23.  
 

^([31](#31a))Ibid., p. 41.  
 

^([32](#32a))Ibid., p. 293.  
 

^([33](#33a))*The Quranic Concept of War*, op. cit., pp. 149-50.  
 

^([34](#34a))Ibid., pp. 54-55, emphasis added.  
 

^([35](#35a))Ibid., p. i, italics in the original.  
 

^([36](#36a))Ibid., p. iii.  
 

^([37](#37a))Ibid., pp. iii-iv, italics in the original.  
 

^([38](#38a))Ibid., p. viii, italics in the original.  
 

^([39](#39a))Ibid., p. x.  
 

^([40](#40a))Ibid., p. xi-xii, emphasis in the original.  
 

^([41](#41a))*Ibid.*, p. xii, emphasis in the original.  
 

^([42](#42a))Ibid., pp. xii-xiii, emphasis added.  
 

^([43](#43a))Ibid., p. xvii.  
 

^([44](#44a))Ibid., pp. xvii-xviii, emphasis added.   
 

^([45](#45a))Ibid., p. xviii.  
 

^([46](#46a))Ibid., pp. 99-103.  
 

^([47](#47a))Ibid., pp. 109-26.  
 

^([48](#48a))Ibid., p. 3.  
 

^([49](#49a))Ibid., p. 4, emphasis added.  
 

^([50](#50a))Ibid., p. 5.  
 

^([51](#51a))Ibid., p. 15.  
 

^([52](#52a))Ibid., p. 20.  
 

^([53](#53a))Ibid., pp. 23-24.  
 

^([54](#54a))Ibid., pp. 30 and 32.  
 

^([55](#55a))Ibid., p. 33.  
 

^([56](#56a))Ibid., pp. 34-35.  
 

^([57](#57a))Ibid., pp. 37-38.  
 

^([58](#58a))Ibid., pp. 38-39.  
 

^([59](#59a))Ibid., pp. 39-40.  
 

^([60](#60a))Ibid., pp. 40-41.  
 

^([61](#61a))Ibid., pp. 41-43.  
 

^([62](#62a))Ibid., pp. 42-43.  
 

^([63](#63a))Ibid., p. 50.  
 

^([64](#64a))Ibid., p. 58, emphasis in the original.  
 

^([65](#65a))Ibid., P. 60, emphasis added.  
 

^([66](#66a))Ibid., p. 66.  
 

^([67](#67a))Ibid., p. 69.  
 

^([68](#68a))*Theory and Practice of Muslim State in India*, op. cit.,
p. xii.  
 

^([69](#69a))Ibid., p. 337.  
 

^([70](#70a))Ibid., p. 10.  
 

^([71](#71a))Ibid., p. 34.  
 

^([72](#72a))Ibid., p. 285-89.  
 

^([73](#73a))Ibid., p. 297.  
 

^([74](#74a))Ibid., p. 255.  
 

^([75](#75a))Ibid., p. 256.  
 

^([76](#76a))Ibid., p. 251-52.  
 

^([77](#77a))Ibid., P. 15.  
 

^([78](#78a))Ibid., p. 78.  
 

^([79](#79a))Ibid.9 p. 5.  
 

^([80](#80a))Ibid., p. 55-56.  
 

^([81](#81a))Ibid., p. 305.  
 

^([82](#82a))Ibid., p. 307.  
 

^([83](#83a))Ibid., p. 68.  
 

^([84](#84a))Ibid., p. 276.  
 

^([85](#85a))Ibid., p. 296-97.

   

------------------------------------------------------------------------


