+++
title = "18 (6) THE JUDGEMENT BIMAL CHANDRA BASAK May 17 85. Chandmal Chopra & Anr. Versus State of West Bengal"

+++
**(6)**

**THE JUDGEMENT**

**BIMAL CHANDRA BASAK**

**May 17          85.**  
**Chandmal Chopra & Anr.**  
**Versus**  
**State of West Bengal**

The Court: I have heard and disposed of this application on the 13th of
May 1985 when I indicated that I shall give my reasons later.

**Facts:**

2\. This is an application under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India praying for a Writ of Mandamus directing the State of West Bengal
to declare each copy of the Koran, whether in the original Arabic or in
its translation in any of the languages, as forfeited to the Government.

3\. This application was first moved before Khastgir J. The learned
Judge entertained the application, gave directions for notice and for
affidavits.  Thereafter for some reason or other the learned Judge chose
not to proceed in this matter any further and released this matter from
her list.  Such reason cannot be found out from the records of this case
though the learned Judge had chosen to take an unprecedented step by
giving an interview to the Press regarding the same of which I cannot
and do not take any notice.  The Chief Justice thereafter assigned this
matter to me.  As the learned Judge after giving directions has chosen
not to hear this matter any further and as this matter has been assigned
to me, I have recalled all the earlier orders and/or directions passed
and heard the matter afresh as Court Application on the question of
issue of the Rule nisi, if any.  Accordingly the petitioner no. I who is
appearing in person made submissions and prayed for issue of a Rule.

4\. The learned Advocate General has appeared for the State and with the
leave of this Court the learned Attorney General has made submissions on
behalf of Union of India.

5\. The petitioners have, in this petition, quoted some passages from
the English translation of Koran and thereafter made the following
averments:

The offending expressions contained in the Koran and quoted in
paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 above are not so offensive in their translation in
which they are so quoted as they are in the original verses in Arabic or
in Urdu, the very sound of whose inimitable symphony not only sends the
Muslims to tears and ecstasy but arouses in them the worst communal
passions and religious fanaticism, which have manifested themselves in
murder, slaughter, loot, arson, rape and destruction or desecration of
holy places in historical times as also in contemporary period not only
in India but almost all over the world. (paragraph 8).

In this way, the publication of the Koran in the original Arabic as well
as in its translations in various languages including Urdu, Hindi,
Bengali, English, etc., amounts to commission of offences punishable u/s
153A and 295A of the Indian Penal Code and accordingly each copy of the
book must be declared as forfeited by the respondent u/s 95 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. (paragraph 9).

**Submissions - Petitioner**

6\. The petitioner in his submission has repeated what has been stated
in the petition.  He has submitted that the provisions of Sections 153A
and 295A of the Indian Penal Code are attached and accordingly the
respondent should be directed to take action under Section 95 of the
Criminal Procedure Code.  He has submitted that Koran seeks to destroy
idols.  It encourages crime and invites violence.  It is also against
morality.  It outrages the religious feelings of non-Muslims.  It
insults all religions excepting Islam.  It encourages hatred,
disharmony, feelings of enmity between different religious communities
in India.

7\. The relevant provisions of Section 95 of the Criminal Procedure Code
(hereinafter referred to as Cr. P.C.) and Sections 153A, 295 and 295A of
the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as I.P.C.), are set out
hereinbelow:

**Cr. P.C. - See. 95**: “(1) Where (a) any newspaper, or book (b) any
document, wherever printed, appears to the State Government to contain
any matter the publication of which is punishable under section 124A or
section 153A or section 153B or section 292 or section 293 or section
295A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the State Government may, by
notification, stating the grounds of its opinion, declare every copy of
the issue of the newspaper containing such matter, and every copy of
such book or other document to be forfeited to Government, and thereupon
any police officer may seize the same wherever found in India and any
Magistrate may by warrant authorise any police officer not below the
rank of sub-inspector to enter upon and search for the same in any
premises where any copy of such issue or any such book or other document
may be or may be reasonably suspected to be.

\(2\) In this section and in section 96  

   (a) newspaper and book have the same meaning as in the Press and
Registration of Book Act, 1867 (25 of 1867).  

   (b) document includes any painting, drawing or photograph or other
visible representation.

\(3\) No order passed or action taken under this section shall be called
in question in any court otherwise than in accordance with the
provisions of section 96.”

**I.P.C. - Sec. 153A**: “Whoever by words, either spoken or written or
by visible representations, or otherwise, promotes or attempts to
promote feelings of enmity or hatred between different classes of Her
Majesty’s subjects, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend
to two years, or with fine or with both.”

**I.P.C. - Section 295**: “Whoever destroys, damages or defiles any
place of worship, or any object held sacred by any class of persons with
the intention of thereby insulting the religion of any class of persons
or with the knowledge that any class of persons is likely to consider
such destruction, damage or defilement as an insult to their religion,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.”

**Section 29SA**: “Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of
outraging the religious feelings of any class of His Majesty’s subjects,
by words, either spoken or written, or by visible representations
insults or attempts to insult the religion or the religious beliefs of
that class, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.”

8\. The petitioner no. 1 has addressed the Court in person and placed
the petition and drawn my attention to the relevant provisions of the
Act referred to above, and has submitted that it is a fit and proper
case where such an order is to be passed against the Government
directing them to take action under Section 95 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.

**Submission - State**

9\. The learned Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State has
placed before me Section 295 of the Indian Penal Code which I have set
out above.

10\. The learned Advocate General has submitted that the Koran is a
sacred book of the Muslim community and making an order of the nature as
prayed for would amount to abolition of this religion.  Such a prayer
offends the provisions of Section 295 of the I.P.C. and, therefore, the
question of invoking jurisdiction of this Court in respect of Section
295A of the I.P.C. cannot and does not arise.  In this connection he has
relied on a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of *Veerabadram
Chettiar* – vs - *V. Ramaswami Naicker & Ors.* reported in A.I.R. 1958
S.C. 1032 at page 1035, paragraph 7. The relevant passage is set out
hereinbelow:

“The learned Judge in the court below, has given much too restricted a
meaning to the words ‘any object held sacred by any class of persons,’
by holding that only idols in temples or idols carried in processions on
festival occasions, are meant to be included within those words.  There
are no such express words of limitation in S. 295 of the Indian Penal
Code and in our opinion the learned Judge has clearly misdirected
himself in importing those words of limitation.  Idols are only
illustrative of those words.  A sacred book, like the Bible, or the
Koran, or the Granth Saheb, is clearly within the ambit of those general
words.  If the courts below were right in their interpretation of the
crucial words in S. 295 the burning or otherwise destroying or defiling
such sacred books, will not come within the purview of the penal
statute.  In our opinion, placing such a restricted interpretation on
the words of such general import, is against all established canons of
construction.  Any object however trivial or destitute of real value in
itself, if regarded as sacred by any class of persons would come within
the meaning of the penal section.  Nor is it absolutely necessary that
the object, in order to be held sacred should have been actually
worshipped.  An object may be held sacred by a class of persons without
being worshipped by them.  It is clear, therefore, that the courts below
were rather cynical in so lightly brushing aside the religious
susceptibilities of that class of persons to which the complainant
claims to belong.  The section has been intended to respect the
religious susceptibilities of persons of different religious persuasions
or creeds.  Courts have got to be very circumspect in such matters, and
to pay due regard to the feelings and religious emotions of different
classes of persons with different beliefs, irrespective of the
consideration whether or not they share those beliefs, or whether they
are rational or otherwise, in the opinion of the court.”

Mr. Advocate General has submitted that the Koran has been in existence
for a long time.  No grievance has been made at any point of time by any
one to the effect as the petitioner is seeking to do before this Court. 
He has submitted that this Court is not entitled to go into this matter
as this relates to a question of religion itself.  He has further
submitted that this is a motivated application with the intention of
destroying communal harmony.

He has relied on a decision in the case of *Public Prosecutor* - vs -
*P. Ramaswami* reported in 1966 (1) C.L.J., 672.

**Submission - Union of India.**

12\. Mr. Attorney General appearing on behalf of Union of India assisted
by M.K. Banerjee Additional Solicitor General has adopted the submission
of Mr. Advocate General and further added as follows:

He has referred to a passage from the Encyclopaedia Britannica at pages
444 and 445.  He has submitted that the Koran is a basic text.  It is
the basis and foundation of the Muslim religion.  This cannot be made
justiciable in a court of law.  The challenge of the petitioner amounts
to not only an insult to the Muslim religion as such but against all
other religions also.  He has further submitted that certain passages
taken out of context cannot be referred to for invoking the writ
jurisdiction of this Court.  He has also relied on a passage from *The
Life and Letters of Raja Rammohan Roy* written by Collet.

13\. He has also relied on a decision in the case of *Krishna Singh* -
vs - *Mathura & Ors.* reported in A.I.R. 1980 S.C. 707 at page 712
paragraph 17.

14\. He has also relied on several passages from Fyzee and Mulla’s 18th
Edition on Mohammedan Law.

15\. He has also relied on a decision in the case of *Ramjilal Modi* -
vs - *State of U.P.* reported in A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 620, paragraph 9.

 16. Next.  Mr. Attorney General has drawn my attention to the Preamble
of the Constitution of India and Article 25 thereof which are set out
hereinbelow:

> Preamble :  WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to
> constitute India into a SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC
> REPUBLIC and to secure to all its citizens Liberty of thought,
> expression, belief, faith and worship.

**Art. 25**: (1) Subject to public order, morality and health and to the
other provisions of this Part, all persons are equally entitled to
freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and
propagate religion.

17\. He has submitted that in view of such provisions of the
Constitution the Court has no such power to give any such direction.

18\. He has further relied on a passage from Halsbury’s Laws of England
(4th Edition, Vol. 18, paragraphs 1692 and 1693).

19\. He has further submitted that this is supposed to be a public
interest litigation and this Court should be very cautious about the
same.  In this connection he has drawn my attention to the decision of
the Supreme Court in *Bandhu Mukti Morcha* - vs - *Union of India and
others* reported in 1984(3) S.C. 161 at 231 paragraphs 59 to 67.

**Reply**

20\. The petitioner in his reply repeated his submissions.

**Decision**

21\. Before examining the scope of the contention of the petitioners, it
is necessary to ascertain the scope and importance of the Koran as
such.  It is the basic text of the Muslim religion.  Like all other
religions it proceeds on the basis that it is the only true religion and
that those who do not follow that religion are not the true devotees of
God.

22\. As observed by the Supreme Court in the case of S. Veerabadram
Chettiar - vs - V. Ramaswami Naicker (supra), as followed in the Madras
decision of Public Prosecutor vs.  Ramaswami (supra) the Koran, like the
Bible and the Granth Saheb is a sacred book.  It is an object held
sacred by Muslims.  Allah is considered as the God.

23\. As pointed out in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, the Koran is the
sacred scripture of the religion of Islam.  It is a book in the Arabic
language containing about 80,000 words.  It is composed of 114 suras, or
chapters, of varying size.  The first sura, entitled “The Opening”, is
in the form of a short devotional prayer; it is constantly so used,
ceremonially and otherwise, and by comparativists has been called “the
Lord’s Prayer of the Muslims”.  It is addressed to God.  The remainder
of the Koran is in the form of an address from God, he either speaking
himself, sometimes in the first person, or else, through the imperative
*ul*, “say” which introduces many verses and passages and some suras,
ordering that the words that follow be proclaimed.  The subject matter
is varied; passages of one or several verses, or of an entire sura, deal
in diverse ways with many topics.  It speaks about oneness and
omniscience and supreme majesty of God.  The style at time fiery, is
powerful, the general tone deeply moralist and theocentric; the whole
reverberates with a passionate demand for obedience to the will of a
transcendent but near and mightily active God.

24\. In the faith of Muslims, and according to the theory propounded in
the book itself, the Koran is the revealed word of God.  This postulates
God, and indeed the kind of God who has something to say to us and who
takes the initiative in saying it.  Religion in this view is not a human
searching after God; it is God who acts, and is known because and
insofar as, and only as, he chooses to disclose himself.

25\. In the Muslim view, God created the universe, ordaining its
processes and controlling them.  He prescribed a pattern or order, which
nature must obey.  For man also he obtained a pattern of behaviour, but
unlike the rest of the natural world, man was made conscious and free,
to choose whether or not he will conform to God’s decrees.  There is for
mankind a right way to live; it is the Koran that seeks to make this
known.

26\. For Muslims the Koran is the *ipsissima verba* of God himself.  It
is God speaking to man not merely in 7th century Arabia to Mohammed but
from all eternity to every man throughout the world including the
individual Muslim as he reads it or devoutly holds it.  It is eternal
breaking through into time, the unknowable disclosed, the transcendent
entering history and remaining here, available to mortals to handle and
to appropriate, the divine become apparent.  To memorise it, as many
Muslims have ceremonially done, and perhaps even to quote from it, as
every Muslim does daily in his formal prayers and otherwise, is to enter
into some sort of communion with ultimate reality.

27\. There is another aspect of this matter.  There are various
interpretations of different verses of the Koran.  As pointed out by
S.D. Collet in *The Life and Letters of Raja Rammohan Roy* two verses of
the Koran quoted by Raja Rammohan Roy are interpreted differently by
some modem scholars.  So far as verse of the Koran under IX.5. is
concerned according to a scholar, it does not refer to general massacre
of all polytheists and idolaters, that is all non-Muslims, but it speaks
only of those non-Muslims who were waging war at the time with the
Muslims treacherously by breaking previous agreement.

28\. According to the *Mulla on Mohammedan Law* there are four sources
of Islamic Law, one of which is the ‘Koran’.  The word ‘Islam’ means
peace and submission.  In its religious sense it denotes submission to
the will of God and in its secular sense the establishment of peace. 
The word ‘Muslim’ in Arabic is the active participle of ‘As-salam’ which
is acceptance of the faith and of which the noun of action is ‘Islam’. 
In English the word ‘Muslim’ is used both as a Noun and an Adjective and
denotes both the persons professing faith and something peculiar to
Muslims, such as law, culture, etc.  The Muslims believe in the divine
origin of their holy book which according to their belief was revealed
to the prophet by the angel Gabriel.  The ‘Koran’ is Al-furcan, i.e.,
one showing truth from falsehood and right from wrong.  The Koran
contains about 6000 verses but not more than 200 verses deal with legal
principles.  The portion which was revealed to the prophet at Mecca is,
singularly free of legal matter and contains the philosophy of life and
religion and particularly ‘Islam’.  As the Koran is of divine origin, so
are the religion and its tenets and the philosophy and the legal
principles which the Koran inculcates.  The Koran has no earthly
source.  It was compiled from memory after the prophet’s death from the
version of Osman the third Caliph.

29\. It is in the light of the above that one should approach to examine
the said book.  Some passages containing interpretation of some chapters
of the Koran quoted out of context cannot be allowed to dominate or
influence the main aim and object of this book.  It is dangerous for any
court to pass its judgement on such a book by merely looking at certain
passages out of context.

30\. In my opinion the Koran being a sacred Book and “an object held
sacred by a class of persons” within meaning of Section 295 of Indian
Penal Code, against such book no action can be taken under Section
295A.  Section 295A is not attracted in such a case.  Section 295A has
no application in respect of a sacred book which is protected under
Section 295 of I.P.C. Any other interpretation would lead to absurdity. 
If any offence, within the meaning of Section 295 is committed, in
respect of Koran then it is punishable.  Such Book gets protection in
view of Section 295A.  At the same time if it is open to take any such
action under Section 295A against such Book, then the protection given
under Section 295 will become nugatory and meaningless.

31\. Further, as pointed out by the Supreme Court in the case of *Ramji
Lal Modi* - vs - *State of U. P.* (supra) Section 295A does not penalise
any and every act of insult or attempt to insult the religion or the
religious beliefs of a class of citizens, which are not perpetrated with
the deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious
feelings of that class.  Insults to religion offered unwittingly or
carelessly or without any deliberate or malicious intention of outraging
the religious feelings of that class do not come within the scope of the
section.  It only punishes the aggravated form of insult to religion
when it is perpetrated with deliberate and malicious intention of
outraging the religious feelings of that class.  I have set out the aim
and object of the Koran.  In my opinion it cannot be said that Koran
offers any insult to any other religion.  It does not reflect any
deliberate or malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings of
non-Muslims.  Isolated passages picked out from here and there and read
out of context cannot change the position.

32\. The Attorney General is right in his contention that such a
construction as suggested cannot be given as this would amount to
violation of the Constitution. I have already set out the Preamble to
and Article 25 of the Constitution.

33\. Preamble to the Constitution is a part of the Constitution.
*Keshavananda* - vs - *Kerala*, A.I.R. 1973 S.C. 1461.  Accordingly, it
is open to the Court to keep the same in mind while considering any
provision of the Constitution of India.

34\. In my opinion passing of such order as prayed for would go against
the Preamble of the Constitution and would violate the provisions of
Article 25 thereof.  The Preamble proclaims India to be a secular
State.  It means that each and every religion is to be treated equally. 
No preference is to be given to any particular religion.  No religion is
to be belittled.  Liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and
worship are assured.  Koran, which is the basic text book of
Mohammedans, occupies a unique position to the believers of that faith
as Bible is to the Christians and Gita, Ramayana and Mahabharata to the
Hindus.  In my opinion, if such an order is passed, it would take away
the secularity of India and it would deprive a section of people of
their right of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship.  This
would also amount to infringement of Article 25 which provides that all
persons shall be equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right
freely to profess, practise and to propagate religion.  Banning or
forfeiture of Koran would infringe that right.  Such action would amount
to abolition of the Muslim religion itself.  Muslim religion cannot
exist without Koran.  The proposed action would take away the freedom of
conscience of the people of that faith and their right to profess,
practise and propagate the said religion.  Such action is unthinkable. 
The Court cannot sit in judgment on a holy book like Koran, Bible, Geeta
and Granth Saheb.

35\. As pointed out in Halsbury 4th Ed.  Vol. 18 on “Foreign Relations
Law”, right of freedom of thought, conscience and religion includes
freedom, alone or with or in community with others, and in public or
private, to manifest religion or belief in worship, teaching, practice
and observance.  In my opinion, the action proposed will deprive a class
of persons of their human rights.

36\. There is another aspect of the matter.  This sacred book has been
in existence for a number of years with its different interpretations
and translations.  Upto now no one has chosen to challenge the same.

37\. For similar reasons I also hold that Section 153A of the Indian
Penal Code has no application in the facts of the present case.  Apart
from anything else, there is no question of forfeiture or banning of the
said book on the grounds of disharmony or feelings of enmity or hatred
or ill-will between different religions or communities.  This book is
not prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between different
religions.  Because of the Koran no public tranquility has been
disturbed upto now and there is no reason to apprehend any likehood of
such disturbance in future.  On the other hand the action of the
petitioners may be said to have attempted to promote, on the grounds of
religion, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between
different religions, i.e., between Muslims on the one hand and
non-Muslims on the other within the meaning of Section 153A.  Similarly,
in my opinion, it may be said that by this petition the petitioners
insult or attempt to insult the Muslim religion and the religious belief
of the Muslims within the meaning of Section 295A of the Indian Penal
Code.  It is an affront to Islam’s Supreme Scriptural Authority.  For
this reason the contention of the respondents that this application is
motivated cannot be completely ruled out.

38\. The learned Attorney General was right in making comments regarding
caution to be exercised in entertaining public interest litigation.  A
Writ petition is a very important proceeding.  It is known as a High
Prerogative Writ.  Article 226 of the Constitution confers a wide power
on the High Courts.  It is wider than Article 32 itself.  The High Court
enjoys a jurisdiction which is not enjoyed by an ordinary civil court. 
In many cases where no remedy is available in an ordinary civil court,
the Writ Court is the only forum.  It is much more expeditious than an
ordinary civil proceeding.  However, in my opinion it is the duty of the
Court while entertaining or admitting such application, particularly a
public interest litigation, to be very cautious about the same,
particularly where it is a matter of great public interest.  In this
context reference may be made to the judgment of Pathak J. in the case
of *Bandhu Mukti Morcha* - vs - *Union of India* (supra).  The present
case involves the sentiment and religious feelings of a minority
community.  The matter involves religious feelings of millions of people
not only in India but also outside India.  It involves a highly delicate
and sensitive issue.  The application was entertained and admitted
without going into the question of prima facie case and the jurisdiction
and power of the Court to entertain this petition.  In spite of the same
directions were given for filing of affidavits.  This by itself amounts
to holding that there is a prima facie case though this question was not
gone into.  The Court should be circumspect in such kind of matters and
be very cautious about the same.  Otherwise though it might attract
cheap publicity but may cause untold misery and disruption of religious
harmony.  The High Court should have been spared of the embarrassment
caused.  The petition should have been rejected forthwith and in limine
as unworthy of its consideration as soon as it was moved.

39\. For the aforesaid reasons I am of the opinion that the Writ Court’s
jurisdiction has been wrongly sought to be invoked in this case.  No
prima facie case has been made out.  It is clear that this Court has no
power of jurisdiction to pass any such order as prayed for in this
application.

40\. For the aforesaid reasons this applications stands dismissed.  No
order as to costs.

41\. In this connection I record my appreciation of the very frank, fair
and sober manner in which this case has been argued by the Attorney
General appearing for the Union of India and the Advocate General
appearing for the State.

<div align="right">

Sd/-  
(B.C. Basak)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------


