+++
title = "07 CHAPTER VII JOURNEY FROM JIHÃD TO JEE-HUZÛRÎ"

+++
**CHAPTER VII**  
**JOURNEY FROM *JIHÃD* TO *JEE-HUZÛRÎ***

“It is obvious to your exalted self that the alien people from distant
lands have become the rulers of territories and times, and the traders
and vendors of goods have attained the rank of sovereignty. They have
destroyed the dominions of the big grandees and the estates of the
nobles of illustrious ranks, and their honour and authority have been
completely set at naught… As soon as the land of Hindustan is cleared of
the alien enemies and the efforts of these people \[the Wahabis\] result
in the achievement of their objective, the ranks and offices of the
state and government would be handed over to the seekers \[of these\],
and the roots of their power and sovereignty would be
strengthened.”^([1](#1))

This was the message which Syed Ahmad Barelvi sent to Raja Hindu Rao,
brother-in-law of Maharaja Daulat Rao Scindia (AD 1795-1827) of
Gwalior.  
 

**THE DOUBLE-FACED DECEIVER**

In another letter, which he wrote to his contemporary Muslim magnates
ran as follows: “My real object is the establishment of *jihãd* against
the Sikhs of the Punjab and not to stay in the countries of Afghanistan
and Yagistan. The long-haired infidels who have seized sovereignty over
Punjab are very experienced, clever and deceitful… The ill-natured Sikhs
and the ill-fated polytheists have gained control over the Western parts
of India from the banks of Indus to the capital city of
Delhi.”^([2](#2))

The second letter is found in this form in *Sawãnih Ahmadî*, a biography
of Barelvi. But there is another version, preserved in Patna University
Library, which reads as under: “My real objective is the establishment
of *jihãd* and carrying of war into Hindustan and not to stay in the
lands of Khorasan… The Christian infidels who have gained possession
over India are very artful and deceptive… The ill-natured Christians and
ill-fated *Mushriks* have gained control over the various parts of India
stretching from the bank of Indus to the shore of the ocean which covers
a distance of six months journey.”^([3](#3))

Obviously, this version was meant for the consumption of Muslim masses.
It is on record that Barelvi was not only seeking monetary help from
Hindu Rajas but also patronage for his followers who were operating from
within India. Hindu Rajas, however, were not against the Sikhs. At the
same time, he was seeking help from Muslim magnates, most of whom were
against the Sikhs but allied with the British. Muslim masses alone were
inimical to both. Many Muslim theologians have followed in the footsteps
of the first Christian missionary, St. Paul, and tried to be ‘all things
to all men’. Barelvi was neither the first such Muslim missionary nor
the last. But he achieved a minor miracle when he remained convinced
that it was the Sikhs and the British who were clever and deceitful.
Such a combination of scoundrelism and self-righteousness is rare even
among Muslim theologians and missionaries.

Shri Seshadri has given a brief account of Syed Ahmad Barelvi and his
Wahabis in *The Tragic Story of Partition*.^([4](#4)) He has also
related how Muslim leaders did a right-about-turn under the guidance of
Sir Syed Ahmed Khan. We will only fill in a few more details because
this episode in the history of Islam in India is extremely revealing.
Marxist and Muslim scholars have been presenting the Wahabis and the
Faraizis as freedom fighters and peasant revolutionaries. We should
study some relevant facts in order to find out whose freedom they were
fighting for, and what sort of revolution they were seeking to bring
about.  
 

**ANTI-BRITISH *JIHÃD* ALWAYS ENDED AS ANTI-HINDU**

We have already related in an earlier chapter how the residues of
Islamic imperialism had reacted immediately after the Mughal empire
collapsed in the first half of the 18th century. Shah Waliullah was a
voluminous exponent of that reaction. But his appeals for an India-wide
*jihãd* against the Marathas had borne very little fruit. Ahmad Shah
Abdali of Afghanistan, whom Waliullah had invited to join the *jihãd*,
inflicted a major military defeat on the Marathas in the Third Battle of
Panipat in 1761 AD. But he also could not salvage the Mughal empire from
the slough of disintegration into which it had sunk. By the time
Waliullah was succeeded by his son Abdul Aziz (1746-1822) in the
theological saddle at Delhi, the Marathas were already on the retreat
before the fast advancing British. So Abdul Aziz converted his father’s
*jihãd* against the Marathas into a *jihãd* against the British. A fatwa
was issued that India under British rule had become a *Dãr-ul-harb*
(zone of war or infidel land) and that it was the duty of all mu‘mins
either to migrate to a *Dãr-ul-Islãm* (Islamic country) or to fight the
*firanghî* for the restoration of Muslim rule.

Abdul Aziz found a devoted disciple in Syed Ahmad Barelvi. To start
with, he sent Barelvi to get training in the art of warfare by joining
the army of Amir Khan, the Pindari chieftain. Next, he commissioned
Barelvi to go to Mecca in order to acquire the requisite religions zeal.
Barelvi arrived in Mecca in 1822. He travelled extensively in Arabia and
Syria and met many masters of Islamic lore. It is not certain whether he
met Abdul Wahab, the founder of the Wahabi Movement in Arabia. But the
similarity of his ideas with those of his Arabian contemporary earned
for his movement the name Wahabi, though he himself had designated it as
*Tarîqah-i-Muhammadiyah* (the way of Muhammad). In any case, he came
back to India towards the end of 1822 fully convinced of his mission,
which was to purify Islam in India of all non-Islamic accretions and
then, with the help of this revived Islam, establish an Islamic state a
la the model prescribed by the Prophet and the first four pious Caliphs.
In the process, the British were to be driven out of India by means of a
*jihãd*.

Barelvi was quite successful in setting up a network of centres in
various cities of North India. He enlisted an impressive following,
particularly among the upper class Muslims. He also collected a lot of
money at the same time. He called upon Muslims to eliminate three kinds
of excesses - firstly, those advocated by heterodox Sufis; secondly,
those practised by the Shias; and thirdly, those ‘borrowed’ from the
Hindus. Prof. Aziz Ahmad writes: “This last category was by far the most
important, and was most vigorously denounced by Sayyid Ahmad Barelvi. It
had included pilgrimage to Hindu holy places, shouting Hindu religious
slogans, and adorning the tombs with *lingams* (Hindu phallic symbol),
worship of Hindu deities, borrowing from Hindu animism, consulting
Brahmins for good or bad omens, and celebration of Hindu festivals. Next
came external Hindu manners, such as eating on leaves or keeping
pig-tails or piercing women’s ears and nose to wear jewellery or shaving
one’s hair and eyebrows in imitation of yogis or even dressing like
Hindus.”^([5](#5))

Barelvi forgot that a majority of Muslims in India were converts from
the Hindu fold, and that Islam sat rather lightly on most of them. This
is understandable. After all, Barelvi was an Islamic missionary and not
a historian of Islam in India. What amazes one is that even Muslim
scholars in modern times have managed to forget that the ‘impurities’ or
‘excesses’ of Islam in India were not injected into it by Hindus from
the outside, but were brought along by Hindu converts who were driven or
lured into the fold of Islam by force or fraud. Nor has any Muslim
scholar noted that it is these ‘impurities’ and ‘excesses’ which have
prevented the total brutalization of native Muslims such as had always
been and is being advocated by their *Ashrãf* (foreign) mentors.

To resume the story, Barelvi’s confidence in a *jihãd* against the
British collapsed when he surveyed the extent and the magnitude of
British power in India. He did the next best under the circumstances,
and declared a *jihãd* against the Sikh power in the Punjab, Kashmir and
the North-West Frontier. The British on their part welcomed this change
and permitted Barelvi to travel towards the border of Afghanistan at a
leisurely pace, collecting money and manpower along the way. It was
during this journey that Barelvi stayed with or met several Hindu
princes, feigned that his fulminations against the Sikhs were a fake,
and that he was going out of India in order to establish a base for
fighting against the British. It is surmised that some Hindu princes
took him at his word, and gave him financial help. To the Muslim
princes, however, he told the truth, namely, that he was up against the
Sikhs because they “do not allow the call to prayer from mosques and the
killing of cows.”^([6](#6))

Barelvi set up his base in the North-West Frontier near Afghanistan. The
active assistance he expected from the Afghan king did not materialise
because that country was in a mess at that time. But the British
connived at the constant flow not only of a sizable manpower but also of
a lot of finance. Muslim magnates in India were helping him to the hilt.
His basic strategy was to conquer Kashmir before launching his major
offensive against the Punjab. But he met with very little success in
that direction in spite of several attempts. Finally, he met his
Waterloo in 1831 when the Sikhs under Kunwar Sher Singh stormed his
citadel at Balakot. The great *mujãhid* fell in the very first battle he
ever fought. His corpse along with that of his second in command was
burnt, and the ashes were scattered in the winds. Muslims hail him as a
*shahîd*.

The scattered remnants of the Wahabis fought a few more skirmishes with
the Sikhs. But they also met with no success. Next, they turned their
fury against the British when the latter took over from the Sikhs in
1849. There was a lot of organizing and shouting of *Allah-o-Akbar* in
the North-West Frontier as well as in several centres inside India such
as Patna, Meerut, Bareilly and Hyderabad. But they produced very little
fight. The British smashed them everywhere and it was all over by 1870.
The greatest ‘achievement’ of the Wahabis after four decades of
‘fighting’ was the murder of Justice Norman at Calcutta in 1871, and of
Lord Mayo, the Viceroy, at Port Blair in 1872.

One of Barelvi’s distinguished disciples was Mir Nasser Ali of Barasat
in Bengal, better known as Titu Mir or Titu Mian. He had met the master
in Mecca in 1822, and returned to Calcutta a few years later in order to
organize another *jihãd* against the British. He set up his headquarters
at Barasat, and declared that India under British rule was a
*Dãr-ul-harb*. But, in due course, his invectives also came to be
increasingly directed against the unarmed Hindus in the countryside of
Bengal.

Narahari Kaviraj, a Communist scholar who hails Titu’s rascals as
peasant revolutionaries, describes the exploits of his hero in the
following words: “They first sallied forth in a body of about 500
persons to attack the market place of the village known as Poorwa, where
they slaughtered a cow. With the blood of the animal they defiled a
Hindu temple. Then they hung up the four quarters (of the cow) in the
different parts of the market place. They maltreated and wounded an
unfortunate Brahmin and threatened to make him a Muslim… The village of
Laoghatty in the Nadia district was their next object attack. Here they
commenced operations by the repetition of the same outrage to the
religious feelings of the Hindus which they had committed at Poorwa,
viz, the slaughter of a cow in that part of the village exclusively
occupied by Hindu residents. But being opposed by Hardeb Ray, a
principal inhabitant of the village, and a Brahmin, at the head of a
party of villagers, an affray ensued in which one Debnath Ray was killed
and Hardeb Ray and a number of villagers were severely wounded… Titu’s
party went on increasing and with growing confidence they went on
killing cows in different places, making raids on the neighbouring
villages, forcing from the raiyats agreements to furnish grain,
compelling many of them to profess conformity to the tenets of their
sect… They openly proclaimed themselves masters of the country,
asserting that the Mussalmans from whom the English usurped it, were the
rightful owners of the empire… The rebels issued parwanas to the
principal zamindars of the district. Their tenor was as follows: “This
country is now given to our *Deen Mohammed*. You must, therefore,
immediately send grain to the army.’ In a written report the magistrate
of Nadia states that a paper written in Bengali and signed in Arabic
characters, was put into his hand, purporting to be an order of Allah to
the Pal Chowdhuries of Ranaghat to supply *russud* (rations) to the army
of fakirs who were about to fight with the government.”^([7](#7)) All of
this was an early rehearsal of what the Moplahs were to do in Malabar in
1921 during the Khilafat agitation against the British.

The British government at Calcutta had to take action at last, not
because it was bothered about what was happening to the Hindus at the
hands of Muslim *mujãhids* but because the Wahabis of Bengal were
becoming a menace to the British system of law and order. Titu Mian was
killed in the very first encounter with a British battalion in 1839. A
number of his followers were hanged or sentenced to various terms of
imprisonment.

Another movement on similar lines had flared up simultaneously in the
Faridpur district of Bengal. This was the Faraizi Movement launched by
Shariatullah who also had spent 20 years in Mecca and Medina. He had
also declared that India under the British was a *Dãr-ul-harb*, and that
Muslims should not observe Friday prayers and the two Ids till Islamic
rule was restored. He also tried to ‘purify’ Islam of ‘un-Islamic
accretions’ borrowed from the hated Hindus. And he also acquired a large
following of fanatic Muslims in order to mount his *jihãd* against the
British. But like his contemporary, Titu Mian, he also ended by spending
all his spleen against the Hindus. Kaviraj writes: “As the followers of
Shariatullah increased in numbers, and as they became too bold and
overbearing, they carried their incursions against Hindu zamindars and
committed acts of cruelty against Hindu families.”^([8](#8))
Shariatullah died in 1837 without achieving anything more spectacular.
That was left to his son who had meanwhile returned from Mecca after a
stay of several years.

Muhammad Mohsin, better known as Dudhu Mian (1819-1860), was a more
full-fledged fundamentalist than his father. Professor Murray Titus
writes that “Among other things, we are told that he insisted upon his
disciples eating the common grass-hopper (*phaDinga*), which they
detested, because the locust (*tiDDi*) was used as food in
Arabia.”^([9](#9)) Dudhu Mian was convinced that Allah had entrusted him
with the mission of restoring Islam in India to its pristine purity and
bygone glory. That implied a fight against the British. But like his
father, he also found that the unarmed Hindus in the countryside of
Bengal were a far more attractive prey. According to Kaviraj, Dudhu’s
followers were well-armed with swords, shields and a variety of other
weapons. In April 1839, they raided 76 Hindu houses in seven villages.
They committed atrocities on innocent Hindus, killed cows and broke the
images worshipped by the Brahmins inside their homes. Later on, one of
their victims was Kalicharan Kanjilal, a gomashta in a British-owned
Indigo factory. Kanjilal was given the full treatment prescribed for
*kafirs* in the Quran and the Sunnah of the Prophet. The atrocities
heaped on this poor and unoffending Hindu by a Islamic-cum-Communist
‘hero’ are described in detail in contemporary government records.

Finally, the British Indigo planters put pressure on the British
government to bring the hoodlum to book. “He was charged with plunder in
1838, committed to sessions for murder in 1841, tried for trespass and
for unlawful assembly in 1844, and for abduction and plunder in 1846.
But it was found impossible to induce witnesses to give evidence, and on
each occasion he was acquitted.”^([10](#10)) It was only in 1857 that he
was put in jail without trial. He died there in 1860.

The last effort made by the *mujãhids* of all sorts to overthrow the
British rule and restore the ‘Muslim empire in India’ was in 1857. They
were able to enlist Hindu support on a large scale because of reasons in
which we need not go here. But this grand *jihãd* was also defeated, and
its leaders had to seek shelter in the Hindu kingdom of Nepal. The last
Mughal emperor ended his days of disgrace in far off Rangoon. Ishtiq
Husain Qureshi names this period as that of the ‘lowest depths of broken
pride’.^([11](#11))

Thus, by about the year 1860, the multifarious *mujãhids* had emptied
themselves of all the heat stored in them by their sojourn in the ‘holy
land’ of Hijaz. They could not shake a single brick in the edifice of
the British empire. It was now the turn of the Muslim magnates, sitting
pretty in their palatial mansions, to rescue the *mujãhids* from the
theological knots into which the latter had tied themselves. Meanwhile,
the British had seen the Muslim potential for mischief against the
Hindus who had started taking pride in their history and heritage, and
demanding self-rule. An invitation was extended to the residues of
Islamic imperialism to revise their strategy when W.W. Hunter wrote *The
Indian Musalmans* in 1871. The invitation was readily accepted by the
other side.  
 

**ISLAMIC THEOLOGIANS DO A RIGHT-ABOUT TURN**

Shri Seshadri has referred to this part of the story. He writes: “It was
the vested landed interests amongst the Muslim aristocracy, especially
in Oudh and parts of U.P. and Bihar which succeeded in persuading the
maulvis to issue fatwas with a view to contradicting the previous
*fatwas* calling for the establishment of *Darul-Islam*. The *fatwas*
issued by the heads of the three prominent Mussalman sects of Mecca
declared that the Mussalmans under the Christian rule of the British
were assured of protection and liberty of Islamic observances and as
such it was not *Darul-harb* and did not warrant jehad against
it.”^([12](#12)) The mullahs in Mecca had been ‘persuaded’ by the
British to help the Muslims in India.

Thus what had started with a bang ended with a whimper. The Mullahs have
always had a hundred tricks in their theological hat. They can turn into
white to-day what they had pronounced black only a day before, and vice
versa. Hunter had noted in his book that “The danger to British rule
comes from the ‘fanatic masses’, who take their religion seriously
unlike the ‘well-to-do Musalmans’ who contrive to evade the clear
prescriptions of the Quran to flee or to rebel”.^([13](#13))

It was at this critical juncture in the history of Islam in India that
Sir Syed Ahmed stepped forward. “He was a pupil of the famous Mawlãnã a
Mamlûk ‘Ali who was entirely a product of the Walî-u’llahî school and
tradition. It was perhaps because of this relationship that he claimed
to be a Wahhãbî…”^([14](#14)) But now on the word ‘Wahabi’ was to
acquire a new meaning. He had been a protege of the British for a long
time. He had sided with his masters during the *jihãd* of 1857. Soon
after the *jihãd* failed, he came out with a book, *The Loyal
Mohammedans of India*. He travelled to England in 1869 and wrote as
follows from there to a friend in India: “Without flattering the
English, I can truly say that the natives of India, high and low,
merchants and petty shopkeepers, educated and illiterate, when
contrasted with the English in education, manners and uprightness, are
as like them as a dirty animal is to an able and handsome man. Do you
look upon an animal as a thing to be honoured? Do you think it necessary
to treat an animal courteously, or the reverse? We have no right to
courteous treatment. The English have reason for believing us in India
to be imbecile brutes.”^([15](#15))

Here was the man the British were looking for. The rest of his role is
too well-known to be repeated here. He was undoubtedly the father of the
two-nation theory which led later on to the demand for Pakistan. He
became a bitter opponent of the Indian National Congress as soon as it
was founded in 1885. He decried parliamentary democracy as a plot to put
the ‘brute Hindu majority’ into power. He led a hate campaign against
the Bengalis who were in the forefront of the fight for freedom. He was
all for a fight against Hindi attaining an equal status with Urdu. And
he tried his best to build bridges between Christianity on the one hand
and Islam on the other. The nett result of his Aligarh Movement was to
convert the Muslim community into a close preserve of toadyism
(*jee-huzûrî*) towards the British. The British on their part responded
positively, and made many concessions to the Muslims. This co-operation
between British imperialism and the residues of Islamic imperialism
continued till the creation of Pakistan, except for a brief period of
bad blood during the Khilafat agitation.

Many scholars, both Hindu and Muslim, have persisted in painting Sir
Syed as a nationalist in his early career. They feel puzzled at what
they call his sudden volte face. The earliest of these scholars was Lala
Lajpat Rai. Lalaji’s father had become a Muslim for all practical
purposes, and was a great admirer of Sir Syed. The son had also come
under the same influence before he went to Lahore and joined the Arya
Samaj. He became an ardent nationalist. But the favourable impression
which Sir Syed had made on his mind earlier had lingered on. He was,
therefore, shocked when Sir Syed appeared in what Lalaji thought to be a
new attire. He wrote a number of Open Letters to Sir Syed which were
published in the English and the Varnacular press of his days. These
letters made Lalaji famous in no time, and all over India.

Shri Seshadri has also observed that “these nationalist ideas appear to
be but a fleeting phase in Sir Syed’s life”. The truth, however, is that
there was never a nationalist phase in the life of Sir Syed. He started
his life as a lick-spittle of the British, and a lick-spittle he
remained to the end of his days. But like his namesake of earlier days,
Syed Ahmad Barelvi, he tried to humour the Hindus whenever he needed
material help. M.R.A. Baig hits the nail on the head when he writes: “As
is well-known, he secured donations for Aligarh from Hindus of his own
feudal class. When canvassing for their support he expressed such
exemplary sentiments as that Hindus and Muslims were the ‘two eyes of
the beautiful Indian bride.’ But when addressing exclusively Muslim
audiences, especially political meetings, he was militant enough to
threaten civil war.”^([16](#16))

Five years after Sir Syed’s death in 1898, his successor, Viqar-ul-Mulk,
wrote a letter to *The Pioneer* of Lucknow. He said: “We start with the
firm conviction and seek to implant it in the mind of every Indian
Musalman that our destiny is now bound up with the presence and
permanence of British rule in this country, and that in the government
of the day we have got our best and surest friend.”^([17](#17))

This was the mentality which led to the formation of the Muslim League
in December, 1906. The League pledged itself to an ever-lasting loyalty
to the British Crown. Three months later, Viqar-ul-Mulk addressed a
students’ gathering at Aligarh. He said: “God forbid, if the British
rule disappears from India. Hindus will lord over it, and we will be in
constant danger of our life, property and honour. The only way for the
Muslims to escape this danger is to help in the continuance of the
British rule. If the Muslims are heartily with the British, then that
rule is bound to endure. Let the Muslims consider themselves as a
British army ready to shed their blood and sacrifice their lives for the
British Crown… Wherever you are, whether in the football field or in the
tennis lawn, you have to consider yourselves as soldiers of a British
regiment. You have to defend the British Empire, and to give the enemy
\[Hindus\] a fight in doing so. If you bear it in mind and act
accordingly, you will have done that and your name will be written in
letters of gold in the British Indian history. The future generations
will be grateful to you.”^([18](#18))

But the leaders of the Indian National Congress continued to hug the
illusion that the residues of Islamic imperialism in India could also be
mobilised in the fight for the freedom of the motherland. They had
failed to notice and understand why the *jihãd* against the British had
again and again led to atrocities on innocent Hindus, and how the
mujãhids of yester years had ended by becoming stooges of the British at
a later stage.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Qeyamuddin Ahmad, *The Wahabi Movement in India*, Calcutta,
1966, pp. 365-366.

[²](#2a) Ibid., p.358. He uses the term ‘polytheists’ for Sikhs who had
not yet started swearing by monotheism, and were regarded as a Hindu
sect.

[³](#3a) Ibid. This letter refers to both the British and the Sikhs who
are again denounced as mushriks, polytheists.

[⁴](#4a) Chapter 3.

[⁵](#5a) Aziz Ahmad, *Studies in Islamic Culture*, Pp. 211-212.

[⁶](#6a) *Targhîb-al-Jîhãd* translated by W.W. Hunter, p. 140. The fond
belief that the Amir of Afghanistan and the Frontier Tribals could be
invited for liberating India from foreign rule, lingered for a long
time. It was soon forgotten that the belief was entertained or fostered
by Muslim ‘revivalists’ in the 18th and the 19th centuries. The Indian
“revolutionaries” like M.N. Roy, Raja Mahendra Pratap, and
Chandrashekhar Azad were latter-day victims of this illusion and tried
to help ‘our friends in the North-West’ with munitions and money. The
illusion suffered a set back only when Pandit Nehru went out to the NWF
to fraternize with the ‘brave Pathans’ soon after becoming virtual Prime
Minister of India in 1946, and was welcomed with bullets. He never
mentioned the ‘brave Pathans’ again.

[⁷](#7a) Narahari Kaviraj, *Wahabi And Faraizi Rebels of Bengal*, New
Delhi, 1982, Pp. 37-38, 43-44, 50-51.

[⁸](#8a) Ibid., p.65.

[⁹](#9a) Murray Titus, *Indian Islam*, Oxford, 1930, p. 180.

[¹⁰](#10a) R.C. Majumdar (ed.), *History and Culture of the Indian
People*, Volume XI, Bombay, 1981, p. 885.

[¹¹](#11a) Ihtiaq Husain Qureshi, *The Muslim Community of the
Indo-Pakistan Subcontinent* (610-1947), Delhi reprint, 1985, Chapter XI.

[¹²](#12a) *The Tragic Story of Partition*, p. 65.

[¹³](#13a) Cited by David Lelyveld, *Aligarh’s First Generation*,
Princeton, 1978, p. 11.

[¹⁴](#14a) Ishtiq Husain Qureshi, *Ulema in Politics*, Delhi reprint, p.
226.

[¹⁵](#15a) Cited by G.F.L. Graham, *Sir Syed Ahmad Khan*, London, 1885,
Pp. 183-184.

[¹⁶](#16a) M.R.A. Baig, *The Muslim Dilemma in India*, Delhi, 1974, p.
52.

[¹⁷](#17a) Francis Robinson, *Separatism Among Indian Muslims*, Delhi,
1975, p. 139.

[¹⁸](#18a) Cited by R.C. Majumdar (ed.), *History and Culture of the
Indian People*, Volume XI, Bombay, 1981, p.146.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


