+++
title = "18 "

+++
<div align="right">

**15. Bhagwati Prasad Goenka**

</div>

I am thankful to you for a copy of ‘Time for Stock Taking’ booklet.

Religions are made for people to shape their lives, in short, to
establish a code of conduct for themselves. A religion which preaches
that other religions are inferior, cannot be equated with a religion
which preaches that all are equal and that all can attain salvation
whatever way they adopt. For this matter the comparing of Islam or
Christianity with Hinduism is not only impractical but totally naive.

1\. If one is intolerant to any other form or concept of faith as is the
case with Islam and Christianity, the question of accepting them as
equal is totally and plainly stupid. Therefore, accepting their
perpetrators like Jesus and Mohammad or equating them with Hindu
Gods/Goddesses cannot arise. It is they who fed that any other form of
belief is substandard and therefore the malady lies there.

2\. Whatever form one wishes to adopt as one’s vehicle to reach Godhood
is best left to the individual; we do not wish to discuss the issue,
leave aside interfere with one’s ways. But we also will not allow
interference with our concept for any reason, be it to the point of
being called communal or fascist or whatever pseudo-jargon the
self-seekers heap on us.

3\. Neither is Islam good nor are Muslims good; both are two faces of
the same coin. Having lived on easy and ill-gotten goodies, they
(especially the Indian Muslims) still live in their glorified (ghastly)
past of having ruled the country for almost 800 years. And what a rule -
destruction of Hindu places of faith, forcible conversions, abductions
and what not! How shameful have been these 800 years, and yet we wish to
appease these slimy characters, have we no spine? Any other people would
have sought damages, compensation if not an equal chance of paying back
in the same coin.

5\. On this point I am only partly in agreement with Dr. Godbole. All,
practically all except committed votes, go to the prospective winning
political party. Congress has always projected itself as the strongest
contender to the throne at Delhi. Only now - that too after the Ayodhya
episode - the BJP has become the front runner. Congress knew that Hindus
are fragmented, disunited and of slave mentality while Muslims can unite
and can be made to vote *en masse*; therefore, the Congress always kept
the Muslims with them and tacitly played politics. It created a fear
psychosis and a feeling of prosecution amongst the Muslims and projected
themselves as their only saviour, thus ensuring their *en masse* votes
while doing precious little for their upliftment in social, moral and
economic standards. That it always played the double role of not
punishing this group for its wrong doings, is apparent from records
spanning for the last 50 years. Two cases in point being the Ayodhya
episode and the aftermath of the Bombay blasts.

6\. No Muslim is tolerant. Tolerance is a great virtue which is received
only after great penance and after realising the meaning of life. No
religion except Hinduism can claim to possess this virtue. However, let
not tolerance be confused with cowardice. Sufis are no exception of the
general Muslim character as fundamentally they are also of the same
mind-set.

7\. Quite true. Islam and its preaching are responsible for the ghetto
mentality amongst the Muslims. But why go into the finery of this issue
at all. If the Muslim leaders are responsible, so are the Muslims - the
result being that the Muslims in general are of ghetto mentality. This
requires correction not by appeasement but by strict discipline. Islam
as it is being taught contaminated by extra-Islamic regimens like Hadis
etc. is only instrumental in dehumanising people of this community.

8\. Namaz cannot be offered at a ‘disputed place’ but this tenet is more
often followed in breach.

It is not possible to assimilate people who believe that they are the
best and none else has the right to even exist. It is against the
principles of democracy which India is. Sarva Dharma Samabhãv or
Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam are noble and humane principles but based on
TOLERANCE even to the point of being mult-ideational. Only when these
people stand up to criticise their own holy books and tenets and
question the Mullahs and Padris can light be bestowed on them and a ray
of hope towards true civilisation can come to them. Before that happens,
let us not equate the enlightened and the ignorant.

If the meaning of “Sarva Panth Samãdar Manch” is what is detailed, it is
certainly most disturbing and would mean diluting our own noble
principles of equality of human beings. The questions asked in the
letter to Shri.  K.S. Sundarshanji are viewed by me as under:

1\. The meaning of ‘Sarva Panth’ should be clearly defined and confined
to only Bharatitya spiritual practices.

2\. It cannot include Islam or Christianity or for that matter Marxism,
Nazism and Fascism.

3\. It is idiotic to try to accommodate religions which do not accept
anything beyond their own teaching. We should not concern ourselves with
Islam or Muslims; we have to unite Hindus of this country and worldwide
as one body and we have no reason to try to assimilate others who even
do not consider us to be equal.

4\. It is a futile exercise to assume that all religions are worthy of
equal respect. We already say this by preaching “Sarva Dharma Samabhãv”
and “Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam” but this acceptance is with a corollary -
the other person or his religion must accept us also as equals.

5\. There is no question of accepting anyone who has even the remotest
sense of superiority or who considers his form of worship as the only
path to GOD. These propagators must learn to accept us, respect our
forms of worship, and love this country, thus applying for eligibility
to be accepted by us; till then let us forget about them and concentrate
on strengthening our own people.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is from Shillong in Meghalaya.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


