+++
title = "27 "

+++
<div align="right">

**24. Professor R. R. Mangasuli**

</div>

No organization has so far found any solution to merge the Muslims in
India with Hindu society. National Congress, Bahujan Samaj Party, Janata
Dal and such parties have only succeeded in increasing the rift between
the two *creeds* and making Muslims more stubborn. Muslims are like an
idiotic son of negligent parents. Careful attention only can correct
him. Muslim as an individual is quite accommodative like other human
beings. He is fanatic when he poses as a follower of Islam.

Islam has spread through sword and coercion. It hardly cares for the
human mind. Civilization in Muslim society is very poor. Tolerance is
almost nil. That is why there are continuous wars and bloodshed in
Muslim-ruled countries.

Muslims are always troublemakers for people having different faiths.
Islam is not ready to accept any God other than Allah. Islam feels that
everybody on the globe should accept Allah and only Allah as his God.
The famous (?) painter Hussain depicting Hindu Goddess Saraswati in an
ugly manner is a noteworthy example. Lack of education is the cause of
intolerance.

The real solution to the ghost of Islam in Muslim mind is education for
fraternity and coexistence. Muslims should be made to understand that
other religions on the globe cannot be destroyed just by sword or gun.
All faiths have to co-exist. Some learned Muslim scholars have
understood this fact and they have merged as true citizens with other
societies.

The concept that “religion is for the uplift of the soul and not for
destruction of other faiths” needs to be inculcated in Muslim minds.
Indian Muslims cannot leave India. At the same time, India can never
become an Islamic totality. They, therefore, have to co-exist with
others as people of other faiths like Christians and Parsis are doing.
Hindus have many faiths among themselves. Even then rifts hardly ever
come to the surface.

By a study of history one can see that the contribution of Muslims in
general to human civilization is almost zero. Muslims still want to live
in the medieval times. They waste their energy in coups, quarrels and
bloodshed.  
 

**Understanding of Religion**

Religion is a living force for a person. Man learns basics of life from
parents, teachers, the surrounding society. What the mother is for a
child, religion is for a person. One should not try to annihilate other
religions; it is like snatching away the mother from the child. Through
the process of learning, one can analyse and think of good and bad. One
can improve and refine one’s living through this process.

Nothing in this world is as pure as knowledge. Knowledge refines the
attitude of man and he understands in a true sense as to what is right
and what is wrong.  
 

**Muslims - Sick and Ill-treated Children**

Muslims have fought wars and thereafter stayed peacefully with the
people of other religions. It is leaders, kings and fanatics who have
used Muslims in the name of Islam for their selfish motives. Hindu
leaders have coaxed Muslims on similar lines for their selfish interest.
Today, every political party is trying to use Muslims for the party
benefit by invoking the so-called injustice which has never been done to
them.

State boundaries disputes and the Mandal Ayog exemplify the attitudes of
selfish leaders. Congress, Janata Dal, United Front Groups are coaxing
the people on caste and creed lines, thereby arousing hatred among them.
Muslims are looked as vote-banks. Such selfish leaders and political
parties can be understood only through the process of education.

Hindu Organizations should view Muslims as sick and ill-treated children
of bad parents. Muslims should be caressed only with better education
and not by giving concessions and temporary relief. Better family
relations, respect for woman, freedom of thought, and basic
understanding of human behaviour can make them real citizens.  Muslims,
therefore, are required to be educated with students of other faiths.
They should attend the schools of Christians and Hindu Organizations.
There should not be any special treatment for them as Muslims. Muslims
can certainly improve through the study of science and humanities and
not through Islam. They should be taught first to be human beings.

Almost all religions except Islam have accepted modern scientific
approach. They have discarded old, impracticable and irrelevant
religious customs. Muslims have to go in the same footsteps and become
sensible and civilized. That will save Islam. Otherwise it is bound to
crumble like Marxism.

Reactionary methods to improve or suppress Muslims will not succeed.
Muslims are to be treated as human beings. They are to be made aware of
freedoms, rights and duties. Unfortunately, Islam has not done this for
its follower. Proper education will fulfil this job and bring Muslims
into the mainstream with other societies. Gone are the days of war and
supremacy. One has to live and let others live. Muslims have to come out
of the fool’s paradise that they will rule the world through coercion.  
 

**Sarva Panth Samãdar Manch**

Views of Dr. Godbole on Sarve Panth Samãdar Manch are reasonable. Islam
cannot be improved by bringing fanatic Muslim maulvis on the platform
and asking them to respect others as we do it for them. Every religious
leader feels that his religion is supreme. Bringing religious leaders on
one platform will not improve Muslim minds. They will talk superficially
to suit the Manch but ultimately behave as Islam tells them to do.
Muslims are to be made to think. They should be made to analyse the
situation. Reformists among Muslims should be encouraged to bring basic
reforms in Muslim society.

By Samãdar Manch movement, it is not likely that Muslims will come
forward in real sense. For every man his faith is supreme. Samãdar Manch
may aim at fraternity and coexistence. To treat all religions on par is
not acceptable to conservatives. Tolerance needs scientific and
humanitarian approach. Samãdar Manch may not succeed in refining Muslim
minds because Muslims are blind followers. Anything that a maulvi says
is supreme for them.

Instead of bringing religions on one platform, it will be useful if
citizens from all walks of life are brought on one platform for the
common cause of fraternity. It should be a non-political and
non-religious platform with scientific and humanitarian goals.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is from Karad in Maharashtra.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


