+++
title = "29 "

+++
<div align="right">

**26.  Professor S. G. Mujumdar**

</div>

I entirely agree with Dr. Shreerang Godbole’s view on the likelihood of
confusion being created by the leaders of the Sangh Parivar, owing to
its contradictory stances on its approach towards the Muslim problem.
The Mantra of *“Sarvadharmasamabhãva”* has clogged the mind of Hindu
leaders for too long. Firstly, how many of these leaders who have
interiorized this concept can claim to be aware of the tenets of
Christianity and Islam which have time and again wreaked havoc on Hindu
Society? Secondly, how many of the Sangh leaders can demonstrate the
*“Sarvadharmasamabhãva”* being practised by the Muslim Clergy and the
Christian Missionaries? Thirdly, what is the logic of equating Hinduism
with exclusive ideologies like Islam and Christianity which have never
had anything to do with the spirit of pluralism, either in theory or in
practice? Will the Sangh leaders care to find out in the spirit of
*“Sarvadharmasamabhãva”*, as to how many of Muslims and Christians who
are presently touted as “secularists par excellence” will invite or
install a Hindu God adjacent to their Allah or Jesus. Fourthly, how can
Muslims and Christians, who have a tyrannical record in the past of
subjugating the majority Hindus in their own homeland, be termed as a
“minority”? Fifthly, if the leaders of the Sangh Parivar really believe
in the equality of religions, why do they oppose movements of
conversions and introduce movements like **“Shuddhi, Ghar Vãpasî,
Parãvartan”**?

The first step towards seeking or evolving a solution of these problems
is to use the same yardstick as the Missionaries did with respect to
Hinduism - A Critique of these two religions i.e. Islam and
Christianity. It is only then that we could arrive at an answer to the
behavioural pattern and mindset of the followers of these religions. The
second step would be to understand the history of these religions (both
past and present) so as to understand their compatibility with
pluralistic religions like Hinduism and Buddhism of India. Thirdly, the
majority of Muslims and Christians who are otherwise past Hindus, should
be made aware of the anti-national ideology of these religions.
Fourthly, even from a spiritual perspective, the arbitrary, whimsical
and thoughtless attitude of Allah of the Koran and Jehovah of the Bible
will not appeal to any rational man, let alone the Hindus. Allah and
Jehovah appear to be of *Tãmasika Vritti* while Hindus know their God to
be above even *Sãttvika Vritti*, i.e. *SaguNa-NirguNa Brahman*.

The post-Independence history of Muslims and Christians should also act
as a reminder to Hindu leaders that in the jingoistic jargon of Indian
Secularism, they have been successful in labelling self-respecting
Hindus as “Fascists” and “Communalists”. Muslims have always voted
strategically, and are known always to pressurise government to accede
to their unreasonable demands. The very fact that Hindus have to fight
for their right to Ram Janmabhoomi, Mathura, and Kashi, proves that
Muslims continue to exhibit their old hostility. The likes of Syed
Shahabuddin, Banatwala, C.M. Ibrahim, Imam Bukhari, Gulam Nabi Azad, are
in politics to see that Muslim interests at all times are acceded to on
top priority basis. They are found nowhere when the question of Kashmiri
Hindu refugees comes up.

The concept of “secularism” has a special connotation in Indian context.
In Indian Secularism, Hinduism can be scrutinised by everyone and can be
railed against in the name of freedom of expression but the same cannot
be done to other religions. That seems to be a taboo. Anyone trying to
question the tenets of Christianity or Islam is a “Communalist”, and
“Fascist” which perhaps is synonymous with olden time Heretic. The
response of Muslims towards Uniform Civil Code, Article 370, Ban on Cow
Slaughter etc., illustrates comprehensively their hostile attitude. The
same is true of Christians also.  Their secessionist activities in
North-East India, their politics in the Dalit Christian Reservation
Movement, their contributions in distorting the Hindus Shastras, and
their international connections prove beyond doubt that both Muslim
Leadership and the Missionary Network are working to a plan. The Hindu
leadership who wish to guide the destiny of Hindus should display enough
intelligence in understanding the *modus operandi* of these two
proselytising religions.

The exercise of floating “Sarva Panth Samãdar Manch” is a futile
exercise. It is practising deception on Hindu society in the long run.
Hindu leaders should act brave and call spade a spade - that is the only
way of awakening the Hindu society. The Mantra of
*“Sarvadharmasamabhãva”* is no mantra at all; it is a curse for which
Hindus have suffered a lot, and it is high time we gave it a ceremonial
burial.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is Assistant Professor of Economics at Indian Law Society’s
Law College at Pune. He is not a member of the Sangh Parivar but
participates in discussions on Hindutva which are held regularly at
Pune.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


