+++
title = "30 "

+++
<div align="right">

**27.  P. R. K. Naidu**

</div>

Thanks for mailing the small but thought provoking pamphlet **“TIME FOR
STOCK TAKING”**. I very much appreciate your gesture of inviting the
responses from the Hindu Mind.

1\. The Indian National Congress from the very inception was not for the
welfare of Hindusthan and its citizens, especially the Hindus and their
culture, but for the unhindered continuation of the British rule.
Pseudo-Nationalist leaders steeped in Western culture took over and gave
the call of Nationalism, which was taken up by the common man and became
a mass frenzied Nationalism, an outcome of the Westernised Indian
leaders. This Nationalism is devoid of Bharatiya culture or well defined
patriotism.

2\. For such behavioural change and craze for everything Foreign not
only the power hungry politicians are at blame, but to a great extent
our religious GURUS and PEETHADIPATTIS have also a share in Hindu
degeneration, as they in their Pseudo Sagacious non-interference have
taken for granted policies of the Political Hindu leaders at the helm of
affairs.

3\. The points raised by Dr. Godbole, are like the overplayed gramophone
record - points put forward by the Pseudo-Secularists and misguided
Hindus only. For them it has become a fashion, a mark of elegance and
broad-mindedness. In all respects I concur with Dr. Godbole’s
explanations and add these suggestions.

The first question of including Jesus and Mohammad in the pantheon of
Hindus, is like accepting their teachings of intolerance and bestial
savagery towards others. It should be liked to a ferocious Tiger in a
Pen of docile cows. If the second statement is taken for granted then
there should not be any difference between good and evil, a saint and a
rogue, a cultured one and a savage, and ultimately between God and
Devil. In the fifth item, the BJP’s claim of treating Muslims as human
beings, which shall bring a change in them, is too far-fetched, like
building castles in the air and as aimless as a shout in the dark. They
have to first segregate them from Islam, which is the main culprit for
dehumanizing them. For item six regarding Sufis, history - even the
doctored one - is a witness to their treacherous pact with the invading
enemies and the shady and shifty part played by them. The eighth
statement is a blatant lie, and a forked-tongue remark. The Islamic
sanctum sanctorum in MECCA itself was a centre of Idol Worship with as
many as 360 idols. It was desecrated, profaned and misused as a Mosque
for their namaz and made Allah’s house. This is confirmed by QURAN, the
Hadith and the Islamic Encyclopedia.

4\. Regarding formation of “SARVA PANTH SAMÃDAR MANCH” by the Sangh, if
it is intended to include Christianity and Islam in it, then the Sangh
is stone-blind to the recorded facts and has not learnt any lesson from
history. Let us not go far back in history, but take it from only 1885
after the inception of Indian National Congress and Gandhiji coming on
the stage. He had made Congress take a step forward with extended hands
of friendship towards Muslims and Muslims had taken two steps backward
to make it dance to their tunes. If the Sangh Parivar from which Hindus
have great expectations also floats “SARVA PANTH SAMÃDAR MANCH”,
expecting peace and tranquility then it is forcing the Nation into the
vortex of diabolism. Dr. Godbole has correctly diagnosed that “what
Hindus need today is not “SARVA PANTH SAMÃDAR but SARVA PANTHA
CHIKITSÃ”. I like to add that a Surgical/Shastriya Chikitsa is urgently
needed for Hindu also. The Sangh Parivar has to rehinduise the Hindus,
who have westernised themselves.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is from Secuderabad in Andhra Pradesh.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


