+++
title = "32 "

+++
<div align="right">

**29. Virendra V. Parekh**

</div>

Dr. Shreerang Godbole has issued a timely warning against cosy soporific
slogans currently mouthed by leaders of some prominent Hindu
organisations. His documents display a clarity of mind and courage of
conviction that is rare among Hindu intellectuals.

While one agrees entirely with the tone and tenor of the documents, some
of Dr. Godboleâ€™s formulations need improvement. It is sufficient to say
that the openness of Hinduism should not be misused to sanction those
dogmas of other religious groups which breed exclusiveness, intolerance
and aggressiveness. The quotation from David Frawley is not apt in this
context. If the Muslims want to search for spirituality in Islam, the
Hindus have no reason to object, however futile the search may seem to
them. The Hindus should concentrate on fighting the politics of Islam
and resist all ideological, political and territorial demands made in
its name.

Dr. Godbole regards it as foolish to remind the Muslims of their Hindu
ancestry. But it is a truthful and powerful means to wean them away from
Islam. The enemy of the Hindu society is not the Muslim, but Islam. Just
as Islam and its alien followers conquered our land, destroyed our
temples and monuments, and killed and enslaved our people, so also they
converted some of us to their own creed. In that sense, Muslims are the
worst victims of Islam. They are descendants of Hindus who lost not only
their political freedom, but also their ancestral faith and ways of
life. This has happened not just in India, but everywhere. Even the
Arabs did not accept Islam willingly. Early history of Islam testifies
to this.  To overcome their sense of shame and guilt, the converts were
told that the pre-Islamic period was a period of darkness. Generations
of Muslims were fed the same myth as an article of faith. Now they no
longer feel the need to question it. The proper response to such a
mindset is to show them that their pre-Islamic history was great and
glorious, that their ancestors courted Islam either under duress or
temptation, that they represent not the victors but the vanquished. For
example, in the debate over Ayodhya, Muslims should be reminded that
they are children of the Hindus whom Babar sought to humiliate and
insult by putting up a mosque at their sacred place.

Probably, what Dr. Godbole wants to say is that Hindus should not make
any political concessions to Islam in the name of common ancestry. This
warning is well-deserved. Such a misplaced generosity has cost us
dearly. A clever negotiator could ask the Muslims to behave as
ex-Hindus. It is another matter that so far the Hindu leaders have been
doing the opposite. It is heartening to know that there are Hindus who
are neither cowed down by the Secularist onslaught, nor carried away by
phoney and perilous liberalism of their leaders. Dr. Godbole deserves
compliments for his hard-headed realism. May his tribe grow.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is a talented journalist from Bombay. He writes mainly in
Gujarati language. At present he holds a position in the Chitralekha
Group of publications.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


