+++
title = "43  Miracle of Balancing Votes"

+++
<div align="right">

**40. Vikram Singh**

</div>

Dr. Shreerang Godbole, a Swayamsewak of the RSS for 17 years, put forth
his views frankly and plainly on “Hindu Organisations and the Muslim
Problem” at a Seminar in the presence of the think-tanks of the Sangh
Parivar. Immediately after that, he wrote a letter to Shri K.S.
Sudarshan, Sah-Karyawaha R.S.S., bemoaning the formation of the “Sarva
Panth Samãdar Manch” by the Sangh.

Thanks to Voice of India both the documents are now available to the
interested persons. As far as the aforesaid letter is concerned, the
analysis presented by Dr. Godbole is clear and complete and needs no
addition. The analysis regarding the “Eight Formulations” of the Sangh
Parivar is no doubt elaborate. Even then it needs some additions.

\(1\) Firstly, the logic of adding Jesus and Muhammad to the 33 crore
Hindu Gods and Goddesses may be attractive and fascinating at first
sight but, in practice, it is not so. It will prove “one-sided love”, or
at least Muslims will never like to put Muhammad, who is for them the
last prophet (not God), with innumerable Hindu Gods and Goddesses which
are nothing but *kufr* according to their faith - Islam - which
proclaims Manotheism and hates Polytheism to the extent of using the
sword. Secondly, this is nothing but an imposition of iconoclastic
*mazhab-i-Islam* on idolaters. Thirdly, social assimilation is never
achieved by such means. The flop-show of Akbar’s *Din-i-Ilahi* is an
historic evidence. And lastly, this logic of the Sangh Parivar is not at
all novel. In fact, the originator of this logic was the veteran
national leader, Lala Haradayal. But ultimately, in the year 1925,
Lalaji opined in his article, *Merã Pavitra Pãgalpan*, that Muslims will
never accept willingly my proposal of calling themselves “Muhammadi
Hindus”! So, if Islam is not ready to accept Bharatiya Nationalism, then
this type of foreign religion should not be allowed to stay in Bharat.

\(2\) Philosophers may say that all religions lead to God. In fact,
philosophers are above religions. But when we think of the common man,
such high flying is not appropriate; they are rather harmful. e.g. if
all religions including Islam lead to God, then some Muslim zealot can
come forward and say that if all Hindus embrace Islam, then, within no
time, Hindu-Muslim unity will be achieved. He may even generously offer
that the “New Muslims” will be called “Rampanthi Muslims”. Then why
bother to describe Indian Muslims as “Muhammad-panthi Hindus?”

\(3\) To say that “Islam is good but Muslims are bad” is astonishing.
Because the original Hindus who embraced Islam sometime back became
“Muslims”. And so, when it is said that “Islam is good but Muslims are
bad”, then it implies that Hindu religion, culture, and blood is bad -
so bad that even the philosopher’s stone of Islam could not make them
good!

\(4\) In some respect, it can be accepted that Muslim leaders are
responsible for the ghetto mentality of Muslims. But to remove the
present Muslim leadership is not a joke; it will need a total
revolution, and to create a revolution in an alien society, particularly
Muslims, if not impossible, is a hard task. Even Mahatma Gandhi could
not get the slightest success in his mission, and we had to lose a part
of our country in the form of Pakistan. Is it not strange that the
present-day RSS leaders have forgotten the oft-quoted aim and object of
the first two Sarsanghchalaks, Dr. Hedgewar and Shri Guruji Golwalkar,
that first we have to organise, unite and strengthen the Hindu Society?

\(5\) Some clever political Muslims have no doubt said that Namaz
offered on a disputed site (like Ayodhya) is not acceptable to Allah. On
this, Dr. Godbole has rightly observed that nowhere is any such thing
said in the Koran and the Hadis, and that this is plain nonsense. If we
accept such “plain nonsense”, then somebody will say that the RSS
Kendriya Karyalaya at Nagpur is also a Mosque because the then BJP
leader Shri Arif Beg and some other Muslim members offered Namaz in that
very Karyalaya as that Namaz was accepted by Allah.  
 

**Miracle of Balancing Votes**

It is pitiable for the Hindus as such that the one-time unflinching
protagonists of Hindutva and Hindu Rashtra are now bent upon ideological
adultery of this sort. This drastic change in their attitude is because
of the Power Politics. The Sangh Parivar has decided to go ahead on the
Rajpath of Power Politics. They think that political power will solve
all the problems; it will even given shape to the Cultural Nationalism
of their dream. In this age of democracy, power can be achieved by the
majority of votes. But the days of statistical calculation have gone and
the reality of “balancing votes” is on the screen. This “balancing
votes” factor can produce miracles in any constituency to the
Legislative Assembly as a whole. This fear of Muslims in the form of
“balancing votes” has created the terror in Hindu intelligentsia -
Muslims are in crores and we will have to accommodate them, which means
accommodating them at any cost, and on their terms.

At the time of partition we could not follow the path which Spain had
followed centuries ago. No one should hope that in the twenty-first
century Hindus can follow that path. Before partition, Muslims were in
crores in number. Even after partition, they are in crores today. Be
sure that if a new Pakistan is carved out and Muslims are not driven out
of that retruncated Bharat - it is dead sure they will not be driven out
- then with the silver jubilee celebration of that new Pakistan, the
number of Muslims will again sore up to crores. That means the Muslim
Problem before the nation, in other words, before the Hindus, will
remain till Muslims do not change their basic ideology. And as their
basic ideology is totally based on the Koran, the Hadis and the Sunnah,
no one can expect a change in the attitude of Indian Muslims for decades
to come. It is up to Hindus, particularly votaries of Hindutva, to
decide ultimately how to solve this critical Muslim Problem.

In fact, this Muslim Problem is not a new but a chronic one. There are
remedies to root it out. But as **Voice of India** has rightly said,
since 1885 the Indian National Congress and now the Sangh Parivar tends
to take Hindus for granted. In the forties, Congress partitioned the
country and today the Sangh Parivar is going to submit to the Muslims
for the sake of political power. Their greed for political power is so
great that they cannot see the other side of Democracy, namely, that in
politics power is never perpetual, it generally changes hands. In order
to attain power, they have already gone to the unimaginable extent.  
 

**Well-Planed Conspiracy**

The Tribunal constituted under the Unlawful Activities (Preventation)
Act 1967 to hear the case of the ban on the RSS, had served a notice to
the RSS. In a detailed reply to the allegations made against it in the
said notice, the RSS through its General secretary had explained its
view of Hindu and Hindu Rashtra as follows (*Organiser*, June 6, 13 and
20, 1993):

“(9) It is submitted that the term Hindu in the conviction as well as in
the constitution of the RSS is a cultural and civilisational concept and
not a political or religious dogma. The term as a cultural concept will
include and did always include all including Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains,
Muslims, Christians and Parsis. The cultural nationality of India, in
the conviction of the RSS, is Hindu and it was inclusive of all who are
born and who have adopted Bharat as their Motherland, including Muslims,
Christians and Parsis. The answering association submit that it is not
just a matter of RSS conviction, but a fact borne out by history that
the Muslims, Christians and Parsis too are Hindus by culture although as
religions they are not so.”

“(10) The RSS by conviction attaches to the term ‘Hindu’ the cultural
and civilisational meaning accorded by history. The answering
association submit that the term ‘Hindu’ was synonymous with the
inhabitants of Bharat. Bharat was and is even now referred to as
Hindustan and its subjects Hindus by culture and nationality.”

“(13) The RSS holds on to the cultural concept of Hindu and says that
all Muslims, Christians and Parsis are by culture Hindus, although their
methods of worship are different, for example Shaivites or
Vaishnavites.”

“(14) The answering association submit that this integrative and
inclusive concept of Hindu by RSS can hardly be construed as separatist
or as distinguishing between Muslims and Hindus. In fact, the RSS
ideology holds the Muslims as part of and not distinct from Hindus.”

“(17) It is submitted that the term Hindu is thus an inclusive concept
not limited to any community or a religion and therefore cannot exclude
Muslims or Christians and in fact, includes them as Hindu. It is in this
sense of the term Hindu that the RSS regards Bharat as culturally a
Hindu nation. This is the meaning of Hindu Rashtra expounded by RSS.”  
 

**The RSS Constitution**

This official statement of the RSS before a legal body, can be called
deceptive, misguiding and sheer jugglery. The RSS Constitution finally
submitted on 10th July 1949 clearly says that, upto that day, the RSS
had no written constitution. The speeches of the Sara Sangh Chalaks and
Sara Karyavahas of those days show very well that the RSS was open only
to Hindus in the traditional sense and was concerned with the upliftment
of Hindus on the basis of Hindu religion and Hindu culture. In the
introduction of the first and even the final Constitution of the RSS, it
is mentioned that “Under the disorganised conditions of the state, an
organisation was thought necessary for the exhaustive resuscitation of
the Hindu Society on the basis of its religion and culture”. In the
‘aims and objects’ section of the said Constitution also, this very
phraseology is repeated. No one can find even the words Muslims,
Christians and Parsis in the RSS Constitution. So to say it today that
“the term as a cultural concept will include and did always include all
including Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Muslims, Christians and Parsis” is
nothing but an untruth and totally dishonest in every sense. It needs
special mention that the term ‘Hindu Society’ occurs four times in the
RSS constitution. To include Muslims, Christians and Parsis in Hindu
Society is nothing but absurd.

Needless to say that it is a well-planned conspiracy of the leaders of
the Sangh Parivar. Broadly speaking, the Sangh Parivar has established a
sort of monopoly on organisational grounds as far as Hindutva ideology
is concerned, and now they are in a mood to take undue advantage of the
situation. The drama of a seminar on the closed platform of Prajna
Bharati in July 1996 was nothing but a manipulation for pushing the
policy of so-called “Vyapak Hindutva” put before the Government (the
Tribunal) in June 1993. **Voice of India** has rightly cautioned the
comatose Hindus, “It has become a habit with Hindu leaders to take
Hindus for granted and bargain with Muslims on the latter’s terms. Now
Hindus have to decide as to how long they are going to be taken for
granted.”

O Hindus! A clarion call by a young RSS Swayamsevak (Dr. Shreerang
Godbole) having seventeen years of sanghãyu, is before you. It is high
time for you to warn the protagonists of “Vyapak Hindutva” that you will
never allow them to sacrifice the larger and long-term interests of
Hindu Society and nation for the meagre and minor interest of political
power for the Sangh Parivar.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is a Professor of Economics, retired from Government
Education Service of Madhya Pradesh. At present he owns and edits Hindû
Asmitã weekly published from Indore in the same Pradesh. He has been a
Swayamsevak of the RSS for 57 years.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


