+++
title = "44 "

+++
<div align="right">

**41. Dr. Vinay Kumar Sinha**

</div>

I quite agree with what Dr. Godbole has opined about Islam and
Christianity and the concept of Secularism or Sarvadharma Sambhãv or
Sarva Panth Samãdar etc.

Yes, it is utterly wrong to bracket Hinduism (and its offshoots like
Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism) with such exclusivist ideologies as Islam
and Christianity. It is in fact wrong to regard Christianity and Islam
as Dharmas. Let us discuss why.

Dharma is a way of life based on certain principles as enunciated by the
great Manu - his ten principles and so on. The basic difference between
the Sanatan Dharma and the prophetic religions is that whereas Dharma is
the result of the experiences acquired by our seers and sages for a
period spread over thousands of years, the Semitic religions are based
exclusively on the principles and practices enunciated by a certain
individual or a certain scripture and are the by-product of certain
special historical and political circumstances. Whereas prophetic
ideologies do not permit any deviation from the set principles, Hinduism
allows the individual the freedom to march towards greater intellectual
and spiritual heights. The door to knowledge is kept wide open in
contrast to the prophetic ideologies which actually blind one’s
intellect.

A Christian is a Christian only so long as he has exclusive belief in
the Sonship of Jesus Christ. Likewise, a Muslim is a Muslim only if he
has hundred percent faith in Quran and Hadith. A Hindu has no such
binding. Being in permanent bondage, the followers of prophetic
ideologies cannot but believe that they are following the path of
righteousness, and that others are on the wrong path. For them, there is
the kingdom of heaven with gardens under which flow rivers; for us, the
non-believers, only the hell of fire. They have not only exclusive
ideologies but their special Gods as well who are kind to them and them
only. So says the Bible: ‘He that believeth and is baptized shall be
saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned’ (Mk XVI: 16). And so
says the Quran more than once: ‘And fight them until persecution is no
more and religion is for Allah …’ (II: 193); ‘O ye who believe! Choose
not disbelievers for (your) friends in place of believers …’ (IV: 144);
‘And slay them wherever you find them (II: 191). As has been pointed
out, Islam is an exclusivist ideology which isn’t under any
circumstances prepared to accord respect or recognition to any other
ideology howsoever tolerant the latter may be towards it. According to
Ibn Taymiah and Syed Qutb the entire globe belongs to Allah and his
messenger and Muslims and Muslims only are rightful heirs to it!

As Dr. Godbole points out, some Hindus think it is against Hinduism to
criticize other religions. Still other Hindus genuinely seem to believe
that resurgence among Hindus would cause permanent damage to the Hindu
society and that by destroying what they term ‘our composite cultural
heritage’ and ‘unity in diversity’ we would be making our country weak.
Far from it. To them I would like to point out that the so-called
‘composite culture’, ‘unity in diversity’, ‘Sarvadharma Sambhãv’ etc.
have been mere myths; they have never been achieved nor is there any
likelihood of their taking shape in future also. If some of our
ancestors ever talked of it, it could only be said to have emanated from
a state of desperation which they may have found themselves in owing to
more than a thousand years of political subjugation. Political
subjugation often leads to intellectual deterioration resulting in
perverted thinking as well. It is sheer self-deception to believe that
the alien cultures which the invaders brought with them mingled with our
ancient culture, or enriched it further. It is also a folly to believe
that Hindu culture fully assimilated the alien cultures. Such a thing
never happened. Moreover, the imperialist forces did not invade India to
establish a society where Sarvadharma Sambhãv would prevail. It is only
we who have fallen prey to such illusions. Muslims and Christians never
talk of it; they have never had such illusions.

Strangely enough, a thesis is being propounded by the so-called
secularists that every Indian is a Hindu! This is an attempt to devalue
the importance of the term “Hindu” and to reduce it to a mere noun from
an adjective. A Hindu is not a geographical creature. Hindus are a
nation unto themselves; any attempt to use this term for Muslims and
Christians is to deny the existence of a Hindu nation which has been a
reality for thousands of years.

Peaceful coexistence with Islam is just not possible. Sambhãv with
Christianity is an impossibility too. Such ideas are totally alien to
these ideologies. Any attempt to try to assimilate them is bound to meet
a dismal fate, as it has for centuries.

Secularism in its Indian form is a highly repugnant term. The very basis
of this Secularism is anti-Hinduism. BJP turned secular long time ago
(assuming that it was ever committed to Hindutva). Now the R.S.S. too
has followed suit. Compared to the self-proclaimed secularists, these
neo-secularists masquerading as votaries of Hindutva are more dangerous,
more poisonous. For it is they who are making the already intransigent
Muslims more and more intransigent, more and more demanding, more and
more obstinate. What we need to do is to expose them thoroughly, to
punish them to the hilt, for it is these people who are the greatest
enemies of the Hindu Nation.

Alas! the greatest misfortune of the Hindu Society has been that it has
never in its long history turned communal. This incidently is the
greatest reason leading to our subjugation from time to time. If we want
to keep alive the spirit of Hindu Nation alive we Hindus have got to be
communal. Without Hindu communalism, the Hindu Nation has no future
whatsoever. True nationalism resides in Hindu communalism, not in
foolish Secularism.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is a highly qualified medical practitioner living in Ranchi
in Bihar.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


