+++
title = "47 "

+++
<div align="right">

**44. B. K. Verma**

</div>

I am highly grateful to you for sending to me the views of Dr. Godbole
on the recent efforts of some Hindu organisations at bringing Muslims
into Indian mainstream by preaching equal respect for every religion.
But the exercise is futile and will only weaken the structure of the
nation.

Instead, we must give serious thought to the ailments which are
bedevilling the nation. Why even after so much accommodation of almost
every demand, reasonable or unreasonable, Muslims make a show of
disaffection and dissatisfaction? What is wrong with our approach? Why
there is non-assimilation of Muslims in the Indian ethos? Particularly
when the breed of Indian Muslims is of indigenous origin.

We cannot approach these questions without going into the particular
mindset of Muslims and the absolute tenets of Islam. Muslim
fundamentalism has acquired an added belligerence all over the world
after the new-found power of petro-dollars. This is the reason why the
civilized world has condoned open acts of barbarism, terrorism, murder
and inhuman acts committed by Muslims. Confinement of 50 odd diplomatic
personnel of the USA in Iran by Khomeini, burning to death of 300 people
who had committed the crime of watching a cinema show in Iran during
Ramzan, covert and overt support to terrorists by Libya, are a few of
the many instances of flagrant violation of the norms of civilized
behaviour.

Dr. Godbole is absolutely right in saying that Islam is exclusivist.
There is nothing like a liberal Muslim. Islam does not allow for any
relaxation in its fundamental doctrines and its adherents fanatically
insist on the observance of every tenet supposed to have been handed
over by Mohammad or the Ulema following him. The same cannot be said of
Hindu religion. Unlike a rigid rock pillar, it has swayed with every
gust of wind and every breeze like a shoot of grass whenever new ideas
came its way. In the process, it gets updated and renewed. You can
interpret this flexibility as its weakness or as its strength according
to your own viewpoint.

Merciless butchering or mass-scale massacre of non-believers (in Islam),
called Jihad in medieval times, might be dismissed today as the work of
illiterate zealots, but recent instances are a sad reminder that the
same Muslim psyche continues. Massacre of innocent Israeli sportsmen at
Munich by the Black September organisation, pronouncement of death
sentence on the actors, writer and director of a play staged at Sharjah,
the relentless hounding of Salman Rushdie, the death sentence pronounced
on Taslima Nasreen, death sentence to a Christian teenager in Pakistan,
are but a very few of the instances where the victims had knowingly or
unwittingly said something supposedly derogatory or derisively of the
Prophet or Islamic belief. The extent to which Muslims can go is best
illustrated by the howling protest made when Azharuddin was stopped from
signing his name for a shoe company simply because his name included
that of the Prophet.

Their rabid intolerance of any other belief is manifest in the flight of
Zoroastrians from Iran, the persecution of Kurds, Ahamadiyas, Bahais,
etc. Egyptian leaders are under a constant threat of elimination by
fanatic Muslim fundamentalists simply because they are perceived as
pursuers of a soft policy towards Israel.

Perhaps there is no better illustration of the strangle-hold of
obscurantist elements over the Indian scene than the events after the
Shah Bano verdict. How after encouraging Arif Mohammad Khan to speak in
Parliament in favour of the judicial pronouncement, Rajiv Gandhi beat a
hasty retreat when Ziaurrahman Ansari and others of his ilk launched an
abusive diatribe on the judgment and even cast aspersions of the judges
themselves. The legislation nullifying the decision in that case is a
classic example of a ‘sovereign’ government buckling under the weight of
fanatic dogma, and subversion of judicial process. One could go on and
on as instances upon instances like this pile up. Today, even the talk
of a common civil code raises the hackles of Muslims and sends shivers
down the spine of those who have an eye on the Muslim electorate.

So what should be the approach? Should we try to reform them? Should we
pursue a policy of pure Hindu Rashtra? Or should we appease them and
thereby hope to get them converted into a community which thinks itself
as a part of the nation?

We have seen that the Indian Government after independence, whether it
be of the Congress or of other combinations, has tried all of these
without any success and with disastrous results. With each surrender by
the authorities, the Muslims get more audacious and cry for more
concessions as a right.

A familiar ruse practised by them is to raise the bogey of persecution
and get what they demand - even more than what they originally asked
for. Even if they are illegal immigrants, none should question them and
accord them full citizenship rights. I recall an instance when I
participated in a function organised on the occasion of the birthday of
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. V.P. Singh, the Congress Chief Minister of U.P.
at that time, was presiding. On the dais with him was Maulana Ali Mian,
the Rector of Nadwatul Ulema, Lucknow. The speakers were speaking on the
life and works of Azad. Suddenly, Ali Mian stood up and started a
harangue about the persecution of Muslims in India. He said that the
life and limbs of Muslims in India were not safe, the dignity of their
womenfolk was in jeopardy, and that when a Muslim male went out his
womenfolk kept praying for his safe return home. He also said that he
had in his pocket invitations and air tickets from many countries
(Muslim obviously) but was ashamed to go as he could not show his face
to the people of those countries for being unable to save the lives of
his brethren and protect the honour of Muslim women - as if he was the
only spokesman for Indian Muslims or was the ruler here to be answerable
to the world Muslim fraternity. Of particular note is the fact that it
was early eighties and there was no trouble anywhere warranting such
comments. And this was no occasion for such an outburst. But the most
amazing thing was the reaction of V.P. Singh. As head of the State, he
should have severely reprimanded Ali Mian for being the scare-monger
that he was. At least, Singh should have asked him to be specific or
shut up. Instead, he took hold of Ali Mian’s hand and placed it on his
head. He said something to this effect, “You keep your hand on my head
and I promise to deal with these problems immediately with your
blessing.”

Appeasement, therefore, does not work anywhere. But, particularly with
the, Muslim mindset, it does not work to its desired end. And it leaves
the other communities bitter. As regards efforts at reforming Muslim
society, we have enough evidence that their clergy and their deep-seated
fanatical belief in the God-ordained Word excludes any will towards
reform. It has by now been well established that Muslims react very
strongly to any hint of reform. One instance of their intransigence is
their stout refusal to deviate from the practice of triple talaq in one
go. It does not matter that other Muslim countries view it with
disfavour. Indian Muslims would not accept any reform in this practice.

Regarding the doctrine of Hindu Rashtra, in the context of today’s
politics this does not seem to be practical. Muslims in India are not a
microscopic Minority to be ignored because we are a democratic nation
and not a theocracy.

The best course would be to fashion our system in such a manner that no
one should have the feeling that his is a race or a community apart,
free to do whatever it likes in its own way. In other words, the law
should apply uniformly to everyone. In case any one wants to practise
his own way, he has to suffer the consequences. Once the message is
brought to them unequivocally, they would fall in line in due course.

This is not to say that this solution is easy to achieve and a simple
solution for a complex problem. Fifty years of drift has complicated the
problem of their integration with the Indian ethos, so much so that they
think of themselves as Muslim first and then as Indian. So for now, we
have to act firmly and unequivocally.

With these observations to add to Dr. Godbole’s comments, I agree with
him in that the efforts of Hindu organisations, particularly the R.S.S.,
in trying to view Muslims and Islam in a soft light and benign hue are
all wrong. The clear message to go out to Muslims should be – “If you
want to live in India, you have to be Indians.”  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer who lives in Lucknow, is a retired government servant. As a
Swayamsevak of the RSS he saw from close quarters the all round rot
growing at all levels of the bureaucracy due to bogus ideas sponsored by
political parties.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


