+++
title = "58 "

+++
<div align="right">

**5. Courageous author puts**  
**his life on the line**

</div>

*Why I am not a Muslim* by Ibn Warraq, Prometheus Books, UK ISBN 0 87975
984 4. £22. Rationalist Press Association members: £ 15, Including
postage, from RPA, Bradlaugh House.

<div align="right">

**Review: Daniel O’Hara**

</div>

  

My own attempt to engage with Islam has, before reading this book,
mainly been through talking with a group of Islamic students from Kings
College, London, who regularly set up a lunchtime stall outside their
college gates in The Strand, opposite the church of St. Mary Overy.
Their views are extreme, but appear entirely within the mainstream
Islamic tradition.

I have put it to them that it is ironic that they should be using such a
platform to complain about the denial of “freedom of speech” for
themselves inside the building (this after the college authorities had
banned a debate they planned to hold on the execution of heretics and
blasphemers) while admitting that they do not believe in freedom of
speech for others. They agree with me that they would not be allowed to
set up such a stall (even to promote Islam, let alone to criticise it)
in Riyadh, Tehran, Islamabad or Dacca. But the irony that they should
demand freedom of speech in order to denounce freedom of speech is
entirely lost on them. They agree, that they despise “Western Democracy”
and the freedoms it guarantees: but they are not above using those very
freedoms to denounce and call for the abolition of freedom. They are as
convinced as any Marxist, and perhaps with better reason, of the
eventual triumph of their creed. At least Marxism is falsified by the
failure of its prophecies concerning the withering of the state and the
collapse of capitalism.  Islam, for better or worse, admits of no
falsification.

The Muslim students to whom I have recently been talking have not heard
of Ibn Warraq or his book. If it came into their hands, they would
probably want to burn it publicly, as their co-religionists in Bradford
did with Salman Rushdie’s *The Satanic Verses* in 1989. Perhaps we
should at least be grateful that there is no longer an Ayatollah
Khomeini to issue a *fatwa* against *Why I am not a Muslim* and its
author, put a price on his head and incite the faithful to murder him.
But the fanatical intolerance of those Islamic students who demand their
right to criticise others, yet who accept no reciprocal rights of others
to criticise their position, clearly shows that and why a book like the
one under review is both timely and necessary, even if one can think of
several ways in which it might have been improved.

Mr Warraq was born and raised a Muslim, but is now a secular humanist, a
freethinker and rationalist critic, not just of Islam but of all
religions, regarding them, in David Hume’s word, as “sick men’s dreams.”
As an apostate, he is, in Muslim eyes, guilty of a crime far more
heinous than murder or even genocide. Indeed, murder and genocide have
traditionally been the preferred methods of rooting out dissent, heresy,
unbelief and rival religions and philosophies in all Islamic cultures.
And this is as true today as it was in the 7th or the 9th Centuries. So
we must salute *Why I am not a Muslim*, as R. Joseph Hoffmann does in
the Foreword, as a “courageous” work. The author has, quite literally,
put his life on the line.

Mr. Warraq tells us in his Preface that it was the Rushdie affair which
galvanised him into writing his book, though he also tells us later,
that he is “not a scholar or a specialist.” He has at any rate read
widely and deeply, and succeeds in conveying a great deal of information
about both the history and the tenets of Islam, and of its treatment of
dissenters. I am unable to comment on the accuracy or balance of this
part of the work, though it has every appearance of being thoroughly
researched. I must, however, confess to finding some parts of the book
rather tediously repetitive. It is surely enough to make a point well,
without constantly quoting two or three other writers who essentially
make the same point. Our author himself at one point observes (p. 133)
that it may seem he is “belabouring the obvious.” But he wishes “more
people would belabour the obvious, and more often.” The trouble is that
those who most need it are unlikely to read the book, while for the rest
of us, it causes avoidable longueurs. Skilful editing by the publishers
could, in my opinion, have made the book tighter, sharper and of even
greater value.

That being said, there is much here to provoke thought and the
following-up of themes in the massive literature, most of it unknown to
the general reader, with which Mr Warraq acquaints us. On some topics
his comments are so pertinent and valuable that one would like to see
them separately printed as a pamphlet. Particularly commendable is his
critique of relativism, of the spinelessness of Western liberal
intellectuals in the face of Islamic totalitarianism, and of our
too-ready capitulation to extremely one-sided left-wing criticisms of
the Western Democratic tradition. As one who currently lives in America
but grew up in a country which now calls itself an Islamic republic, Mr
Warraq is well placed to judge just how much is to be lost by the
surrender of entirely justifiable pride in the real achievements of
Western democracies. For this, he suggests, an insidious relativism and
misplaced “political correctness” is largely responsible.

I shall quickly pass over the very extensive critical work on the Koran
and other traditional sources of Islam which Mr Warraq relates, and his
detailed history of the banditry, bloodshed and terror which chiefly
characterised the early centuries of Islam, and which are resurgent in
our own. It may come as a surprise to most readers to learn that the
Koran did not achieve anything like its present shape until about two
centuries after the death of Muhammed - roughly the same time it took
the Christian Church to finalise its New Testament canon. And many of
the traditional, extra-koranic sources for the life and teachings of the
Prophet have been shown by recent scholarship to be extremely
unreliable. So much for the basic Islamic dogmas of an infallible
Prophet and an inerrant God-authored holy book. What the traditional
sources tell us of the Prophet, however, make him seem as unappealing as
any other manipulative and power-hungry opportunist in history. It is
good to know that opposition to the Prophet and his teachings, and the
totalitarian religion which grew out of them, goes back to his own time
and peoples, and has never been entirely silenced, even though so many
gainsayers have paid with their lives, as they still are doing. While
Christendom has much to be ashamed of, Mr Warraq suggests that Islam has
been even more brutally culpable.\*

Even today, the social teachings of Islam perpetuate the inferiority of
women and their subjection to absolute control in all aspects of their
lives - even as to whether and when they may leave the house - of their
husbands (to whom they must remain constantly available, except when
“unclean,” as objects of unrestrained sexual gratification), or if
unmarried, their male guardians. Such unequal treatment of the sexes is
defended in the literature I have picked up outside Kings College as
“elevating the situation of the people from the level of animals (as is
the case in the west), to one where the dignity and honour of all human
beings is preserved and respected (as would be the case in an Islamic
State).”

George Orwell and Franz Kafka together could surely not have dreamed up
a more terrifying perversion of the truth. I commend Ibn Warraq’s book
as a much needed antidote and corrective to such shameless propaganda.
Even if some of its chapters can be safely passed over by the general
reader, there are others which will amply repay careful study by
virtually everyone.  
 

**Footnotes:**

This review appeared in the December, 1995 issue of *The Freethinker*, a
monthly published from London.

\* Here both Ibn Warraq and Daniel O’Hara are greatly mistaken.
Christianity committed far greater crimes, for a longer period, and over
a much larger area. The soft face which Christianity wears today has
been forced upon it by its collapse in its traditional strongholds -
Western Europe and North America.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


