+++
title = "66 "

+++
<div align="right">

*Indian Express*  
New Delhi, 16 April 1995  
**7. Pampering the minority ego**  
Talveen Singh

</div>

Are there no limits to what Muslims can demand, and get away with, in
the imagined cause of their religion? India is not a Muslim country and,
by the grace of our 30 million gods, never will be. So there is no
reason why our political leaders should have to start kowtowing and
running scared everytime a bunch of semi-literate *mullahs* gets up and
starts making a noise.

Whenever this happens, it angers non-Muslim Indians and strengthens the
hands of Hindu fanatics. And yet, we have just seen Shiv-Sena government
in Maharashtra buckle under Muslim pressure and suspend the release of
Mani Rattnam’s *Bombay*. It is a film about inter-religious marriage and
the triumph of peace over communal hatred. These are subjects that
should be close to the heart of our allegedly secular rulers. *Bombay*
should have been encouraged with tax exemptions, awards, premiers on
Doordarshan. Instead it has been considered ‘controversial’ right from
the start.

Except in the eyes of fanatics and fundamentalists, who would prefer a
film about Hindu-Muslim hatred, what can be considered controversial
about communal harmony? Surely, the Maharashtra Government, which is in
any case not well-known for its fondness of the Muslims community, could
have taken a firmer line against the ragtag bunch of *maulvis* and
Muslim fundamentalists who were making a noise? They could have been
told that stem measures would be taken against anyone who tried to
disrupt the screening of the film.

Instead, after seeing the film they came up with a list of objections so
absurd that they should have been considered ludicrous in our secular
land but they have been taken seriously.

They object, we are told, to the last shot. The Muslim girl while
eloping with her Hindu husband carried the *Koran* in her hand. This was
bad, they said, because it seemed to imply that her marriage had Islamic
sanction. They also objected to verses from the *Koran* being chanted in
the background.

Nor did they approve of the film’s first scene which shows a woman
lifting her *burqa* off her face. They need to be asked why this is
suddenly objectionable when thousands of other Hindi films have shown
similar sequences to great romantic effect. But nobody asks these
questions so the list continues. Offence was taken, we are told, because
a Hindu family was shown being burned alive. A Muslim family is also
shown being similarly murdered, because this also happened in the
terrible riots of 1992, but our Muslim objectors are selective in their
disapproval.

The question that the Maharashtra Government needs to answer is why it
is trying to reason with fundamentalists instead of telling them firmly
that their threats and protests will not be tolerated. Could it be that
the State’s new BJP Home Minister is following the same Congress
policies that the leader of his party, L.K. Advani, so effectively
rubbished as ‘appeasement’ when he trundled across India on his
*rathyatra*? Ibrahim Tai of some organisation called the Raza Academy is
reported to have said, “If this movie is shown there will be a third
riot in Bombay.” Should he not have been arrested instead of being
invited to a private screening of the film?

If one bunch of fundamentalists can get away with their threats of
violence how is it going to be possible to stop another bunch from
tearing down the next mosque they come across?

Emboldened by their success in stopping *Bombay*, Maharashtra’s Muslims
notched up another little fundamentalist victory last week. Nine
Ahmediyas, who were peacefully distributing religious literature in
Malegaon, were attacked by a mob of armed Muslims who beat them within
an inch of their lives with sticks, whips and stones. They were
inspired, clearly, by the fact that the Pakistan Government has declared
Ahmediyas as heretics. After the attack, Malegaon police arrested 15 of
the culprits but this is what happened to them, as reported by this
newspaper.  “…All those arrested were let off soon afterwards when a
section of the mob marched to the police station and demanded their
release, threatening to otherwise attack the police,” Appeasement, Mr.
Advani?

Yes, Appeasement it is.  The same kind of appeasement that caused the
Rajiv Gandhi Government to change maintenance laws for Muslim women, in
accordance with the Shariat, and to ban Salman Rushdie’s *Satanic
Verses* because Muslims thought of it as a blasphemous book.

Inevitably, the country paid the price with a Hindu backlash but nobody
has ended up learning any lessons. Especially, not Muslim leaders. They
still haven’t understood that by raising objections to films on communal
harmony and by making other, similarly silly demands they divert
attention from the genuine problems that the community suffers from.

There is, for instance, the question of TADA. It has been seriously
misused by State Government, especially Gujarat and Maharashtra, and
most of the victims have been Muslim. There are problems like the fact
that most victims of communal riots tend to be Muslim and that justice
rarely gets done. If organisations like the Raza Academy and the Muslim
League would raise these issues, along with issues of education
backwardness among Muslims and instances of discrimination in
employment, they might find genuine support from other Indians. They
might also do real good to their community but they continue to talk of
irrelevances, of matters they consider Islamic, and even when it comes
to Islamic matters they are selective.

We did not hear one word of criticism, for instance, from organisations
like the Raza Academy, and similar ilk, when a 14-year-old Christian boy
was sentenced to death in Pakistan. I remember asking an Imam about it
and he said that there was nothing wrong with the punishment because it
was in accordance with the Islamic law of blashphemy. When I pointed out
that the boy was illiterate and so could not have written the allegedly
blasphemous slogans he said, “Well, it must be alright, they must know
what they’re doing.”

The boy survived. But, in Iran, women criminals who are virgins are
raped before being executed. That is the law. Next time Muslim leaders
demand Shariat laws they should ask for Shariat punishments as well.
Perhaps, this will make our secular leaders realise that India is not a
Muslim country. We cannot be secular if we continue to pander to every,
silly religious demand.  
 

**Footnotes:**

This columnist is no friend of Hindus or Hindutva. She believes that
Hindu-Muslim differences are no more than ‘a fight between two brands of
fanatics’, which superior minded fence-sitters like her can resolve if
given a chance. Her ire is directed towards ‘Hindu fanatics’, most of
the time. But once in a while, she does come down upon ‘Muslim fanatics’
as well.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


