+++
title = "69 "

+++
<div align="right">

*The Times of India*  
New Delhi, 29 April, 1995  
**10. More Space for ‘namaaz’ urged**  
By Vidyadhar Date

</div>

BOMBAY, April 28.

Some leaders of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in Maharashtra have
proposed that the floor space index (FSI) for mosques in Bombay be
increased to accommodate a larger number of people offering *namaaz*
(prayers). This would also help end offering of prayers on the roads
outside mosques.\*

The offering of *namaaz* on roads had caused considerable tension in
Bombay two years ago with the Shiv Sena and the BJP voicing strong
protests and organising *maha artis* on the roads.

Deputy chief minister and home minister Gopinath Munde is understood to
have supported the move for granting higher FSI which would enable the
mosques to build additional space in their premises. The Shiv Sena is
also not averse to the idea, sources said.

President of the Bombay unit of the BJP Vedprakash Goyal said the move
was not aimed at wooing Muslims. The facility could be extended to
temples too. In the crowded Kabutarkhana area in Dadar a mosque, a
temple and a chapel existed side by side. In such areas there was
greater need to provide more space for worshippers.

Former ministers Rafiq Zakaria and Ishaq Jamkhanawala have welcomed the
proposal. Mr. Zakaria said: “The Congress government should have taken
the decision long ago. The move shows that the BJP and the Sena are
sensitive to the requirements of the minorities.”

Mr. Zakaria said steps should be taken to ensure that the FSI facility
was not misused for purposes other than religious work. Shops and other
commercial establishments should be prevented from being set up. “A
committee should be set up to consider the issues which were involved.
Some of the mosques were remarkable for their historical and
architectural value,” he suggested.

Mr. Muzafar Hussain, a noted Islamic scholar, said: “The *Shariat*
provided for offering *namaaz* in three shifts when space was limited.
However, in some areas in Bombay the mosques were so small that they
could not accommodate the devout even in three shifts.”

Mr. Hussain said according to the basic tenets of Islam, prayers should
not be offered on a public thoroughfare. If it became necessary to use
the public premises, permission of the authorities concerned should be
taken. Islam also stressed the importance of clean surroundings at the
place of prayers.  
 

**Footnotes:**

\* It was assumed that Muslims sprawl out on roads for doing *namaz*
simply because the space within mosques cannot accommodate them. This is
a Big Lie. Sprawling out on public thoroughfares is a part of Muslim
aggression as advocated by their ‘religion’. “Muslims,” says the
*Hidayah* “should allow the narrowest passage to the Kafirs going on
throughfares.” In any case, why should Hindu taxpayers’ money be spent
on widening mosques when plenty of petro-dollars have been pouring into
the country for building bigger and bigger mosques in which firearms can
be stored, and *madrasas* in which warriors for Islam can be trained?  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


