+++
title = "77 "

+++
<div align="right">

*The Hindustan Times,*  
New Delhi, 16 August 1996  
**18. BJP bid to win over Muslims**  
From Gautam Chaudhuri

</div>

CALCUTTA, Aug. 15 - Desperately seeking ways to make inroads into the
minority vote bank in Uttar Pradesh, the BJP has set up a core group of
six Muslim leaders, who have been asked to concentrate on the minority
pockets in UP before the forthcoming Assembly elections, in order to woo
the Muslims to give bigger support to the BJP.

The group will be led by the BJP minority panel president, Mr. Izaz
Rezvi. Realising that without a convincing support from the minorities,
which is now being monopolised by the Samajwadi Party and the
Congress-Bahujan Samaj Party combine, it may not be a smooth sailing for
the party in the UP Assembly poll, the group has been asked to hold
regular interactions with the minorities to remove their misconceptions
about the BJP.

While party stalwarts, led by the former Prime Minister Atal Behari
Vajpayee, are now involved in attempts to win the confidence of the
minorities, the core group of the minority panel has been asked to
establish direct links with the rank and file in each minority pocket by
paying regular visits to the Muslim-dominated areas before the poll.

At the same time, they would also make similar efforts to forge easy
communication links with the minority mass in other parts of the country
as well, though UP remains the first priority.

The focus of the campaign would be that the issue before the Muslims
should not be Babri but of *barabari* (equality).  Apart from
encouraging debates and free exchange of views on the issue, the BJP
also seeks to highlight the glorious role of the Muslims in the
country’s Independence movement and subsequently during the Indo-Pak
war, with the valiant Muslim freedom fighters and those who had laid
down their lives for the country in the wars like Havildar Abdul Hamid
to occupy the pride of place in this regard.\*

Also to be brought in focus would be the contribution of the minorities
to usher in speedy development in the country in all arenas. All these
are meant only to reaffirm the party’s faith in minorities and
vice-versa so that they do not remain isolated from the BJP in the
coming days.

The issue has been accorded top priority because according to party
calculations, even with the Opposition divided between the BSP-Congress
combine and the Samajwadi Party-led United Front, the party does not
feel entirely assured of a sweeping victory with its 33 per cent share
of votes in UP.

It has also become very important in political terms because only a
convincing win in UP Assembly elections is expected to pave the way for
an early exit of the United Front Government at the Centre and
realignment of political forces, with the BJP at the helm of affairs.

In the political resolution adopted at the recently-held national
executive meeting of the BJP minority panel, the Congress and its
“satellite parties” like the Samajwadi Party, Janata Dal and the
communist parties were held responsible for keeping alive the “poison of
separatism” in some sections of Muslims.

“All Muslims and Hindus of India are Indians, their religions may be
different, but their nation is one”, said the resolution. The panel
upheld the BJP’s demand for a uniform civil code to strengthen the
“Indianness” of Hindus and Muslims in the country and setting aside the
Article 370 of the Constitution.  
 

**Footnotes:**

\* The Indian National Congress had also invented heroes like
Siraj-ud-Daulah and Mir Qasim of Bengal, Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan of
Mysore, and Bahadur Shah Zafar, the last Mughal ‘emperor’. But this
exercise in converting villains into heroes did not help in rallying
Muslims round the Congress. Inventing history is not only morally wrong,
but also self-defeating. Those who are out to deceive others end by
deceiving themselves.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


