+++
title = "84 "

+++
<div align="right">

*The Times of India*  
Mumbai, 2 March 1997  
**25. Muslims in Behrampada voted**  
**in a pragmatic way**  
By Anil Singh

</div>

MUMBAI: Simply put, it was gutter-level politics, quite literally, which
helped the Shiv Sena win the civic seat from Behrampada. The Sena was
the only party which got the drains cleaned and had toilets built for
the women of this Muslim-dominated slum in Bandra east.

Apart from their work in the area, a host of other factors went into
ensuring the Sena’s victory in the slum which witnessed some of the
bloodiest communal riots in December 1992-January 1993.

To begin with, the Muslim leadership in Behrampada was divided.  While
one group favoured the Congress, the other sided with the Sena.

The Samajwadi Party, which performed so well in other Muslim pockets,
did not put up a strong candidate in Behrampada. Its candidate, Naseem
Khan, polled only 1,473 votes and finished fifth among the 14
contestants.

The Congress, which is not a cadre-based party like the Sena, never
recovered from the setback it suffered when its MP, Sunil Dutt, withdrew
from active politics. Although Mr. Dutt is popular in Behrampada, he has
stopped visiting it, according to residents.

The sitting Congress corporator, Gulzar Sheikh, is a discredited man.
However, he stood as an independent and cornered 1, 114 votes, finishing
sixth. The Congress candidate, Nirmala Agarwal, was the sitting
corporator from the adjoining ward. She was pitchforked into this ward
because of the change in ward limits this time. Ms Agarwal got 2,111
votes and finished second to the Sena’s Virendra Jagade who got 6,829
votes.

The Republican Party of Indian (RPI), which did not have an alliance
with the Congress this time, finished third.  Its candidate, Maruti
Pawar, got 1,951 votes. The Janata Dal’s Ahmed Kadri finished fourth
with 1,507 votes.

The only other candidate who got more than 500 votes was independent
candidate and a Congress rebel, Pandurang Thorat.

While the Sena benefited from its alliance with the BJP, the Congress
paid a heavy price for the lack of an alliance with the RPI and rebel
candidates. The low turnout in ward no. 79, about 40 per cent, was
another factor which affected the Congress.

As Behrampada accounts for nearly 20,000 of the 40,000 voters in ward
no. 79, the Sena banked heavily on Muslim votes from this slum. Its
workers went about wooing the Muslims meticulously under the leadership
of local Sena MLA Shrikant Sarmalkar. He was a corporator from
Behrampada from 1985 to 1992 and has a support base there.

Observers say that the Sena benefited from another source. Mohalla
committee workers such as P. P. Jamkhedar and Sushobha Barve and senior
police officers such as Satish Sahney and Sanjay Pandey did commendable
work to normalise relations after the riots. However, being apolitical,
the mohalla committee took no credit for the work. The Sena built on
this base and capitalised on the vacuum left by Mr. Dutt’s absence.

According to informed sources, the police indirectly helped the Sena by
externing a Behrampada Muslim leader just before the polls. However,
there were no complaints of rigging or bogus voting from Behrampada.

A Behrampada resident said on condition of anonymity that she voted for
the Sena as the party had been helping them with their day-to-day
problems. For instance, the Sena helped her get an electricity meter
installed. Slumdwellers who do not have their own meters are fleeced by
slumlords who provide them illegal connections.

According to Ms Barve, Behrampada residents were disoriented when
outside support dried up soon after the 1992-93 riots. Several
samaritans who had come to the slum’s aid withdrew after they found that
the local community leaders refused to stop fighting among themselves.

Left to fend for themselves, most Behrampada residents made their peace
with the Sena, which was bending over backwards to woo them. Educated
Muslim youngsters were the first to accept the Sena’s offer of
friendship. It is from this lot that a new leadership is expected to
emerge in the coming months.

However, Behrampada residents feel that the Sena tiger will not change
its stripes and that its support for them is largely a tactical move.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


